Introduction to Speech Communication
 INTRODUCTION TO SPEECH COMMUNICATION

Sarah E. Hollingsworth; Megan Linsenmeyer; Terrisa Elwood; Sasha Hanrahan; and Mary Walker

                                                         OKLAHOMA STATE UNIVERSITY LIBRARIES
                                                                           STILLWATER, OK
Introduction to Speech Communication Copyright  2021 by Individual authors retain copyright of their work. is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

Introduction to Speech Communication by Sarah E. Hollingsworth, Terrisa Elwood, Sasha Hanrahan, Megan Linsenmeyer, Mary Walker, and Kathryn Weinland is licensed CC
BY-NC-SA. In addition to original material, it has been adapted and remixed from Exploring Public Speaking: 4th Edition licensed CC BY-NC-SA, Stand Up, Speak Out licensed CC
BY-NC-SA and Fundamentals of Public Speaking licensed CC BY.
                                                 Contents

Accessibility Statement                                    x

Acknowledgements                                           xii

CHAPTER 1: WHY PUBLIC SPEAKING MATTERS TODAY

1.1 Public Speaking in the Twenty-First Century            3

1.2 Why is Public Speaking Important?                      9

1.3 The Process of Public Speaking                         18

1.4 Enrichment                                             29

CHAPTER 2: BUILDING CONFIDENCE

2.1 What is Communication Apprehension?                    32

2.2 Classifying Communication Apprehension                 37

2.3 Learning Confidence                                    42

2.4 Enrichment                                             49

CHAPTER 3: DELIVERY

3.1 The Importance of Delivery                             51

3.2 Methods of Speech Delivery                             55

3.3 Preparing for Your Delivery                            61

3.4 Practicing Your Delivery                               69

3.5 What to do When Delivering Your Speech                 78

3.6 Public Speaking Online                                 89

3.7 Enrichment                                             97

CHAPTER 4: ETHICS

4.1 The Ethics Pyramid                                     100

4.2 Ethics in Public Speaking                              107
4.3 Free Speech                                               127

4.5 Enrichment                                                132

CHAPTER 5: AUDIENCE ANALYSIS

5.1 What is Audience Analysis?                                136

5.2 Why Conduct an Audience Analysis?                         139

5.3 Three Types of Audience Analysis                          149

5.4 Conducting Audience Analysis                              160

5.5 Using Your Audience Analysis                              164

5.6 Enrichment                                                168

CHAPTER 6: CULTURE

6.1 Culture and Communication                                 172

6.2 Foundations of Culture and Identity                       175

6.3 Exploring Specific Cultural Identities                    184

6.4 Intercultural Communication                               201

6.5 Intercultural Communication Competence                    211

6.6 Enrichment                                                218

CHAPTER 7: ORGANIZING AND OUTLINING

7.1 Why is Organizing and Outlining Important?                221

7.2 The Topic, General Purpose, Specific Purpose, and Thesis  225

7.3 Organizational Patterns of Arrangement                    229

7.4 Outlining Your Speech                                     233

7.5 Enrichment                                                238

CHAPTER 8: RESEARCHING YOUR SPEECH

8.1 Library Resources                                         241

8.2 What Is Research?                                         246

8.3 Developing a Research Strategy                            251

8.4 Citing Sources                                            271

8.5 Enrichment                                                280
CHAPTER 9: SUPPORTING IDEAS AND BUILDING ARGUMENTS

9.1 Crafting Supporting Ideas                       284

9.2 Using Research as Support                       287

9.3 Exploring Types of Support                      297

9.4 Using Support and Creating Arguments            312

9.5 Enrichment                                      325

CHAPTER 10: INTRODUCTIONS AND CONCLUSIONS

10.1 Introductions                                  328

10.2 Conclusions                                    336

10.3 Enrichment                                     341

CHAPTER 11: THE IMPORTANCE OF LISTENING

11.1 Importance of Listening                        344

11.2 Listening vs. Hearing                          347

11.3 Listening Styles                               354

11.4 Why Listening Is Difficult                     361

11.5 Stages of Listening                            372

11.6 Listening Critically                           382

11.7 Enrichment                                     391

CHAPTER 12: LANGUAGE

12.1 What Language Is and Does                      395

12.2 Standards for Language in Public               401

12.3 Using Effective Language in Public Speaking    413

12.4 Enrichment                                     415

CHAPTER 13: PRESENTATION AIDS

13.1 What are Presentation Aids?                    417

13.2 Functions of Presentation Aids                 422

13.3 Types of Presentation Aids                     428

13.4 Using Presentation Slides                      444

13.5 Low-Tech Presentation Aids                     455

13.6 Enrichment                                     459
CHAPTER 14: INFORMATIVE SPEAKING

14.1 What is an Informative Speech?                        461

14.2 Types of Informative Speeches                         466

14.3 Guidelines for Selecting an Informative Speech Topic  471

14.4 Guidelines for Preparing an Informative Speech        474

14.5 Giving Informative Speeches in Groups                 477

14.6 Sample Informative Speech Outline                     480

14.7 Enrichment                                            490

CHAPTER 15: UNDERSTANDING SMALL GROUP COMMUNICATION

15.1 Communicating in Small Groups                         493

15.2 Understanding Small Groups                            497

15.3 Small Group Development                               510

15.4 Small Group Dynamics                                  516

15.5 Enrichment                                            529

CHAPTER 16: SMALL GROUPS & DECISION MAKING

16.1 Leadership, Roles, and Problem Solving in Groups      533

16.2 Leadership and Small Group Communication              536

16.3 Group Member Roles                                    549

16.4 Problem Solving and Decision Making in Groups         567

16.5 Enrichment                                            587

CHAPTER 17: PERSUASIVE SPEAKING

17.1 Why Persuade?                                         590

17.2 A Definition of Persuasion                            594

17.3 Why is Persuasion Hard?                               598

17.4 Traditional Views of Persuasion                       602

17.5 Theories of Persuasive Communication                  607

17.6 Constructing a Persuasive Speech                      612

17.7 Sample Persuasive Speech Outline                      623

17.8 Enrichment                                            624
CHAPTER 18: SPECIAL OCCASION SPEAKING

18.1 Understanding Special Occasion Speaking  628

18.2 Types of Special Occasion Speeches       635

18.3 Special Occasion Language                646

18.4 Special Occasion Delivery                648

18.5 Sample Special Occasion Speech Script    650

18.6 Enrichment                               651

Glossary                                      653

Links by Chapter                              678
                Accessibility Statement

OSU Libraries and Oklahoma State University believe that education must be available to everyone; this means
supporting the creation of free, open, and accessible educational resources. We are actively committed to
increasing the accessibility and usability of the textbooks we produce.

                  Accessibility features of the web version of this resource

The web version of Introduction to Speech Communication has been designed with accessibility in mind. With the
assistance of a Partnering to Impact Grant: Harmonizing Open Educational Resources: Accessibility Beyond
Screen Readers Through OSU Community Voices generously provided by Women for OSU, we are thrilled
to offer audio files for each primary reading sections of our textbook. These audio files were recorded by
Oklahoma State University undergraduate speech students in the College of Arts and Sciences multimedia
studio.

   Additionally, it is our goal to optimize this resource for people using screen-reader technology. Content
should be navigable using a keyboard, and links, headings, and tables should be formatted to work with screen
readers. All images considered essential include alt-tags. Information is not conveyed by color alone, and there
is an option to increase font size. (See tab on top right of screen titled, "Increase Font Size.")

   It has been optimized for people who use screen-reader technology.
         all content can be navigated using a keyboard.
         links, headings, and tables are formatted to work with screen readers.

   All images in this guide are screenshots that are considered non-essential as they are described fully in
      the text. As such, they do not include alt tags.

   Information is not conveyed by color alone.
   There is an option to increase font size. (See tab on top right of screen titled, "Increase Font Size.")

                                  Other file formats available

In addition to the web version, this book is available in a number of file formats including PDF, EPUB (for
eReaders), MOBI (for Kindles), and various editable files. Here is a link to where you can download this book
in another file format. Look for the Download this book drop-down menu to select the file type you want.

X |
                   Known accessibility issues and areas for improvement

While we strive to ensure that this resource is as accessible and usable as possible, we might not always get it
right. Any issues we identify will be listed below. There are currently no known issues.

List of Known Accessibility Issues

Location of Issue  Need for Improvement  Timeline  Work Around

                                     Accessibility standards

The web version of this resource has been designed to meet Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0, level
AA. In addition, it attempts to follow all guidelines in Appendix A: Checklist for Accessibility of the Accessibility
Toolkit - 2nd Edition.

               Let us know if you are having problems accessing this guide

We are always looking for ways to make our resources more accessible. If you have problems accessing this
resource, please contact us to let us know, so we can fix the issue.

   Please include the following information:

   The location of the problem by providing a web address or page description
   A description of the problem
   The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are using that can help us diagnose

      and solve your issue
         e.g., Windows 10, Google Chrome (Version 65.0.3325.181), NVDA screen reader

You can contact us by completing this web form or by sending an email to kathy.essmiller@okstate.edu.
   This statement was last updated on February 20, 2021, by Kathy Essmiller.
   "Accessibility Statement" by Kathy Essmiller is licensed CC-BY and is adapted from "Accessibility

Statement" in the BCCampus Pressbooks Guide by Lauri M. Aesoph licensed CC-BY. Language has been
customized for local use.

                                                                         | XI
                  Acknowledgements

This book, Introduction to Speech Communication, is used to support teaching, learning and research for SPCH
2713 at Oklahoma State University (OSU). This resource has been customized for use at OSU by faculty
members Sarah E. Hollingsworth, Kathryn Weinland, Sasha Hanrahan, Mary Walker, Terrisa Elwood and
Megan Linsenmeyer. In addition to inclusion of original work authored by the editors to meet the needs
of their course at OSU, the editors adapted and mixed together portions of Exploring Public Speaking: 4th
Edition, Stand Up, Speak Out, and Fundamentals of Public Speaking.The Online delivery section comes from
a combination of multiple sources from Maricopa Community College, Lousiana Library Network, Lumen
Learning, University of Arkansas, and Douglas College. Please see below for full citations of each of these
works. We at Oklahoma State University Libraries acknowledge our gratitude for the expertise and generosity
of the scholars at Affordable Learning Georgia, College of the Canyons, the Open Education Network and
elsewhere for creating and sharing customizable versions of their work.

Attribution statement:

Introduction to Speech Communication by Sarah E. Hollingsworth, Kathryn Weinland, Sasha Hanrahan, Mary
Walker, Terrisa Elwood and Megan Linsenmeyer is licensed CC BY-NC-SA. In addition to original material,
it has been adapted and remixed from Exploring Public Speaking: 4th Edition licensed CC BY-NC-SA, Stand Up,
Speak Out licensed CC BY-NC-SA and Fundamentals of Public Speaking licensed CC BY.

Recommended APA citation for this work:

Hollingsworth, S., Weinland, K., Hanrahan, S., Walker, M. Elwood, T. & Linsenmeyer, M. (Eds.). (2021).
Introduction to speech communication. Oklahoma State University Libraries. https://open.library.okstate.edu/
speech2713/

Citations for works acknowledged above:

Goodman, & Green, (n.d.) Online delivery considerations. Public Speaking. Maricopa Community Colleges.
https://open.maricopa.edu/com225/chapter/online-delivery/

   Lousiana Library Network. (2022). It's about them: Public speaking in the 21st century.
https://louis.pressbooks.pub/publicspeaking/chapter/online-public-speaking/

   Lumen Learning. (n.d.). Introduction to speaking online. Public Speaking.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-publicspeaking/chapter/introduction-to-speaking-online/

XII |
   Mead, L. (2021). Chapter 34: Speaking to a Camera: Making eye contact is key. Advanced Public Speaking.
https://uark.pressbooks.pub/speaking/chapter/speaking-to-a-camera/

   Schechter, S. (2023). Chapter 16: Public speaking online. Public Speaking For Today's Audiences.
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/speaking/chapter/chapter-16/

   Stand up, Speak Out. Okay, this is Kathy, that work has such an interesting history I cannot pretend to provide
an authoritative, accurate citation. Feel free to contact me at kathy.essmiller@okstate.edu if you have one, and
I will add it here.

   Stokes-Rice, T., Leonard, V., & Rome, L. Fundamentals of public speaking. (T. Radtke, Ed.). College of the
Canyons. https://www.oercommons.org/courses/fundamentals-of-public-speaking

   Tucker, B., Barton, K., Burger, A., Drye, J., Hunsicker, C., Mendes, A., & LeHew, M. Exploring public speaking:
4th edition. Communication Open Textbooks. https://oer.galileo.usg.edu/communication-textbooks/1

                                                                                                                                                                                             | XIII
Chapter 1: Why Public Speaking Matters Today

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Describe the three types of public speaking in everyday life: informative, persuasive, and entertaining.
     Explain the benefits of taking a course in and engaging in public speaking.
     Identify the three components of getting your message across to others.
     Distinguish between the interactional models of communication and the transactional model of communication.
     Explain the three principles discussed in the dialogical theory of public speaking.

                                                              Key Terms

     Channel
     Cultural Dimension
     Decoding
     Dialogic Theory of Public Speaking
     Dialogue
     Encoding
     Entertaining Speaking
     Feedback
     Informative Speaking
     Interactional Model of Public Speaking
     Linear Model of Public Speaking
     Mediated
     Message
     Monologue
     Noise
     Nonverbal Communication
     Persuasive Speaking
     Physical Dimension

1 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Receiver
 Social-Psychological Dimension
 Source
 Temporal Dimension
 Thought Leader
 Transactional Model of Public Speaking
 Verbal Communication

                                                       THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 2
   1.1 Public Speaking in the Twenty-First Century

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1463#audio-1463-1

       "Good communication is the bridge between clarity and confusion." -Nat Turner

Humans' ability to communicate using formalized systems of language sets us apart from other living

3 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
creatures on the Earth. Whether these language conventions make us superior to other creatures is debatable,
but there is no question that overall, the most successful and most powerful people over the centuries have
mastered the ability to communicate effectively. In fact, the skill of speaking is so important that it has been
formally taught for thousands of years.

   Public speaking is the process of designing and delivering a message to an audience. Effective public
speaking involves understanding your audience and speaking goals, choosing elements for the speech that
will engage your audience with your topic, and delivering your message skillfully. The ironic feature of public
speaking is that while we recognize that it is an important skill to have, many of us do not like or want
to give speeches. You may be reading this book because it was assigned to you in a class, or you may be
reading it because you have to give a speech in your personal or professional life. If you are reading this book
because you like public speaking or you have a burning desire to learn more about it, you are in the minority.
However, people continue to spend millions of dollars every year to listen to professional speakers. For
example, attendees of the 2010 TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) conference, which invites speakers
from around the world to share their ideas in short, eighteen-minute presentations, paid six thousand dollars
per person to listen to fifty speeches over a four-day period! We realize that you may not be invited to TED to
give the speech of your life or create a speech so inspirational that it touches the lives of millions via YouTube;
however, all of us will find ourselves in situations where we will be asked to give a speech, make a presentation,
or just deliver a few words. Even the ability to speak effectively on a personal camera at home or in your office
has now become a needed skill as many corporations, nonprofit organizations, and others have turned to
virtual meeting spaces as an alternative to face to face interactions.

   The good news about public speaking is that although it may not be on the top of the list of our favorite
activities, anyone can learn to give effective presentations. You do not have to look like a celebrity and you do
not have to use fancy words to be a successful speaker. What is important is that the audience understands
you and remembers what you have to say. By learning and using the techniques provided in this book, you will
discover how to create engaging speeches and present them using your own delivery style.

   Impactful public speakers understand that they should plan, organize, and revise their material in order
to develop an effective speech. This book will help you understand the basics of effective public speaking and
guide you through the process of creating your own presentations. In this chapter, we will first introduce
Pistol Pete, our very own Oklahoma State mascot, who will travel with you through this course, the principles
of communication, why public speaking is important, and then we will discuss models that illustrate the
process of public speaking itself.

                                                             THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 4
   Howdy! Y'all ready to saddle up and ride alongside me? I'm Pistol Pete, the livewire mascot of Oklahoma
State University, and I'm here to bring the thunder and fire up the Cowboy and Cowgirl spirit like no other!
Since the roaring '20s, I've been the epitome of grit and determination for the Oklahoma State faithful.
With my trusty cowboy hat, chiseled jawline, and sharp wit, I'm hard to miss and even harder to forget. I'm
the embodiment of the Orange Pride that courses through our veins. My roots run deep, partner. Drawing
inspiration from the remarkable life of Frank Eaton, known as Pistol Pete, I earned my nickname for my
lightning-fast aim and fiery passion. But my story doesn't end there. I've channeled that unwavering
determination into becoming a legendary cowboy and lawman. From thunderous football games to nail-biting
basketball showdowns, I electrify the atmosphere and ignite that Cowboy spirit in each of you. But it's not
just about the games, my friends. You may ask, why is ole Pete taking a public speaking course? There are
lots of good reasons I need to develop strong communication skills like representing our beloved university,
enhancing fan interaction, improving alumni and donor engagements, and handling interviews and media
appearances. I'm out there making a difference in the community too, spreading love and inspiring the next
generation with the indomitable spirit that encompasses this great university. Let's celebrate the traditions,
history, and unmatched pride that define Oklahoma State University. So, saddle up, my friends, and let's ride
this trail together! Join me, Pistol Pete, and let's show the world what it means to be a true Orange Cowboy by
becoming an effective communicator!

5 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                                                             THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 6
7 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                             References

Berkun, S. (2009, March 4). Does public speaking matter in 2009? [Web log message]. Retrieved from
   http://www.scottberkun.com/blog.

Survey of Human Communication (OER text). Retrieved from https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/
   3.0/. LibreTexts content is licensed by CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                             THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 8
       1.2 Why is Public Speaking Important?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1457#audio-1457-1

   In today's world, we are constantly bombarded with all kinds of messages. No matter where you live, where
you work or go to school, or what kinds of media you use, you are probably exposed to hundreds, if not
thousands, of advertising messages every day. Because we live in a world where we are overwhelmed with
content, communicating information in a way that is accessible to others is more important today than ever

9 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
before. To help us further understand why public speaking is important, we will first examine public speaking
in everyday life. We will then discuss how public speaking can benefit you personally.

                EVERYDAY PUBLIC SPEAKING

Every single day people across the United States and around the world stand up in front of some kind of
audience and speak. In a typical day, you may find yourself speaking in front of a group of college students
for an organization you belong to, giving a presentation in your psychology class, addressing the Student
Government Association about a pressing concern, or even speaking to a crowd at a religious function. Each
and everyday you go out and interact with your community, you will find a variety of opportunities to make
a difference in the world through public speaking. Although public speeches are of various types, they can
generally be grouped into three categories based on their intended purpose: informative, persuasive, and
special occasion.

INFORMATIVE SPEAKING

One of the most common types of public speaking is informative speaking. The primary purpose of
informative presentations is to share one's knowledge of a subject with an audience. Reasons for making an
informative speech vary widely. For example, you might be asked to instruct a group of coworkers on how to
use new computer software or to report to a group of managers how your latest project is coming along. A local
community group might wish to hear about your volunteer activities in Tulsa during spring break, or your
classmates may want you to share your expertise on new agricultural practices. What all these examples have
in common is the goal of imparting information to an audience.

   TV announcers, teachers, lawyers, and entertainers should be able to speak well, but most other professions
require or at the very least can benefit from the skills found in public speaking. Informative speaking is
integrated into many different occupations. Physicians often lecture about their areas of expertise to medical
students, other physicians, and patients. Teachers find themselves presenting to parents as well as to their
students. Firefighters give demonstrations about how to effectively control a fire in the house.

   Financial planners might address a group at the public library for an information session on retirement
planning. Being able to effectively transmit your ideas to other individuals is an important personal and
professional skill. It is believed 70% of jobs today involve some form of public speaking (Aras, 2012).

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 10
Informative speaking is a common part of numerous jobs and other everyday activities. As a result, learning
how to speak effectively has become an essential skill in today's world.

PERSUASIVE SPEAKING

A second common reason for speaking to an audience is to persuade others. In our everyday lives, we are
often called on to convince, motivate, or otherwise persuade others to change their beliefs, take an action,
or reconsider a decision. Advocating for music education in your local school district, convincing clients to
purchase your company's products, or inspiring high school students to attend college all involve influencing
other people through public speaking.

   With the recent economic shift from manufacturing to service careers, the ability to communicate with
others has become crucial. Top CEOs advise that great leaders should be able to communicate ideas effectively,
they should be able to persuade, build support, negotiate and speak effectively in public (Farrell, 2011).
Professional and motivational speakers can make millions of dollars each year from people who want to be
motivated to do better in their lives. Whether public speaking is something you do every day or just a few
times a year, persuading others is a challenging task. If you develop the skill to persuade effectively, it can be
personally and professionally rewarding.

SPECIAL OCCASION SPEAKING

Special occasion speaking involves an array of speaking occasions ranging from introductions to wedding
toasts, to presenting and accepting awards, to delivering eulogies at funerals and memorial services in
addition to after-dinner speeches and motivational speeches. This form of speaking has been important
since the time of the ancient Greeks, when Aristotle identified epideictic speaking (speaking in a ceremonial
context) as an important type of address. As with persuasive and informative speaking, there are
professionals, from religious leaders to comedians, who make a living simply from delivering entertaining,
special occasion speeches. As anyone who has watched an awards show on television or has seen an incoherent
best man deliver a wedding toast can attest, special occasion speaking is a task that requires preparation and
practice for most speakers to be effective.

11 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         PERSONAL BENEFITS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

Oral communication skills were the number one skill that college graduates found useful in a business
setting, according to a study by sociologist Andrew Zekeri (2004). That fact alone makes learning about public
speaking worthwhile. However, there are many other benefits of communicating effectively for the hundreds
of thousands of college students every year who take public speaking courses. Let's take a look at some specific
personal benefits you will get both from taking a course in public speaking and from actually giving public
speeches.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 12
BENEFITS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING COURSES

In addition to learning the process of creating and delivering an effective speech, students of public speaking

leave the class with a number of other benefits as well. Some of these benefits include developing critical
thinking skills, strengthening verbal and nonverbal skills, and building public
speaking confidence.

  Developing Critical Thinking Skills
  One of the very first benefits you will gain from your public speaking course is an
increased ability to think critically. Problem solving is one of many critical thinking
skills you will engage in during this course. For example, when preparing a persuasive
speech, you will have to think through real problems affecting your campus,
community, or the world and provide possible solutions to those problems. You will
also have to think about the positive and negative consequences of your solutions and
then communicate your ideas to others. At first, it may seem easy to come up with

13 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
solutions for a campus problem such as a shortage of parking spaces: just build more
spaces. But after thinking and researching further you may find out that building
costs, environmental impact from loss of green space, maintenance needs, or limited
locations for additional spaces make this solution impractical. Being able to think
through problems and analyze the potential costs and benefits of solutions is an
essential part of critical thinking and of public speaking aimed at persuading others.
These skills will help you not only in public speaking contexts but throughout your
life as well. As we stated earlier, college graduates in Zekeri's study rated oral
communication skills as the most useful for success in the business sector. The second
most valuable skill they reported was problem-solving ability, so your public speaking
course is doubly valuable!

Another benefit to public speaking is that it will enhance your ability to conduct and analyze research. Public
speakers should provide credible evidence within their speeches if they are going to persuade various
audiences. So your public speaking course will further refine your ability to find and utilize a range of sources.

Strengthening Verbal and Nonverbal Skills

A second benefit of taking a public speaking course is that it will help you strengthen your verbal and
nonverbal communication skills. Whether you competed in public speaking in high school or this is your first
time speaking in front of an audience, having the opportunity to actively practice communication skills and
receive professional feedback will help you become a better overall communicator. Often, people do not even
realize that they twirl their hair or repeatedly mispronounce words while speaking in public settings until
they receive feedback from a professor during a public speaking course. Before you even start a career, you
have to get a job. Effective speaking skills make you more attractive to employers, enhancing your chances of
securing employment and later advancing within your career. Employers, career counselors, and the National
Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE) all list good communication skills at the top of the list of
qualities sought in potential employees. According to NACE's executive director, Marilyn Mackes, the Job
Outlook 2013 Report found that employers are looking for people who can communicate effectively (Koncz
& Allen, 2012). Monster.com advises, "articulating thoughts clearly and concisely will make a difference in
both a job interview and subsequent job performance" (McKay, 2005). Additionally, many folks around the
United States will often pay speech coaches, seek out workshops, or read self help books to help them enhance
their nonverbal speaking skills. People around the United States will often pay speech coaches over one
hundred dollars per hour to help them enhance their speaking skills. You have a built-in speech coach right
in your classroom, so it is to your advantage to use the opportunity to improve your verbal and nonverbal
communication skills with the help of your professor.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 14
BUILDING CONFIDENCE IN PUBLIC SPEAKING

An additional benefit of taking a public speaking class is that it will help improve your confidence with public
speaking. Whether they have spoken in public a lot or are just getting started, most people experience some
anxiety when engaging in public speaking. Heidi Rose and Andrew Rancer evaluated students' levels of public
speaking anxiety during both the first and last weeks of their public speaking class and found that those levels
decreased over the course of the semester (Rose & Rancer, 1993). One explanation is that people often have
little exposure to public speaking. By taking a course in public speaking, students become better acquainted
with the public speaking process, making them more confident and less apprehensive. In addition, you will
learn specific strategies for overcoming the challenges of speech anxiety. We will discuss this topic in greater
detail throughout this book.

       BENEFITS OF ENGAGING IN PUBLIC SPEAKING

Once you have learned the basic skills associated with public speaking, you will find that being able to

effectively speak in public has profound benefits, including influencing the world around you,
developing leadership skills, and becoming a thought leader.

INFLUENCING THE WORLD AROUND YOU

If you do not like something about your local government, then speak out about your issue! One of the best
ways to get our society to change is through the power of speech. Common citizens in the United States and
around the world, like you, are influencing the world in real ways through the power of speech. Just type the
words "citizens speak out" in a search engine and you will find numerous examples of how common citizens
use the power of speech to make real changes in the world--for example, by speaking out against "fracking"
for natural gas (a process in which chemicals are injected into rocks in an attempt to open them up for fast
flow of natural gas or oil) or in favor of retaining a popular local sheriff. One of the amazing parts of being a
citizen in a democracy is the right to stand up and speak out, which is a luxury many people in the world do not
have. So if you do not like something, be the force of change you are looking for through the power of speech.

15 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
DEVELOPING LEADERSHIP SKILLS

Have you ever thought about climbing the corporate ladder and eventually finding yourself in a management
or other leadership position? If so, then public speaking skills are very important. Hackman and Johnson
assert that effective public speaking skills are a necessity for all leaders (Hackman & Johnson, 2004). If you
want people to follow you, you have to communicate effectively and clearly what people should do. According
to Bender, "Powerful leadership comes from knowing what matters to you. Powerful presentations come from
expressing this effectively. It is important to develop both" (Bender, 1998). One of the most important skills
for leaders to develop is their public speaking skills, which is why executives spend millions of dollars every
year going to public speaking workshops; hiring public speaking coaches; and buying public speaking books
or listening to online tutorials.

BECOMING A THOUGHT LEADER

Even if you are not in an official leadership position, effective public speaking can help you become a "thought
leader." Joel Kurtzman, editor of Strategy & Business, coined this term to call attention to individuals who
contribute new ideas to the world of business. According to business consultant Ken Lizotte, "when your
colleagues, prospects, and customers view you as one very smart guy or gal to know, then you are a thought
leader" (Lizotte, 2008). Typically, thought leaders engage in a range of behaviors, including enacting and
conducting research on business practices. To achieve thought leader status, individuals should communicate
their ideas to others through both writing and public speaking. Lizotte demonstrates how becoming a thought
leader can be personally and financially rewarding at the same time: when others look to you as a thought
leader, you will be more desired and make more money as a result. Business gurus often refer to "intellectual
capital," or the combination of your knowledge and ability to communicate that knowledge to others (Lizotte,
2008). Whether standing before a group of executives discussing the next great trend in business or delivering
a webinar (a seminar over the web), thought leaders use public speaking every day to create the future that the
rest of us live in.

                                             References

Bender, P. U. (1998). Stand, deliver and lead. Ivey Business Journal, 62(3), 46-47.
Edmund, N. W. (2005). End the biggest educational and intellectual blunder in history: A $100,000 challenge to our top

   educational leaders. Ft. Lauderdale, FL: Scientific Method Publishing Co.
Hackman, M. Z., & Johnson, C. E. (2004). Leadership: A communication perspective (4th ed.). Long Grove, IL:

   Waveland.
Lizotte, K. (2008). The expert's edge: Become the go-to authority people turn to every time [Kindle 2 version]. New York,

   NY: McGraw-Hill. Retrieved from Amazon.com (locations 72-78).

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 16
Rose, H. M., & Rancer, A. S. (1993). The impact of basic courses in oral interpretation and public speaking on
   communication apprehension. Communication Reports, 6, 54-60.

Zekeri, A. A. (2004). College curriculum competencies and skills former students found essential to their
   careers. College Student Journal, 38, 412-422.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

17 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
          1.3 The Process of Public Speaking

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                        One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                        https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1459#audio-1459-1

   As noted earlier, all of us encounter thousands of messages in our everyday environments, so getting your
idea heard above all the other ones is a constant battle. Some speakers will try gimmicks, but we strongly
believe that getting your message heard depends on three fundamental components: message, skill, and
passion. The first part of getting your message across is the message itself. When what you are saying is clear
and coherent, people are more likely to pay attention to it. On the other hand, when a message is ambiguous,

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 18
people will often stop paying attention. Our discussions in the first part of this book involve how to have clear
and coherent content.

   The second part of getting your message heard is having effective communication skills. You may have the
best ideas in the world, but if you do not possess basic public speaking skills, you are going to have a problem
getting anyone to listen. In this book, we will address the skills you should possess to effectively communicate
your ideas to others.

   Lastly, if you want your message to be heard, you should communicate passion for your message. One
mistake that novice public speakers make is picking topics in which they have no emotional investment. If an
audience can tell that you do not really care about your topic, they will just tune you out. Passion is the extra
spark that draws people's attention and makes them want to listen to your message.

   In this section, we will examine the process of public speaking by first introducing you to some basic
components of public speaking, a few basic models of public speaking and then discussing how public
speaking functions as dialogue. To start at the beginning, let us look a little more in depth at some basic terms.
Next the models will give you a basic understanding of the communication process and some challenges that
you may face as a speaker.

         BASIC COMPONENTS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

                      An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1459#h5p-1

Source/Encoder

When we communicate, it all starts with an origin. Generally speaking, the source refers to the person sending
the message. This role can be called speaker, sender, encoder, or source. Because encoding is the act of sending
a message, many communication scholars refer to the sender as the encoder. Because we can send messages
while speaking and listening, sometimes using the term "speaker" does not fit the circumstances. We can
operate as sources both verbally and nonverbally while speaking and listening during public speaking.

Receiver/Decoder

Usually there is a primary intended audience when we are speaking. In conversation it may just be one or two
people, but with public speaking it can be anywhere from a handful of people to thousands of people packed in
an arena. These people are thought of as the receivers of the message. This role can be called listener, receiver

19 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
or decoder. Because decoding is the act of receiving and making sense of a message, communication scholars
often refer to the receiver as the decoder. Receivers can receive all sorts of messages whether they are intended
or not.

Channel

The channel is usually the primary method or medium for communicating and can occur through face to face
communication, telephone conversations, texting, letters, mass media, etc. It is important to recognize that
the channel you select may have implications for your message. Some messages are best delivered face to face,
while some can be handled in a simple email or text message. Which channel is your primary method for
communicating? How does public speaking in a face to face setting differ from delivering a speech through a
computer screen?

Message

The message is the basic idea or information you are hoping to convey. Messages can present themselves
in a variety of ways, but we primarily identify them in two primary categories: verbal and nonverbal. Verbal
messages are those that we use language to deliver. They communicate our ideas or information through the
use of the words we select to use. The way we word messages can have a major impact on the way the message
is received. Nonverbal messages are the ways we communicate without using words. This can involve our vocal
characteristics, our gestures, body movements, facial expressions and more. As indicated above, you can tell
when someone is excited to talk about a topic versus someone who lacks care and concern for the topic they are
discussing. What kinds of nonverbal behavior indicate a lack of passion in a person's presentation? Feedback
is a specific type of message that indicates the receiver's response to the information. Feedback can also be
presented verbally or nonverbally. When we clap for a speaker or we ask challenging questions, these behaviors
communicate feedback to the speaker.

Noise

Oftentimes when a source is trying to send a message to a receiver, there is a problem that prevents the
message from being received as intended. This problem is generally considered to be noise. Noise is anything
that interferes with the message in its transmission or reception of the message. The noise can be external
to the participants engaged in communication or it can be internal. Common types of noise include physical
noise, physiological noise, psychological noise, and semantic noise. You will learn more about these different
types of noise in section 11.4 of this text.

   Understanding the basic components of communication will help give you a foundational understanding
that will benefit you as you move through this course. Additionally, it is useful to learn about the different
views of communication and how they have changed through time as well as the differences of the models
between different channels of communication.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 20
                MODELS OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

A basic model of human communication is one of the first topics that most communication teachers start
with in any class. For our focus on public speaking, we will introduce three widely discussed models in
communication: linear, interactional, and transactional.

The linear model of public speaking comes from the work of Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver (1949). The
original model mirrored how radio and telephone technologies functioned and consisted of three primary
parts: source, channel, and receiver. The source was the part of a telephone a person spoke into, the channel
was the telephone itself, and the receiver was the part of the phone where one could hear the other person.
Shannon and Weaver also recognized that often there is static that interferes with listening to a telephone
conversation, which they called noise.

   Although there are a number of problems with applying this model to human communication, it does have
some useful parallels to public speaking. In public speaking, the source is the person who is giving the speech,
the channel is the speaker's use of verbal and nonverbal communication, and the receivers are the audience
members listening to the speech. As with a telephone call, a wide range of distractions (noise) can inhibit an
audience member from accurately attending to a speaker's speech. Avoiding or adapting to these types of noise
is an important challenge for public speakers.

21 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
The interactional model of communication developed by Wilbur Schramm builds upon the linear model
(Schramm, 1954). Schramm added three major components to the Shannon and Weaver model. First,
Schramm identified two basic processes of communication: encoding and decoding. Encoding is what a
source does when "creating a message, adapting it to the receiver, and transmitting it across some source-
selected channel" (Wrench, McCroskey & Richmond, 2008). When you are at home preparing your speech or
standing in front of your classroom talking to your peers, you are participating in the encoding process.

   The second major process is the decoding process, or "sensing (for example, hearing or seeing) a source's
message, interpreting the source's message, evaluating the source's message, and responding to the source's
message" (Wrench, McCroskey & Richmond, 2008). Decoding is relevant in the public speaking context when,
as an audience member, you listen to the words of the speech, pay attention to nonverbal behaviors of the
speaker, and attend to any presentation aids that the speaker uses. You should then interpret what the speaker
is saying.

   Although interpreting a speaker's message may sound easy in theory, in practice many problems can arise. A
speaker's verbal message, nonverbal communication, and mediated presentation aids can all make a message
either clearer or harder to understand. For example, unfamiliar vocabulary, speaking too fast or too softly,
or small print on presentation aids may make it difficult for you to figure out what the speaker means.
Conversely, by providing definitions of complex terms, using well-timed gestures, or displaying graphs of
quantitative information, the speaker can help you interpret his or her meaning.

   Once you have interpreted what the speaker is communicating, you then evaluate the message. Was it good?

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 22
Do you agree or disagree with the speaker? Is a speaker's argument logical? These are all questions that you
may ask yourself when evaluating a speech.

   The last part of decoding is "responding to a source's message," when the receiver encodes a message to
send to the source. When a receiver sends a message back to a source, we call this process feedback. Schramm
talks about three types of feedback: direct, moderately direct, and indirect (Schramm, 1954). The first type,
direct feedback, occurs when the receiver directly talks to the source. For example, if a speech ends with
a question-and-answer period, listeners will openly agree or disagree with the speaker. The second type of
feedback, moderately direct, focuses on nonverbal messages sent while a source is speaking, such as audience
members smiling and nodding their heads in agreement or looking at their watches or surreptitiously sending
text messages during the speech. The final type of feedback, indirect, often involves a greater time gap
between the actual message and the receiver's feedback. For example, suppose you run for student body
president and give speeches to a variety of groups all over campus, only to lose on student election day.
Your audiences (the different groups you spoke to) have offered you indirect feedback on your message
through their votes. One of the challenges you may face as a public speaker is how to respond effectively to
audience feedback, particularly the direct and moderately direct forms of feedback you receive during your
presentation.

   One of the biggest concerns that some people have with the interactional model of communication is that
it tends to place people into the category of either source or receiver with no overlap. Even with Schramm's

23 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
model, encoding and decoding are perceived as distinct for sources and receivers. Furthermore, the
interactional model cannot handle situations where multiple sources are interacting at the same time
(Mortenson, 1972). To address these weaknesses, Dean Barnlund (2008) proposed a transactional model of
communication. The basic premise of the transactional model is that individuals are sending and receiving
messages at the same time. Whereas the interactional model has individuals engaging in the role of either
source or receiver and the meaning of a message is sent from the source to the receiver, the transactional
model assumes that meaning is co-created by both people interacting together.

   The idea that meanings are co-created between people is based on a concept called the "field of experience."
According to West and Turner, a field of experience involves "how a person's culture, experiences, and heredity
influence his or her ability to communicate with another" (West & Turner, 2010). Our education, race, gender,
ethnicity, religion, personality, beliefs, actions, attitudes, languages, social status, past experiences, and
customs are all aspects of our field of experience, which we bring to every interaction. For meaning to occur,
we should have some shared experiences with our audience; this makes it challenging to speak effectively to
audiences with very different experiences from our own. Our goal as public speakers is to build upon shared
fields of experience so that we can help audience members interpret our message.

          DIALOGIC THEORY OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

Most people think of public speaking as engaging in a monologue where the speaker stands and delivers
information and the audience passively listens. Based on the work of numerous philosophers, however,
Ronald Arnett and Pat Arneson proposed that all communication, even public speaking, could be viewed as a
dialogue (Arnett & Arneson, 1999). The dialogic theory is based on three overarching principles:

    1. Dialogue is more natural than monologue.
    2. Meanings are in people not words.
    3. Contexts and social situations impact perceived meanings (Bakhtin, 2001a; Bakhtin, 2001b).
Let's look at each of these in turn.

DIALOGUE VS. MONOLOGUE

The first tenet of the dialogic perspective is that communication should be a dialogue and not a monologue.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 24
Lev Yakubinsky argued that even public speaking situations often turn into dialogues when audience
members actively engage speakers by asking questions. He even claimed that nonverbal behavior (e.g.,
nodding one's head in agreement or scowling) functions as feedback for speakers and contributes to a
dialogue (Yakubinsky, 1997). Overall, if you approach your public speaking experience as a dialogue, you will
be more actively engaged as a speaker and more attentive to how your audience is responding, which will, in
turn, lead to more actively engaged audience members.

MEANINGS ARE IN PEOPLE, NOT WORDS

Part of the dialogic process in public speaking is realizing that you and your audience may differ in how you
see your speech. Hellmut Geissner and Edith Slembeck (1986) discussed Geissner's idea of responsibility, or
the notion that the meanings of words should be mutually agreed upon by people interacting with each other
(Geissner & Slembek, 1986). If you say the word "dog" and think of a soft, furry pet and your audience member
thinks of the animal that attacked him as a child, the two of you perceive the word from very different vantage
points. As speakers, we should do our best to craft messages that take our audience into account and use
audience feedback to determine whether the meaning we intend is the one that is received. To be successful
at conveying our desired meaning, we should know quite a bit about our audience so we can make language
choices that will be the most appropriate for the context. Although we cannot predict how all our audience
members will interpret specific words, we do know that--for example--using teenage slang when speaking to
the audience at a senior center would most likely hurt our ability to convey our meaning clearly.

CONTEXTS AND SOCIAL SITUATIONS

Russian scholar Mikhail Bahktin (2001a, 2001b) notes that human interactions take place according to cultural
norms and rules. How we approach people, the words we choose, and how we deliver speeches are all
dependent on different speaking contexts and social situations. On September 8, 2009, President Barack
Obama addressed school children with a televised speech (https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/the-press-
office/remarks-president-a-national-address-americas-schoolchildren). If you look at the speech he delivered
to kids around the country and then at his speeches targeted toward adults, you will see lots of differences.
These dissimilar speeches are necessary because the audiences (speaking to kids vs. speaking to adults) have
different experiences and levels of knowledge. Ultimately, good public speaking is a matter of taking into

25 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
account the cultural background of your audience and attempting to engage your audience in a dialogue from
their own vantage point.

   Considering the context of a public speech involves thinking about four dimensions: physical, temporal,
social-psychological, and cultural (DeVito, 2009).

PHYSICAL DIMENSION

The physical dimension of communication involves the real or touchable environment where communication
occurs. For example, you may find yourself speaking in a classroom, a corporate board room, or a large
amphitheater. Each of these real environments will influence your ability to interact with your audience.
Larger physical spaces may require you to use a microphone and speaker system to make yourself heard or to
use projected presentation aids to convey visual material.

   How the room is physically decorated or designed can also impact your interaction with your audience. If
the room is dimly lit or is decorated with interesting posters, audience members' minds may start wandering.
If the room is too hot, you will find people becoming sleepy. As speakers, we often have little or no control
over our physical environment, but we always need to take it into account when planning and delivering our
messages.

TEMPORAL DIMENSION

According to Joseph DeVito, the temporal dimension "has to do not only with the time of day and moment
in history but also with where a particular message fits into the sequence of communication events" (DeVito,
2009). The time of day can have a dramatic effect on how alert one's audience is. Don't believe us? Try giving
a speech in front of a class around 12:30 p.m. when no one's had lunch. It is amazing how impatient audience
members get once hunger sets in.

   In addition to the time of day, we often face temporal dimensions related to how our speech will be viewed
in light of societal events. Imagine how a speech on the importance of campus security would be interpreted
on the day after a shooting occurred. Compare this with the interpretation of the same speech given at a time
when the campus had not had any shootings for years, if ever.

   Another element of the temporal dimension is how a message fits with what happens immediately before it.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 26
For example, if another speaker has just given an intense speech on death and dying and you stand up to speak
about something more trivial, people may downplay your message because it does not fit with the serious
tone established by the earlier speech. You never want to be the funny speaker who has to follow an emotional
speech where people cried. Most of the time in a speech class, you will have no advance notice as to what the
speaker before you will be talking about. Therefore, it is wise to plan on being sensitive to previous topics and
be prepared to ease your way subtly into your message if the situation so dictates.

SOCIAL-PSYCHOLOGICAL DIMENSION

The social-psychological dimension of context refers to "status relationships among participants, roles and
games that people play, norms of the society or group, and the friendliness, formality, or gravity of the
situation" (DeVito, 2009). You have to know the types of people in your audience and how they react to a wide
range of messages.

CULTURAL DIMENSION

The final context dimension Joseph DeVito mentions is the cultural dimension (DeVito, 2009). When we
interact with others from different cultures, misunderstandings can result from differing cultural beliefs,
norms, and practices. As public speakers engaging in a dialogue with our audience members, we should
attempt to understand the cultural makeup of our audience so that we can avoid these misunderstandings as
much as possible.

   Each of these elements of context is a challenge for you as a speaker. Throughout the rest of the book, we will
discuss how you can meet the challenges presented by the audience and context and become a more effective
public speaker in the process.

                                             References

Arnett, R. C., & Arneson, P. (1999). Dialogic civility in a cynical age: Community, hope, and interpersonal relationships.
   Albany, NY: SUNY Press.

Bakhtin, M. (2001a). The problem of speech genres. (V. W. McGee, Trans., 1986). In P. Bizzell & B. Herzberg

27 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   (Eds.), The rhetorical tradition (pp. 1227-1245). Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin's. (Original work published in
   1953.).
Bakhtin, M. (2001b). Marxism and the philosophy of language. (L. Matejka & I. R. Titunik, Trans., 1973). In
   P. Bizzell & B. Herzberg (Eds.), The rhetorical tradition (pp. 1210-1226). Boston, MA: Medford/St. Martin's.
   (Original work published in 1953).
Barnlund, D. C. (2008). A transactional model of communication. In C. D. Mortensen (Ed.), Communication
   theory (2nd ed., pp. 47-57). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.
   DeVito, J. A. (2009). The interpersonal communication book (12th ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Geissner, H., & Slembek, E. (1986). Miteinander sprechen und handeln [Speak and act: Living and working
   together]. Frankfurt, Germany: Scriptor.
   Mortenson, C. D. (1972). Communication: The study of human communication. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Schramm, W. (1954). How communication works. In W. Schramm (Ed.), The process and effects of communication
   (pp. 3-26). Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
   Shannon, C. E., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical theory of communication. Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
West, R., & Turner, L. H. (2010). Introducing communication theory: Analysis and application (4th ed.). New York,
   NY: McGraw-Hill, p. 13.
Wrench, J. S., McCroskey, J. C., & Richmond, V. P. (2008). Human communication in everyday life: Explanations
   and applications. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon, p. 17.
   Yakubinsky, L. P. (1997). On dialogic speech. (M. Eskin, Trans.). PMLA, 112(2), 249-256. (Original work
published in 1923).

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 28
                    1.4 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. What areas of public speaking do you think will be most challenging for you? Why? What are some plans to
                 overcome these challenges?

            2. How might becoming a more effective and confident public speaker affect your life? Consider the differences
                 between personal and professional impacts.

            3. What are your feelings and/or experiences with public speaking? How might this skill be used in your future?
            4. Think about your own field of experience through positionality and perspectives. How has your gender, work

                 history, religious affiliation, relationship status, educational experiences, major, socioeconomic status, age,
                 ethnicity, race, hometown, political affiliation and life experiences influenced your attitudes, beliefs, and values?
                 Give some concrete examples.
            5. What are the three fundamental components of getting your message across according to your text? Do you feel
                 any components are missing or should be added?
            6. What are three ways that you will use public speaking in your future career (personal & professional)?

                                                   Activities

            1. Reflect on your own desire for improved communication and public speaking skills in your life. Set three or four
                 personal and/or professional goals you hope to achieve by taking this class.

            2. Think of a career path that you are considering. Using that occupation do a quick internet search of that position
                 with the term, "public speaking". Discuss your findings with a classmate or friend.(e.g. "nurse and public
                 speaking").

            3. Form six groups. Each group will be given a blank piece of paper, crayons/markers/colored pencils, and a different
                 process of public speaking from Section 1:3: The Public Speaking Process (linear model of public speaking,
                 interactional model of public speaking, transactional model of public speaking, dialogic theory of public speaking,
                 contexts and social situations of public speaking). Groups should draw a model or picture that represents their
                 selected process of public speaking. Groups will display and explain their drawings to the class.

29 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                 THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 30
Chapter 2: Building Confidence

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Employ methods to build public speaking confidence.
 Describe the nature of communication apprehension (CA), and be in a better position to deal with your particular "brand" of

   CA.
 Apply cognitive restructuring (CR) techniques to create a more positive frame of reference.
 Recognize the importance of customized practice to become conversant in your topic.
 Create a personal preparation routine to minimize your apprehension.

                                Key Terms

 "Breathe and Release"
 Cognitive Restructuring (CR)
 Communication Apprehension
 Conversant
 Scrutiny Fear
 State-Anxiety
 Systematic De-sensitization
 Trait-Anxiety

31 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    2.1 What is Communication Apprehension?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1516#audio-1516-1

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 32
  "The brave man is not he who does not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear." -Nelson
                                              Mandela

"I have to do what?"
   You receive your syllabus on the first day of history class, and you see that a significant percentage of your overall grade

for the semester depends upon one, ten-minute oral presentation in front of the class. The presentation is to be based on an
original research project and is due in eight weeks.

   You are excited to get an email after a very positive job interview. They ask you to come to a second interview prepared to
answer a number of questions from a panel made up of senior management. The questions are contained in an attachment.
"Please be ready to stand in the front of the room to answer," the email reads; ending with "See you next week!"

   The plans are finalized: You will have dinner to meet your new fianc's family on Saturday night - just days away. But,
then you are told that your fianc's father, a former Marine and retired police officer, will want to talk about politics and
current events - and that he will likely judge what sort of person you are based on how well you can defend your ideas.

   In this chapter, you will learn about dealing with one of the most common fears in our society: the fear
of public speaking. Fear of public speaking is associated with communication apprehension (CA), which is
an individuals level of fear or anxiety associated with either real or anticipated communication with another
person or persons (McCrosky, 1977). If you are one of those folks - take comfort in the fact that you are
not alone! Research indicates that 20% or more of the U.S. population has a high degree of communicative
apprehension (McCroskey, 1976).

   CA is a real phenomenon that represents a well-documented obstacle not only to academic, but also to
professional success. CA can impact many diverse areas; from one's level of self-esteem (Adler, 1980) and how

33 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
you are perceived by others (Dwyer & Cruz, 1998), to success in school, achieving high grade-point averages,
and even landing job interview opportunities (Daly & Leth, 1976).

   People with higher levels of CA have demonstrated that they will avoid communicative interaction in
personal and professional relationships, social situations, and importantly, classrooms. Such avoidance can
result in miscommunication and misunderstanding, which only becomes compounded by further avoidance.

   CA left unaddressed can even lead to a negative disposition toward public interaction, which leads to a lesser
degree of engagement, thus perpetuating the fear and further compounding the situation (Menzel & Carrell,
1994). The anxiety creates a vicious cycle and becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy. But it is a cycle that need not
continue.

   By reading this chapter, you will learn about CA; not necessarily how it develops, as that can be different in
every individual, but rather about how people can deal with it effectively. CA is not something that can easily be
eliminated - turned "off" as if controlled by an internal toggle switch. But it doesn't have to remain an obstacle
to success either.

   Effective public speaking is not simply about learning what to say, but about developing the confidence to
say it. For many, it all comes down to overcoming those nerves and convincing yourself that you can actually
get up there and speak! Each individual deals with CA most effectively through increased self-awareness and a
willingness to work on reducing its impact. To conquer the nervousness associated with public speaking, one
must identify the factors that lead to this anxiety, and then take specific steps to overcome this apprehension.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 34
The morning sun rose high in the sky, casting a warm glow over the campus of Oklahoma State University.
Inside the classroom, a hushed anticipation filled the air as the students settled into their seats, awaiting the
start of their public speaking class. Among them sat Pistol Pete, the spirited mascot known for his exuberance
and energy. But today, a different energy emanated from him--a nervousness that churned in his stomach
and made his hands tremble.

   As the professor called his name to deliver his speech, Pete's heart skipped a beat. Doubt and fear clouded
his mind, causing his usually boisterous spirit to waver. A thousand thoughts raced through his head--what if
he stumbled over his words? What if his enthusiasm didn't translate into his voice? The weight of expectations
felt heavy upon his shoulders.

   As he rose from his seat, Pete could feel the gaze of his classmates upon him. The room suddenly felt
suffocating, the walls closing in. His throat tightened, and words seemed to escape him. A wave of self-doubt
washed over him, threatening to extinguish the fire within.

   Taking a deep breath, Pete reminded himself of his purpose. He knew that his role as Pistol Pete went
beyond the confines of the field or the court. He represented the resilience, spirit, and wholesome pride of
Oklahoma State University. It was this realization that fueled his determination to push through his fears and
share his story.

   With shaky steps, Pete made his way to the front of the class. His palms were sweaty, and his voice trembled
as he began to speak. But as he looked into the eyes of his classmates, he saw understanding and support. Their
encouraging smiles gave him the strength he needed to carry on.

   As he delved into his speech, Pete's nervousness slowly transformed into a passionate fervor. He spoke of
the unifying force he embodied as Pistol Pete, the impact he had on the community, and the legacy he carried
on from Frank Eaton. His voice grew stronger, filled with conviction, and his words resonated with the hearts
of his classmates.

35 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   By the end of his speech, the nervousness that had plagued Pete had dissipated, replaced by a newfound
sense of accomplishment. Despite his initial fear, he had conquered the challenge of speaking in front of the
class. The room erupted in applause, a testament to the courage he had displayed.

   In that moment, Pistol Pete realized that even heroes have their moments of doubt. But it is in facing those
fears head-on, embracing vulnerability, and summoning the strength within that true growth and triumph
are achieved. From that day forward, Pete carried the memory of that experience, using it as a reminder that
even in the face of nerves and fear, he could rise above and inspire others with his voice. How does your body
show anxiety prior to presentations? What can you do to calm your nerves?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 36
   2.2 Classifying Communication Apprehension

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1537#audio-1537-1

37 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                        Forms of Communication Apprehension (CA)

CA is not the result of a single cause, and so the phenomenon itself comes in many forms. It is important for
each person to recognize that their particular sort of CA (we'll call it a "personal brand") is a phenomenon that
has developed uniquely through each of their lives and experiences.

Trait-anxiety

Some researchers (McCroskey, et al. 1976) describe CA as trait-anxiety, meaning that it is a type of anxiety
that is aligned with an individual's personality. People who would call themselves "shy" often seek to avoid
interaction with others because they are uncertain of how they will be perceived. Avoiding such judgment is
generally not difficult, and so becomes a pattern of behavior. These folks, according to researchers, are likely
to view any chance to express themselves publicly with skepticism and hesitation. This personal tendency is
what is known as trait-anxiety.

State-anxiety

Other researchers (Beatty, 1988) describe CA as state-anxiety, meaning that it is a type of anxiety that is
derived from the external situation which individuals find themselves. While some may fear public speaking
due to some personal trait or broader social anxiety, researchers have found that CA more often stems from
the fear associated with scrutiny and negative evaluation. Some people may have had a negative experience in
public at an early age - they forgot a line in a play, they lost a spelling bee, they did poorly when called on in

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 38
front of their class - something that resulted in a bit of public embarrassment. Others may have never actually
experienced that stress themselves, but may have watched friends struggle and thus empathized with them.
These sorts of experiences can often lead to the formation of a state-anxiety in an individual.

Scrutiny Fear

Still other researchers (Mattick et al., 1989) discuss CA as what is called a scrutiny fear; which stems from an
activity that does not necessarily involve interacting with other people, but is simply the fear of being in a
situation where one is being watched or observed, or one perceives him or herself as being watched, while
undertaking an activity. When asked to categorize their own type of CA, many people will identify with this
phenomenon.

   In order for anybody to effectively deal with CA, the first step is to consider what may be its primary
cause. CA is what is known as a resultant condition; and those who are dealing with the challenge will
recognize different intensities associated with different situations or triggers. This means that overcoming
the condition requires first that you recognize, and then minimize, the cause. Each person is different, and so
each case of CA is personal and unique.

   Trait-anxiety can be one contributing factor to CA, but is often part of a much larger condition. It is
important to understand that, while the techniques discussed here would help in improving an individual's
approach to public speaking opportunities, we do not claim that these techniques would work with more
significant personality disorders. However, both the presence of state anxiety, and the appearance of scrutiny
fear, can be effectively addressed through the application of cognitive restructuring (CR) and careful,
deliberate experience.

39 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                      Cognitive Restructuring

Since the major difference between "presenting" to a public audience versus "presenting" to a small group
of close friends involves one's attitude about the situation. Overcoming CA is as much a matter of changing
one's attitude as it is developing one's skills as a speaker. A change in attitude can be fostered through a self-
reflective regimen called cognitive restructuring (CR), which is an internal process through which individuals
can deliberately adjust how they perceive an action or experience (Mattick et al., 1989). Cognitive Restructuring
is a three-step, internal process:

   1. Identify objectively what you think
2. Identify any inconsistencies between perception and reality
3. Replace destructive thinking with supportive thinking

   These steps are easy to understand, but perhaps may be a bit difficult to execute! The first step is to identify
objectively what you are thinking as you approach a public speaking opportunity. Recall your habitual frame
of reference. The first step in CR is to shine a bright light directly on it. This will be different for each student
as this is an internal process.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 40
                                     Sources of Apprehension

After years of interviewing students from my classes, the two concerns most often described are the feeling of
being the center of attention - as if you are under some collective microscope with everybody's eyes on you;
and the feeling that the audience is just waiting for you to make a mistake or slip up somehow - and that their
disapproval will be swift, immediate, and embarrassing. Let's discuss how CR might be applied to each of these
widely held perceptions.

Center of Attention

Probably the most common concern people have is being the "center of attention." When people describe this
specific scrutiny fear, they use phrases like "everyone just stares at me," or "I don't like having all eyes on me."
Consider for a moment what your experiences have been like when you have been a member of the audience
for another speaker. Where did you look while the person spoke? Did you look at the speaker?

   Direct eye contact can mean different things in different cultures, but in U.S. culture, eye contact is the
primary means for an audience to demonstrate that they are listening to a speaker. Nobody likes to be ignored,
and most members of an audience would not want to be perceived as ignoring the speaker - that would be
rude!

   Compare: before CR, the frame of reference reflects the idea that "everyone is staring at me"; after CR, the
perception is altered to "the audience is looking at me to be supportive and polite- after all, I'm the one doing
the talking."

Fear of Judgment

Another common concern is the fear of being judged harshly or making an embarrassing mistake. Go back to
that memory of you as a member of the audience, but this time reflect on what sort of expectations you had at
the time. Did you expect the speaker to be flawless and riveting? Did you have in mind some super-high level
of performance - below which the speaker would have disappointed you? You probably did not (unless you had
the chance to watch some prominent speaker).

   Think back to any experiences you may have had watching another speaker struggle - perhaps a classmate
during one of their presentations. Witnessing something like that can be uncomfortable. Did you feel empathy
for the person struggling? Isn't it a much more pleasant experience when the speaker does well? Again, the
vast majority of people empathize with the speaker when it comes to the quality of the presentation. They are
willing to give the speaker a
chance to say what they want to say.

   Thus: before CR, the frame of reference reflects the idea that "everyone is judging me harshly"; and after CR,
the perception is altered to "the audience is willing to listen to what I have to say because it's a more pleasant
experience for them if the speaker is successful."

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

41 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
               2.3 Learning Confidence

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1542#audio-1542-1

Consider what comes into your mind if you are to deliver a public presentation. Are your thoughts consumed
with many uncertainties? What if I make a mistake? What if they don't like what I'm talking about? What if?
Try your own version of CR. Put yourself in the role of audience member and ask yourself whether your fears
as a speaker are consistent with your expectations as an audience member. Remember that, just like you, the
audience wants the speaker to succeed.

   Of course CR, unfortunately, is always easier said than done. It is a process that takes time, patience, and
practice. The most important thing to remember is that you are trying CR as a means of breaking a habit, and
habits are formed over periods of time, never instantaneously. The breaking of a habit, similarly, cannot be
done instantaneously, but gradually, over time and with deliberate effort.

   Changing your attitude is only one element in overcoming CA. The other involves improving your skills
as a speaker. The presence of CA in any student brings with it the need to prepare more deliberately and
more diligently. The other chapters in this book deal with the importance of preparation in all areas of
public presentation. Readers should consider how the challenges involved with overcoming CA can impact the
preparation process.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 42
                "Believe you can, and you're halfway there." -Theodore Roosevelt

                              Techniques for Building Confidence

Prepare Well

The correlation between preparation and nervousness is consistent. More practice results in less nervousness.
The best, most consistent and direct way to minimize the level of nervousness you feel is through effective
preparation. This is always true.

   Michael Jordan was once asked the best way to learn how to shoot free throws. To everyone's surprise, the
first step he described did not entail actually shooting the ball. He described how the first step in learning to
shoot free throws is to run sprints. Most importantly, his advice was to run until your body was under the
same stress as it would be in a game when you needed to make those free throws - because only under those
conditions would your practice become truly productive. Only then do you pick up the ball and shoot.

   All types of preparation and practice yield some benefits, but there is a significant difference between
practice that is merely helpful and practice that is sufficient. There is a difference between "knowing what you
are talking about," and "knowing what you are going to say."

   Thinking about your presentation can be helpful, but that sort of preparation will not give you a sense of
what you are actually going to say. Athletes know that the best practices will re-create game conditions and
test their abilities to perform in real-life scenarios.

43 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Many students do not practice effectively, and this can result in the wrong idea that practice isn't helpful.
Unfortunately, these same students usually have had little, if any, training in how one might prepare for a
presentation, and so they employ the scholastic training they are most familiar with - how to write a paper.
This is not the same activity as presenting, and so the lack of proper preparation only contributes to the lack of
confidence. Let's look at a few elements of effective practice.

Visualize Success

Athletes and performers are often coached to visualize what they are trying to do as a way to perform correctly.
Football and basketball players must envision how each member of the team will move during a particular play
because team success depends on speedy and flawless coordination between individuals. Dancers and divers
are trained to visualize the form and positioning of their bodies as they execute their moves. Engaging the
imagination in this way can be beneficial to performance.

   Speakers too, should visualize success. As you practice, visualize yourself presenting with confidence to
a receptive audience. "See" your relaxed facial expressions and "hear" your confident tone of voice. Imagine
yourself moving gracefully, complementing what you say with expressive gestures.

   Imagine the audience reacting appropriately - nodding appreciatively and giving thoughtful consideration
to your points. Imagine the gratification of watching the audience really "get it." When you can honestly
envision yourself performing at this level, you are taking an important step toward achieving that goal.

Avoid Gimmicks

Some acting coaches (and speech teachers) encourage their students to practice in front of mirrors, so that
they can watch themselves perform and evaluate how they move. In acting, this can be very useful; but in
speaking, it is less so.

   When you practice your presentation, the most important element is expressiveness. You want to become
more familiar with the volume of material, the order in which you plan to present it, and the phrasing you
think would be most effective to express it.

   Watching yourself perform in a mirror will focus your attention on your appearance first - and on what
you express second. This makes using a mirror during practice a distraction from what the practice ought to
achieve.

   For some reason, the myth persists that imagining your audience in their pajamas - or something similarly
silly - is an effective way to make standing in front of them seem less scary. These sorts of gimmicks don't
work! In fact, concentrating on anything other than what you are doing is distracting and not beneficial at all.
Do your best to avoid such advice. Visualize success!

Breathe and Release

One type of pre-presentation exercise that might be helpful is based on a therapeutic idea called systematic de-
sensitization. A multi-stage regimen to help patients deal with phobias through coping mechanisms, which
involves gradual exposure to what produces the anxiety, long-term self- reflection, and mental discipline.

   Here, we will discuss a shortened version called "breathe and release." This relaxation technique could
be useful for nervous speakers - especially those who are concerned with the physical manifestations of
nervousness, such as shaky hands or knees.

   The key to "breathe and release" is to understand that when nervous tension results in minor trembling, the

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 44
effort of trying to keep one's hands from shaking can contribute to the whole situation - that is, trying to stop
literally can make it worse! Therefore, the best approach is through relaxation.

How to Breathe and Release

    1. Imagine the nervousness within your body. Imagine the energy bubbling inside you, like boiling
         water.

    2. Draw that energy to a high point within your body through a deep, cleansing breath. Imagine this
         cleansing breath like a vacuum, inhaling all of the bubbling liquid.

    3. Release the energy by deliberately relaxing your upper body, all the way from your fingertips to your
         shoulder blades. Imagine how keeping any part of your upper extremities tense would result in a
         "kink" in the release valve, and so complete relaxation is the key to success.

Minimize What You Memorize

One important hint for speech preparation involves avoiding the writing of an entirely scripted version of the
presentation. A speech outline is not a monologue or manuscript; it is a guideline and should be used as a
roadmap for your speech.

   Remember that lunch with your friends? When you were describing the movie plot, you were being
conversant in a prepared way. This means that you knew what you were describing, but you were not
concerned with the specific words you were using. Being conversant is the condition of being prepared to
discuss an issue intelligently.

   A well-prepared speaker is with regard to her topic. Consider how being conversant in this manner allows
freer, more fluid communication, with no stress associated with your ability to remember what words you
wanted to use. Being conversant also gives the speaker the best chance to recognize and react to audience
feedback.

   If you are completely focused on the integrity of scripted comments, then you will be unable to read and
react to your audience in any meaningful way. Imagine how frustrating it would be for your friends at that
lunch if you would not respond to any of their questions until you were finished reading a few descriptive
paragraphs about the movie. They would probably just wait until you were done reading and then try to engage
you in a conversation!

Practice Out Loud

Remember the very first time you tried to do anything - a game, a sport, an activity, anything at all. How good
were you out of the gate? Perhaps you had talent or were gifted with a "feel" for what you were doing. But even
then, didn't you get better with more experience? Nobody does anything the very best they can on their very
first attempt, and everyone - even the most talented among us - benefit from effective practice.

   Speaking in public is no different from any other activity in this way. To maximize the chance that your
presentation will come out smooth and polished, you will need to hear it all the way through. By practicing out
loud, from the beginning to the ending, you will be able to listen to your whole speech and properly gauge the
flow of your entire presentation.

   Additionally, without at least one complete out-loud practice, there will be no way to accurately estimate the
length of your speech and your preparation will remain insufficient.

   When dealing with CA, the last thing you want is to leave some questions unanswered in your own mind!

45 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
The out-loud "dress rehearsal" is the single, most important element to your preparation. Without it, you will
be delivering your presentation in full for the first time when it counts the most. Putting yourself at that sort
of disadvantage isn't wise, and is easily avoided.

   You might even consider trying that initial practice without the benefit of any notes. Stand up; start
speaking; see what comes out! During your initial practice consider these questions:

   1. Where, during your presentation, are you most - and least - conversant?
   2. Where, during your presentation, are you most in need of supportive notes?
   3. What do your notes need to contain?

Prepare for your public presentation by speaking and listening to yourself, rather than by writing, editing, and
rewriting. Remember that when you are having a conversation, you never use the same sort of language and
syntax as you do when you are writing a formal paper. Practice with the goal of becoming conversant in your
topic, not fluent with a script.

Customize Your Practice

Depending on your personal level of CA, you may choose to implement techniques previously mentioned in
different ways. Take a moment to reflect on what causes your CA. Do you dislike the feeling of being the center
of attention? Are you more concerned with who is in the audience and what they might think of you? Or are
you worried about "freezing" in front of the audience and forgetting what you wanted to say?

   Write some of these concerns down and put them into a priority order. If you are worried about a particular
issue or problem, how might you prepare to minimize the chance of that issue arising?

   Now, consider your current method of preparation. Do you prepare more for a written paper than for an
oral presentation? Do you have the goal of presenting a scripted message? Do you practice out loud? When,
during your process, do you practice aloud? Do you practice at all before you begin to compose your speaking
notes; or do you only practice after? Remember that dealing with CA often involves the breaking of a mental
habit. It is a good idea to change what you have done previously. Be deliberate. Observe what works for your
situation.

   As stated earlier in the chapter: Each individual deals with CA most effectively through increased self-
awareness and a willingness to take each of the steps in the entire process. After you acknowledge your reality,
then you take the steps necessary to overcome apprehension.

   When you've read about the ways to overcome the debilitating impact of CA, the next steps in your process
involve seeing what works best for you. Do not continue to prepare in exactly the same way as before. Speak
more; write and revise less. Be sure to practice out-loud at least once during your preparation, in order to
prepare yourself sufficiently. Reflect on your personal concerns and try Cognitive Restructuring on those
concerns. Take your time. Do the work. Have confidence that your preparation will yield positive results.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 46
                                             Conclusion

In this chapter, we've discussed Communication Apprehension or CA. This difficult condition can be the result
of many, varied causes. Even professional researchers don't always agree on whether CA is inherent in the
person, or the result of what the person experiences or perceives- with some calling it "trait-anxiety;" others
"state-anxiety;" and still others classifying it as "scrutiny fear." The first step for any person to address this
condition is self-reflection.

   Try to identify what has caused you to feel the way you do about public speaking. Careful introspection
can result in a more productive level of self-awareness. Whatever the root cause of CA might be for any
particular individual, the first step in addressing CA is to objectively view the habitual frame of reference that
has emerged in your mind regarding public speaking. Consider all those "what-if's" that keep cropping up in
your mind and how you might begin to address them productively, rather than simply to ignore them and hope
they go away. Go through the steps of Cognitive Restructuring or CR. Consider how many of those "what-if's"
are nothing more than invented pressure that you place upon yourself.

   Relaxation techniques, such as "Breathe and Release," have proven to be effective for many speakers,
especially those concerned with the physical manifestations of nervousness like trembling hands or shaky
knees. Remember that those sorts of tremors can often be exacerbated by efforts to hold still. Don't force
yourself to hold still! Relax instead.

   Lastly, we discussed the most effective means to prepare - which is toward the goal of becoming conversant
in your topic, rather than being able to recite a memorized script. By familiarizing yourself with your topic,
you become better able to consider the best way to talk to your audience, rather than becoming "married to

47 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
your script" and ultimately consumed with saying the words in the right order. Practicing out-loud, without a
mirror to distract you, is the best way to prepare yourself.

   CA is a real issue, but it need not be an obstacle to success. Take the time to become more aware of your
personal brand of CA. Take positive steps to minimize its impact. Your willingness to work and your positive
attitude are the keys to your success.

   The author of this chapter says that one of the keys to overcoming nervousness is preparation. Make a list
of the barriers to your own preparation process (e.g. "I don't know how to use the library," or "I have young
children at home who make demands on my time"). Having identified some of the things that make it difficult
for you to prepare, now think of at least one way to overcome each obstacle you have listed. If you need to,
speak with other people to get their ideas too.

                                            References

Adler, R. B., (1980). Integrating reticence management into the basic communication curriculum.
Communication Education, 29, 215-221.

   Beatty, M.J. (1988). Public speaking apprehension, decision-making errors in the selection of speech
introduction strategies and adherence to strategy. Communication Education, 37, 297 - 311.

   Daly, J. A. & Leth, S. A., (1976), Communication Apprehension and the Personnel Selection Decision, Paper
presented at the International Communication Association Convention, Portland, OR.

   Dwyer, K. & Cruz, A (1998), Communication Apprehension, Personality, and Grades in the Basic Course: Are
There Correlations? Communication Research Reports, 15(4), 436- 444.

   Mattick, R. P., Peters, L., & Clarke, J. C., (1989) Exposure and cognitive restructuring for social phobia: A
controlled study. Behavior Therapy, 20, 3-23.

   McCroskey, J. C., & Anderson, J. (1976). The relationship between communication apprehension and
academic achievement among college students, Human Communication Research, 3, 73-81.

   McCroskey, J. C. (1977). Oral Communication Apprehension: A summary of recent theory and research.
Human Communication Research, 4, 78-96

   McCroskey, J. C. (1984). The communication apprehensive perspective. In J. A. Daly & J. C. McCroskey (Eds.),
Avoiding communication: Shyness, reticence, and communication apprehension. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications,
Inc.

   McCroskey, J. C. (1976) The Problem of Communication Apprehension in the Classroom, Paper prepared for
the special edition of Communication, Journal of the Communication Association of the Pacific compiled for the C.A.P.
Convention (Kobe, Japan, June 1976).

   Menzel, K. E., &Carrell, L. J., (1994). The relationship between preparation and performance in public
speaking, Communication Education, 43, 17-26.

   Pelias, M. H. (1989). Communication apprehension in basic public speaking texts: An examination of
contemporary textbooks. Communication Education, 38(1), 41- 53.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 48
                    2.4 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. What are some suggestions from the lecture and/or textbook regarding speaking with confidence that you plan to
                 utilize?

            2. When you see a speaker who is obviously feeling nervous, how can you as an audience member help put the
                 speaker at ease? How can thinking about your experiences as an audience member help you feel less nervous as a
                 speaker?

            3. Which form of communication apprehension discussed in Section 2:2: Classifying Communication Apprehension
                 affects you most? How so?

                                                   Activities

            1. Complete the Personal Report of Public Speaking Anxiety (PRPSA, McCroskey, 1970) and determine your score.
                 Consider whether that score seems accurate. Visit with a friend or classmate about your results. Document your
                 score so you can fill out the PRPSA again at the end of the class and compare your beginning and ending scores.

            2. Go to the following website and follow along with Dr. Ellisha Goldstein's 3-Minute Body Scan. Pay particular
                 attention to your own body and decide whether a body scan or a meditation practice may help with your
                 communication apprehension.

49 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                           Chapter 3: Delivery

                                                    Learning Objectives

 List the different methods of speech delivery.
 Identify key elements in preparing to deliver a speech.
 Describe the benefits of delivery-related behaviors.
 Utilize specific techniques to enhance speech delivery.

                           Key Terms

 Extemporaneous Speaking
 Impromptu Speaking
 Lectern
 Manuscript Speaking
 Memorized Speaking
 Monotone
 Pitch
 Rate
 Tone
 Vocal Cue
 Vocalized Pauses
 Volume

                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 50
            3.1 The Importance of Delivery

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1551#audio-1551-1

   "We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit." -Will Durant

Some surveys indicate that many people claim to fear public speaking more than death, but this finding is

51 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
somewhat misleading. No one is afraid of writing their speech or conducting the research. Instead, people
generally only fear the delivery aspect of the speech, which, compared to the amount of time you will put
into writing the speech (days, hopefully), will be the shortest part of the speech giving process (5-8 minutes,
generally, for classroom speeches). The irony, of course, is that delivery, being the thing people fear the most,
is simultaneously the aspect of public speaking that will require the least amount of time.

   Consider this scenario about two students, Bob and Chris. Bob spends weeks doing research and crafting a
beautifully designed speech that, on the day he gets in front of the class, he messes up a little because of nerves.
While he may view it as a complete failure, his audience will have gotten a lot of good information and most
likely written off his mistakes due to nerves, since they would be nervous in the same situation!

   Chris, on the other hand, does almost no preparation for his speech, but, being charming and comfortable
in front of a crowd, smiles a lot while providing virtually nothing of substance. The audience takeaway from
Chris's speech is, "I have no idea what he was talking about" and other feelings ranging from "He's good in
front of an audience" to "I don't trust him." So the moral here is that a well-prepared speech that is delivered
poorly is still a well-prepared speech, whereas a poorly written speech delivered superbly is still a poorly
written speech.

   Despite this irony, we realize that delivery is what you are probably most concerned about when it comes to
giving speeches, so this chapter is designed to help you achieve the best delivery possible and eliminate some
of the nervousness you might be feeling. To do that, we should first dismiss the myth that public speaking is just
reading and talking at the same time. You already know how to read, and you already know how to talk, which is
why you're taking a class called "public speaking" and not one called "public talking" or "public reading."

   Speaking in public has more formality than talking. During a speech, you should present yourself
professionally. This doesn't necessarily mean you must wear a suit or "dress up" unless your instructor asks
you to. However, it does mean making yourself presentable by being well-groomed and wearing clean,
appropriate clothes. It also means being prepared to use language correctly and appropriately for the audience
and the topic, to make eye contact with your audience, and to look like you know your topic very well.

   While speaking has more formality than talking, it has less formality than reading. Speaking allows for
flexibility, meaningful pauses, eye contact, small changes in word order, and vocal emphasis. Reading is a
more or less exact replication of words on paper without the use of any nonverbal interpretation. Speaking,
as you will realize if you think about excellent speakers you have seen and heard, provides a more animated
message.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 52
   As the day of his public speaking engagement drew near, Pistol Pete found himself grappling with a
common concern that many speakers face - what to do with his hands during his speech. As the spirited
mascot of Oklahoma State University, Pete was well-versed in captivating audiences with his energetic
presence on the field, but standing behind a podium in a formal setting felt entirely different.

   With each passing day, his anxiety grew. During his practice sessions, Pete would awkwardly fidget with
his hands, unsure of where to place them or how to use them effectively. He worried that his usual animated
gestures might be too distracting or inappropriate for a formal speech.

   Late one evening, Pete confided in a close friend, expressing his nervousness and concern about his
upcoming speech. His friend, a seasoned public speaker, offered some reassuring advice. They encouraged
Pete to focus on being natural and genuine, advising him to use his hands to emphasize important points and
to express his passion for the topic.

   Taking the advice to heart, Pete decided to rehearse his speech once more. This time, he consciously let go
of his worries about his hand movements and embraced a more relaxed approach. He discovered that by using
his hands to complement his words, he felt more connected to the audience and his message.

   On the day of his speech, as Pete stood before the audience, he took a deep breath and reminded himself of
the advice he had received. As he began to speak, he felt a newfound confidence in his gestures. He allowed his
hands to express his enthusiasm, creating a natural flow that resonated with the crowd.

   As the speech progressed, Pete's worries about his hands faded away. Instead, he focused on sharing the

53 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
captivating story of Frank Eaton and his legacy, letting his gestures amplify the emotions and importance of
his words. In that moment, Pistol Pete realized that sometimes, the best thing to do with his hands was to
let them be an extension of his authentic self, creating a genuine connection with the audience and leaving a
lasting impression. How comfortable are you with using your hands effectively during a presentation?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 54
           3.2 Methods of Speech Delivery

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1554#audio-1554-1

What follows are four methods of delivery that can help you balance between too much and too little
formality when giving a speech. Each has its own strengths and weaknesses, but you will most likely want to
focus on the extemporaneous approach, since that is probably what your instructor will want from you.

55 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                       Impromptu Speaking

Impromptu speaking is the presentation of a short message without advance preparation. You have probably
done impromptu speaking many times in informal, conversational settings. Self-introductions in group
settings are examples of impromptu speaking: "Hi, my name is Steve, and I'm a volunteer with the Homes for
the Brave program." Another example of impromptu speaking occurs when you answer a question such as,
"What did you think of the movie?" Your response has not been preplanned, and you are constructing your
arguments and points as you speak. Even worse, you might find yourself going into a meeting and your boss
says, "I want you to talk about the last stage of the project. . . " and you have no warning.

   The advantage of this kind of speaking is that it's spontaneous and responsive in an animated group
context. The disadvantage is that the speaker is given little or no time to contemplate the central theme of his
or her message. As a result, the message may be disorganized and difficult for listeners to follow.

   Here is a step-by-step guide that may be useful if you are called upon to give an impromptu speech in public:
    1. Take a moment to collect your thoughts and plan the main point or points you want to make.
    2. Thank the person for inviting you to speak. Do not make comments about being unprepared, called
         upon at the last moment, on the spot, or uneasy. No one wants to hear that and it will embarrass
         others and yourself.
    3. Deliver your message, making your main point as briefly as you can while still covering it adequately
         and at a pace your listeners can follow.
    4. Stay on track. Answer the question or prompt as given; resist the temptation to go elsewhere.
    5. If you can, use a structure, using numbers if possible: "Two main reasons . . ." or "Three parts of our
         plan. . ." or "Two side effects of this drug. . ." Past, present, and future or East Coast, Midwest, and
         West Coast are common structures.
    6. Thank the person again for the opportunity to speak.
    7. Stop talking (it is easy to "ramble on" when you don't have something prepared). If in front of an
         audience, don't keep talking as you move back to your seat.

Impromptu speeches are generally most successful when they are brief and focus on a single point.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 56
                                       Manuscript Speaking

Manuscript speaking is the word-for-word iteration of a written message. In a manuscript speech, the speaker
maintains his or her attention on the printed page except when using visual aids. The advantage to reading
from a manuscript is the exact repetition of original words. In some circumstances this can be extremely
important. For example, reading a statement about your organization's legal responsibilities to customers
may require that the original words be exact. In reading one word at a time, in order, the only errors would
typically be mispronunciation of a word or stumbling over complex sentence structure. A manuscript speech
may also be appropriate at a more formal affair (like a funeral), when your speech must be said exactly as
written in order to convey the proper emotion or decorum the situation deserves.

   However, there are costs involved in manuscript speaking. First, it's typically an uninteresting way to
present. Unless the speaker has rehearsed the reading as a complete performance animated with vocal
expression and gestures (well-known authors often do this for book readings), the presentation tends to be
dull. Keeping one's eyes glued to the script prevents eye contact with the audience. For this kind of "straight"
manuscript speech to hold audience attention, the audience must be already interested in the message and
speaker before the delivery begins.

   It is worth noting that professional speakers, actors, news reporters, and politicians often read from an
autocue device, such as a TelePrompTer, especially when appearing on television, where eye contact with
the camera is crucial. With practice, a speaker can achieve a conversational tone and give the impression of
speaking extemporaneously and maintaining eye contact while using an autocue device. However, success
in this medium depends on two factors: (1) the speaker is already an accomplished public speaker who has
learned to use a conversational tone while delivering a prepared script, and (2) the speech is written in a

57 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
style that sounds conversational and in spoken rather than written, edited English, for example, with shorter
sentences and clearer transitions.

   For the purposes of your public speaking class, you will not be encouraged to read your speech. Instead, you
will be asked to give an extemporaneous presentation.

                                    Extemporaneous Speaking

Extemporaneous speaking is the presentation of a carefully planned and rehearsed speech, spoken in a
conversational manner using brief notes. By using notes rather than a full manuscript, the extemporaneous
speaker can establish and maintain eye contact with the audience and assess how well they are understanding
the speech as it progresses. And since you will be graded (to some degree) on establishing and maintaining eye
contact with your audience, extemporaneous speaking can be extremely beneficial in that regard. Without all
the words on the page to read, you have little choice but to look up and make eye contact with your audience.
In some cases, your instructor will require you to prepare strong preparation and speaking (notes) outlines as
a foundation for your speech; this topic is addressed in Chapter 6.

   Speaking extemporaneously has some advantages. It promotes the likelihood that you, the speaker, will be
perceived as knowledgeable and credible since you know the speech well enough that you don't need to read it.
In addition, your audience is likely to pay better attention to the message because it is engaging both verbally
and nonverbally. It also allows flexibility; you are working from the strong foundation of an outline, but if you
need to delete, add, or rephrase something at the last minute or to adapt to your audience, you can do so. The
outline also helps you be aware of main ideas vs. subordinate ones.

   The disadvantage of extemporaneous speaking is that it in some cases it does not allow for the verbal and
the nonverbal preparation that are almost always required for a good speech. Adequate preparation cannot be
achieved the day before you're scheduled to speak, so be aware that if you want to present a credibly delivered

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 58
speech, you will need to practice many times. Because extemporaneous speaking is the style used in the great
majority of public speaking situations, most of the information in the subsequent sections of this chapter is
targeted toward this kind of speaking.

                                       Memorized Speaking

Memorized speaking is the rote recitation of a written message that the speaker has committed to memory.
Actors, of course, recite from memory whenever they perform from a script. When it comes to speeches,
memorization can be useful when the message needs to be exact and the speaker doesn't want to be confined
by notes.

   The advantage to memorization is that it enables the speaker to maintain eye contact with the audience
throughout the speech. Being free of notes means that you can move freely around the stage and use your
hands to make gestures. If your speech uses visual aids, this freedom is even more of an advantage.

   However, there are some real and potential costs. First, unless you also plan and memorize every vocal cue
(the subtle but meaningful variations in speech delivery, which can include the use of pitch, tone, volume,
and pace), gesture, and facial expression, your presentation will be flat and uninteresting, and even the most
fascinating topic will suffer. You might end up speaking in a monotone or a sing-song repetitive delivery
pattern. You might also present your speech in a rapid "machine-gun" style that fails to emphasize the most
important points.

   Second, if you lose your place and start trying to ad lib, the contrast in your style of delivery will alert your
audience that something is wrong. If you go completely blank during the presentation, it will be extremely
difficult to find your place and keep going. Obviously, memorizing a typical seven-minute classroom speech

59 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
takes a great deal of time and effort, and if you aren't used to memorizing, it is very difficult to pull off.
Realistically, you probably will not have the time necessary to give a completely memorized speech. However,
if you practice adequately, you will approach the feeling of memorized while still being extemporaneous.

   As we said earlier, for the purposes of this class you will use extemporaneous speaking. Many professional
speakers who are paid to make speeches use this approach because, while they may largely know what they
want to say, they usually make changes and adjustments based on the audience or event. This approach
also incorporates most of the benefits of memorized speaking (knowing what you want to say; being very
thoroughly rehearsed) and manuscript speaking (having some words in front of you to refer to) without the
inherent pitfalls those approaches bring with them.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 60
            3.3 Preparing for Your Delivery

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1556#audio-1556-1

In the 1970s, before he was an author, playwright, and film actor, Steve Martin was an up-and-coming stand-
up comedian whose popularity soared as a result of his early appearances on The Tonight Show with Johnny
Carson and Saturday Night Live. As Martin notes in his autobiography, Born Standing Up (2008), as the
audiences for his act got bigger and bigger, he needed to adapt his delivery to accommodate:

61 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Some promoters got on board and booked me into a theater in Dallas. Before the show I asked one of them, How many
   people are out there?" "Two thousand," he said. Two thousand? How could there be two thousand? That night I did my
   usual bit of taking people outside, but it was starting to get dangerous and difficult. First, people were standing in the
   streets, where they could be hit by a car. Second, only a small number of the audience could hear or see me (could
   Charlton Heston really have been audible when he was addressing a thousand extras?). Third, it didn't seem as funny or
   direct with so many people; I reluctantly dropped it from my repertoire. (p. 168)

Martin's audiences would grow to be around 50,000 at the height of his popularity as a stand-up comedian,
again requiring him to make adjustments to his delivery (he began wearing his iconic all-white suit so that
people in the nosebleed seats at his shows could still see his frenetic movements from afar). Most of us will
never speak to so many people at once, but even though you don't expect an audience of such size, you should
still be prepared to adapt to the setting in which you will speak.

   Your audiences, circumstances, and physical contexts for public speaking will vary. At some point in your
life you may run for public office or rise to a leadership role in a business or volunteer organization. Or you
may be responsible for informing coworkers about a new policy, regulation, or opportunity. You may be asked
to deliver remarks in the context of a worship service, wedding, or funeral. You may be asked to introduce a
keynote speaker or simply to make an important announcement in some context. Sometimes you will speak in
a familiar environment, while at other times you may be faced with an unfamiliar location and have very little
time to get used to speaking with a microphone. Being prepared to deal with different speaking situations will
help reduce anxiety you may have about giving a speech, so let's look at factors you need to keep in mind as
you prepare for your speech in this class, as well as future speeches you may need to give.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 62
                                           Using Lecterns

A lectern is a small raised surface, usually with a slanted top, where a speaker can place notes during a speech.
While a lectern adds a measure of formality to the speaking situation, it also allows speakers the freedom to do
two things: to come out from behind the lectern to establish more immediate contact with the audience and to
use both hands for gestures. By the way, this piece of furniture is often mistakenly called a podium, which is a
raised platform or stage.

   However, for inexperienced speakers who feel anxious, it is all too tempting to grip the edges of the lectern
with both hands for security. You might even wish you could hide behind it. Be aware of these temptations
so you can manage them effectively and present yourself to your audience in a manner they will perceive as
confident. One way to achieve this is by limiting your use of the lectern to a place to rest your notes only. Try
stepping to the side or front of the lectern when speaking with free hands, only occasionally standing at the
lectern to consult your notes. This will enhance your eye contact as well as free up your hands for gesturing.

                           Speaking in a Small or Large Physical Space

If you are accustomed to being in a classroom of a certain size, you will need to make adjustments when
speaking in a smaller or larger space than what you are used to. A large auditorium can be intimidating,
especially for speakers who feel shy and "exposed" when facing an audience. However, the maxim that "proper
preparation prevents poor performance" is just as true here as anywhere. If you have prepared and practiced
well, you can approach a large-venue speaking engagement with confidence.

   In terms of practical adjustments, be aware that your voice is likely to echo, especially if far fewer people

63 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
are in the space than it can hold, so you will want to speak more slowly as well as more loudly than usual and
make use of pauses to mark the ends of phrases and sentences. Similarly, your facial expressions and gestures
should be larger so that they are visible from farther away. If you are using visual aids, they need to be large
enough to be visible from the back of the auditorium. Of course, if the speaker can get the audience to move to
the front, that is the best situation, but it tends not to happen.

   Limited space is not as disconcerting for most speakers as enormous space, and it has the advantage of
minimizing the tendency to pace back and forth while you speak. A small space also calls for more careful
management of note cards and visual aids, as your audience will be able to see up close what you are doing with
your hands. Do your best to minimize fumbling, including setting up in advance or arriving early to decide
how to organize your materials in the physical space. Of course, if you have any control over the location of the
presentation, you should choose one that fits the size of your audience.

                                        Speaking Outdoors

Outdoor settings can be charming, but they are prone to distractions. If you're giving a speech in a setting that
is picturesquely beautiful or prone to noise such as from cars, it may be difficult to maintain the audience's
attention. If you know this ahead of time, you might plan your speech to focus more on mood than
information and perhaps to make reference to the lovely view.

   More typically, outdoor speech venues can pose challenges with weather, sun glare, and uninvited guests,
such as insects and pigeons. If the venue is located near a busy highway, it might be difficult to make yourself
heard over the ambient noise. You might lack the usual accommodations, such as a lectern or table. Whatever

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 64
the situation, you will need to use your best efforts to project your voice clearly without sounding like you're
yelling or straining your voice. In the best outdoor situation, you will have access to a microphone.

65 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 66
Using A Microphone

Most people today are familiar with microphones that are built into video recorders, phones, and other
electronic devices, but they may be new at using a microphone to deliver a speech. One overall principle to
remember is that a microphone only amplifies, it does not clarify. If you are not enunciating clearly, the
microphone will merely enable your audience to hear amplified mumbling.Microphones come in a wide
range of styles and sizes. Generally, the easiest microphone to use is the clip-on style worn on the front of
your shirt or blouse. (These are commonly referred to as a Lavalier mic, which is a brand name.) If you look
closely at many television personalities and news anchors, you will notice these tiny microphones clipped to
their clothing. They require very little adaptation. You simply have to avoid looking down--at your notes, for
instance--because your voice will be amplified when you do so. If you have to use a hand-held microphone,
making gestures and using notes becomes very difficult.Lectern and handheld microphones require more
adaptation. If they're too close to your mouth, they can screech. If they're too far away, they might not pick up
your voice. Some microphones are directional, meaning that they are only effective when you speak directly
into them. If there is any opportunity to do so, ask for tips about how to use a particular microphone. Also
practice with it for a few minutes while you have someone listen from a middle row in the audience and
signal whether you can be heard well. The best plan, of course, would be to have access to the microphone for
practice ahead of the speaking date.Often a microphone is provided when it isn't necessary. If the room is
small or the audience is close to you, do not feel obligated to use the microphone. Sometimes an amplified
voice can feel less natural and less compelling than a direct voice. However, if you forgo the microphone,
make sure to speak loudly enough for all audience members to hear you--not just those in front.

67 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                           Audience Size

A small audience is an opportunity for a more intimate, informal tone. If your audience has only eight to twelve
people, you can generate greater audience contact. Make use of all the preparation you have done. You do not
have to revamp your speech just because the audience is small. When the presentation is over, there will most
likely be opportunities to answer questions and have individual contact with your listeners.

   One problem with a small audience is that some people will feel it is their right, or they have permission,
to interrupt you or raise their hands to ask questions in the middle of your speech. This makes for a difficult
situation, because the question may be irrelevant to your topic or cause you to go on a side track if answered.
The best you can do is say you'll try to deal with that question at the end of the speech if you have time and hope
they take the hint. Better, good rules should be established at the beginning that state there is limited time but
discussion may be possible at the end.

   Your classroom audience may be as many as twenty to thirty students. The format for an audience of this
size is formal but conversational. Depending on how your instructor structures the class, you may or may not
be asked to leave time after your speech for questions and answers. Some audiences are much larger. If you
have an audience that fills an auditorium, or if you have an auditorium with only a few people in it, you still
have a clearly formal task, and you should be guided as much as possible by your preparation.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 68
             3.4 Practicing Your Delivery

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1561#audio-1561-1

There is no foolproof recipe for good delivery. Each of us is unique, and we each embody different
experiences and interests. This means each person has an approach, or a style, that is effective for her or him.
This further means that anxiety can accompany even the most carefully researched and interesting message.
But there are some techniques you can use to minimize that anxious feeling and put yourself in the best
possible position to succeed on speech day. If you've ever watched your favorite college football team practice,
you may have noticed that sometimes obnoxiously loud crowd noise is blaring over the speaker system in the
stadium. The coaches know that the crowd, whether home or away, will be raucous and noisy on game day. So

69 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
to prepare, they practice in as realistic an environment as possible. You need to prepare for your speech in a
similar way. What follows are some general tips you should keep in mind, but they all essentially derive from
one very straight-forward premise:
Practice your speech beforehand, at home or elsewhere, the way you will give it in class.

                                  Practice Your Speech Out Loud

We sometimes think that the purpose of practicing a speech is to learn the words and be prepared for what
we will need to say. Certainly that is part of it, but practice also lets you know where potential problems lie.
For example, if you only read your speech in your head, or whisper the words quietly, you're not really
practicing what you will be doing in front of the class. Since you will be speaking with a normal volume for
your assignment, you need to practice that way, even at home. Not only will this help you learn the speech,
but it will help identify any places where you tend to mispronounce or stumble over words. Also, sentences on
paper do not always translate well to the spoken medium. Practicing out loud allows you to actually hear
where your sentences and phrases are awkward, unnatural, or too long, and allows you to correct them before
getting up in front of the audience.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 70
                                Practice Your Speech Standing Up

71 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
In all the time that the authors of this book have been teaching speech, not once have either of us come into a
classroom and seen a bed behind the lectern for students to speak from. This is to say that when you practice
at home, lying on your bed reading your speech really only prepares you for one thing: lying on a bed reading a
speech. Since you will be standing in front of your class, you need to practice that way. As we mention in more
detail below, the default position for delivering a speech is with your feet shoulder-width apart and your knees
slightly bent. Practicing this way will help develop muscle memory and will make it feel more natural when you
are doing it for real. We also suggest you wear the same shoes you will be wearing on the day of your speech.

                               Practice Your Speech with a Lectern

One of the biggest challenges with practicing a speech as you're going to give it is usually the fact that most of
us don't own a lectern. This is problematic, since you don't want to practice giving your speech while holding
your notes in front of you because that is what will feel comfortable when you give your speech for real. So the
solution is to practice your speech while standing behind something that approximates the lectern you will
have in your classroom. Sometime this may be a kitchen counter or maybe even a dresser you pull away from
the wall. One particularly creative idea that has been used in the past is to pull out an ironing board and stand
behind that. The point is that you want to get experience standing behind something and resting your speech
on it.

   Of course, if you really want to practice with an actual lectern, it might be worth the time to see if your
classroom is empty later in the day or find out if another classroom has the same type of lectern in it. Practicing
with the "real thing" is always ideal.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 72
                             Practice Your Speech with an Audience

Obviously on the day you give your speech you will have an audience of your fellow students and your professor
watching you. The best way to prepare for the feeling of having someone watch you while giving a speech is
to have someone watch you while you practice giving a speech. We don't mean a collection of stuffed animals
arranged on your bed or locking your pets in the room with you, but actual human beings. Ask your parents,
siblings, friends, or significant other to listen to you while running through what you will say. Not only will
you get practice in front of an audience, but they may be able to tell you about any parts that were unclear or
problems you might encounter when you give it for a grade.

   Not to overcomplicate the issue, but remember that when you speak to your class, you will have an entire
room full of people watching. Therefore, if you only have one person watching you practice, be sure to simulate
an entire audience by looking around the room and not focusing on just that one person. When you give your
speech for real, you will want to make eye contact with the people on the left side of the room as well as the
right; with the people in the front as well as in the back. You also want the eye contact to be around five seconds
long, not just a glance; the idea is that you are talking to individuals, not just a glob of people. During practice,
it may help to pick out some strategically placed objects around the room to occasionally focus on just to get
into the habit of looking around more often.

73 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Practice Your Speech for Time

THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 74
You will undoubtedly be given a time limit for each of your speeches, and points will probably be deducted
from your grade if you go over or under that time. Therefore, you want to make sure you are well within time.
As a general rule, if your speech window is 5-7 minutes, your ideal speech time is going to be 6 minutes; this
gives you an extra 60 seconds at the beginning in case you talk very fast and race through it, and 60 seconds on
the back end in case you get lost or want to add something at the last minute. If you practice at home and your
5-7 minute speech lasts 5:06, you are probably going to be in trouble on speech day. Most likely your nerves will
cause you to speak slightly faster and put you under the 5:00 mark. If your times are vastly different, you may
have to practice four or more times.

   When practicing your speech at home for time, it is a good idea to time yourself at least three times. This
way you can see if you are generally coming in around the same time and feel pretty good that it is an accurate
reflection of how long you will speak. Conversely, if during your three rehearsals your times are 5:45, 5:12, and
6:37, then that is a clear indicator that you need to be more consistent in what you are saying and doing.

   Although we are using examples of practicing for classroom speeches, the principle is even more important
for non-classroom speeches. One of the authors had to give a very important presentation about the college
to an accreditation board. She practiced about 15 times, to make sure the time was right, that her transitions
made sense, that she was fluid, and that the presentational slides and her speech matched. Each time
something improved.

                           Practice Your Speech by Recording Yourself

There is nothing that gets us to change what we're doing or correct a problem more quickly than seeing
ourselves doing something we don't like on video. Your instructor may record your speech in class and

75 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
have you critique it afterwards, but it may be more helpful to do that in advance of giving your speech. By
watching yourself, you will notice all the small things you do that might prove to be distracting and affect your
grade during the actual speech. Many times students aren't aware that they have low energy or a monotone/
monorate voice, or that they bounce, sway, pull at their clothes, play with hair or jewelry, or make other
unusual and distracting movements. At least, they don't know this until they see themselves doing it. Since we
are generally our own harshest critics, you will be quick to notice any flaws in your speech and correct them.

   It is important enough that it deserves reiterating:
   Practice your speech beforehand, at home or elsewhere, the way you will give it in class.
   Following these steps will not only prepare you better for delivering the speech, but they may also help
reduce anxiety since you will feel more familiar with the situation you find yourself in when faced with a
speaking engagement. Additionally, the more you speak publicly, whether for practice or in front of a live
audience, the more fluid you will become for later speeches.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 76
77 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   3.5 What to do When Delivering Your Speech

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1564#audio-1564-1

The interplay between the verbal and nonverbal components of your speech can either bring the message
vividly to life or confuse or bore the audience. Therefore, it is best that you neither overdramatize your speech
delivery behaviors nor downplay them. This is a balance achieved through rehearsal, trial and error, and
experience. One way to think of this is in terms of the Goldilocks paradigm: you don't want to overdo the
delivery because you might distract your audience by looking hyper or overly animated. Conversely, someone
whose delivery is too understated (meaning they don't move their hands or feet at all) looks unnatural and
uncomfortable, which can also distract. Just like Goldilocks, you want a delivery that is "just right." This
middle ground between too much and too little is a much more natural approach to public speaking delivery.
This natural approach will be covered in more detail in the following sections where we discuss specific
aspects of your delivery and what you need to think about while actually giving your speech.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 78
                                                Hands

Almost everyone who gives a speech in public gets scared or nervous to some extent. Even professionals who
do this for a living feel that way, but they have learned how to combat those nerves through experience and
practice. When we get scared or nervous, our bodies emit adrenaline into our systems so we can deal with
whatever problem is causing us to feel that way. Unfortunately, you will need to be standing relatively still for
the next 5-7 minutes, so that burst of adrenaline is going to try to work its way out of your body and manifest
itself somehow. One of the main ways is through your hands.

   It may sound funny, but we have seen more than one student unknowingly incorporate "jazz hands"
(shaking your hands at your sides with fingers opened wide) at various points in their speech. While certainly
an extreme example, this and behaviors like it can easily becoming distracting. At the other end of the scale,
people who don't know what to do with their hands or use them "too little" sometimes hold their arms stiffly at
their sides, behind their backs, or in their pockets, all of which can also look unnatural and distracting.

   The key for knowing what to do with your hands is to use them naturally as you would in normal
conversation. If you were standing around talking to your friends and wanted to list three reasons why you
should all take a road trip this weekend, you would probably hold up your fingers as you counted off the
reasons ("First, we hardly ever get this opportunity. Second, we can..."). Try to pay attention to what you do
with your hands in regular conversations and incorporate that into your delivery.

   However, with all that said, if you have nothing else to do with your hands, such as meaningful gestures, the
default position for them is to be resting gently on the sides of the lectern. You don't want to grip the lectern
tightly, but resting them on the edges keeps them in position to move your notes on if you need to or use them
to gesture. As stated above, you want to practice this way beforehand so you are used to speaking this way
when you come to class.

79 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 80
                                                 Feet

Just like your hands, a lot of nervous energy is going to try to work its way out of your body through your feet.
On the "too much" end, this is most common when people start "dancing" behind the lectern Another variation
is twisting feet around each other or the lower leg. On the other end are those who put their feet together, lock
their knees, and never move from that position. Both of these options look unnatural, and therefore will prove
to be distracting to your audience. Locking your knees can also lead to loss of oxygen in your brain, not a good
state to be in, because it can cause you to faint.

   The default position for your feet, then, is to have them shoulder-width apart with your knees slightly bent.
Again, you want to look and feel natural, so it is fine to adjust your weight or move out from behind the lectern,
but constant motion (or perpetual stillness) will not lead to good overall delivery.

   These two sections on hands and feet mention "energy." Public speakers need to look energetic--not
hyperactive, but engaged and upbeat about communicating their message. Slumping, low and unvarying pitch
and rate, and lack of gestures telegraph "I don't care" to an audience.

                                               Objects

There is a very simple rule when it comes to what you should bring with you to the lectern when you give your
speech: Only bring to the lectern what you absolutely need to give the speech. Anything else you have with you
will only serve as a distraction for both you and the audience. For the purposes of this class, the only objects
you should need to give your speech are whatever materials you are speaking from, and possibly a visual aid if
you are using one. Beyond that, don't bring pens, laptops, phones, lucky charms, or notebooks with you to the

81 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
lectern. These extra items can ultimately become a distraction themselves when they fall off the lectern or get
in your way. Some students like to bring their electronic tablet, laptop computer, or cell phone with them, but
there are some obvious disadvantages to these items, especially if you don't turn the ringer on your cell phone
off. Cell phones are not usually large enough to serve as presentation notes; we've seen students squint and
hold the phone up to their faces.
Not only do you need to be aware of what you bring with you, but you should also be aware of what you have
on your person as well. Sometimes, in the course of dressing for a speech, we can overlook simple issues that
can cause problems while speaking. Some of these can include:

   Jewelry that `jingles' when you move, such as heavy bracelets;
   Uncomfortable shoes or shoes that you are not used to;
   Anything with fringe, zippers, or things hanging off it. They might become irresistible to play with while

      speaking;
   For those with longer hair, remember that you will be looking down at your notes and then looking back

      up. Don't be forced to "fix" your hair or tuck it behind your ear every time you look up. Use a hairband,
      clip, or some other method to keep your hair totally out of your face so that the audience can see your
      eyes and you won't have to adjust your hair constantly. It can be very distracting to an audience to watch
      a speaker pull hair from his face after every sentence.

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 82
                                      The Lectern and Posture

We have already discussed the lectern, but it is worth mentioning again briefly here. The lectern is a tool for
you to use that should ultimately make your speech easier to give, and you need to use it that way. On the
"too much" end, some people want to trick their audience into thinking they are not nervous by leaning on
the podium in a relaxed manner, sometime going so far as to actually begin tipping the podium forward. Your
lectern is NOT part of your skeletal system, to prop you up, so don't do this. On the "too little" end are those
who are afraid to touch it, worried that they will use it incorrectly or somehow knock it over (you won't!).

   As always, you want the "Goldilocks" middle ground. As stated above, rest your notes and hands on it, but
don't lean on the lectern or "hug" it. Practicing with a lectern (or something similar to a lectern) will eliminate
most of your fears about using it.

   The lectern use is related to posture. Most of us let gravity pull us down. One of the muscle memory
tricks of public speaking is to roll your shoulders back. Along with making your shoulder muscles feel better,
doing so with feet apart and knees bent, rolling your shoulders back will lead to a more credible physical
presence--you'll look taller and more energetic. You'll also feel better, and you'll have larger lung capacity for
breathing to support your tone and volume.

83 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                             Eye Contact

As we've said consistently throughout this book, your audience is the single biggest factor that influences every
aspect of your speech. And since eye contact is how you establish and maintain a rapport with your audience
during your speech, it is an extremely important element of your delivery. Your professor may or may not
indicate a standard for how much eye contact you need during the speech, such as 50%, but he or she will
absolutely want to see you making an effort to engage your audience through looking directly at them.

   What is important to note here is that you want to establish genuine eye contact with your audience, and not
"fake" eye contact. There have been a lot of techniques generated for "faking" eye contact, and none of them
look natural. For example, these are not good ideas:

   Three points on the back wall - You may have heard that instead of making eye contact, you can just pick
      three points on the back wall and look at those. What ends up happening, though, is you look like you are
      staring off into space and your audience will spend the majority of your speech trying to figure out what
      you are looking at. To avoid this, look around the entire room, including the front, back, left, and right
      sides of the space.

   The swimming method - This happens when someone is reading his or her speech and looks up quickly
      and briefly to try to make it seem like they are making eye contact, not unlike a swimmer who pops his
      head out of the water for a breath before going back under. Eye contact is more than just physically
      moving your head; it is about looking at your audience and establishing a connection. In general, your
      eye contact should last at least five seconds at a time and should be with individuals throughout the
      room.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 84
   The stare down - Since you will, to some degree, be graded on your eye contact, some students think
      (either consciously or not), that the best way to ensure they get credit for establishing eye contact is to
      always and exclusively look directly at their professor. While we certainly appreciate the attention, we
      want to see that you are establishing eye contact with your entire audience, not just one person. Also,
      this behavior is uncomfortable for the instructor.

                                       Vocal Considerations

Volume

Volume refers to the relative softness or loudness of your voice. Like most of the other issues we've discussed
in this section, the proper volume for a given speaking engagement usually falls on a scale like the one above.
If you speak too softly ("too little" volume), your audience will struggle to hear and understand you and may
give up trying to listen. If you speak with "too much" volume, your audience may feel that you are yelling at
them, or at least feel uncomfortable with you shouting. The volume you use should fit the size of the audience
and the room.

   Fortunately, for the purposes of this class, your normal speaking voice will probably work just fine since you
are in a relatively small space with around twenty people. However, if you know that you are naturally a soft-
spoken person, you will need to work on breathing to get more air into your lungs, and on projecting your
voice to the people in the last row, not just those in t he front. Of course, if you are naturally a very loud talker,
you may want to make other adjustments when giving your speech. Obviously this will all change if you are
asked to speak in a larger venue or given a microphone to use.

   Public speaking relies on the voice for interest, credibility, audibility, and clarity. The British Prime Minister

85 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
of the 19th century was quoted saying, "There is no greater index of character so sure as the voice." While that
seems exaggerated today, a public speaker at any level cannot ignore the energy, loudness, and clarity in their
voice. There are four steps to voice production: breathing (produced by the lungs, which are largely responsible for the
vocal characteristic of volume); phonation (the production of the sound in the vocal folds, which close and vibrate
to produce sound for speaking as the air is exhaled over them; phonation creates pitch); resonation (a type of
amplification of the sound in the larynx, oral cavity, and nasal cavity, which creates the characteristic of quality); and
articulation, which produces the sounds of language others can understand and is responsible for rate and for
being understood.

   Your instructor may give you more directions on maximizing the power of your voice to achieve more
variety and power. We have all listened to a low-energy, monotone, monorate speaker and know how hard it
is, so you should pay attention to your recording, perhaps by closing your eyes and just listening, to see if your
voice is flat and lifeless.

Pitch

Pitch is the relative highness or lowness of your voice, and like everything, you can have too much or too
little (with regard to variation of it). Too much pitch variation occurs when people "sing" their speeches, and
their voices oscillate between very high pitched and very low pitched. While uncommon, this is sometimes
attributed to nerves. More common is too little variation in pitch, which is known as being monotone.

   Delivering a speech in a monotone manner is usually caused by reading too much; generally the speaker's
focus is on saying the words correctly (because they have not practiced). They forget to speak normally to show
their interest in the topic, as we would in everyday conversation. For most people, pitch isn't a major issue,
but if you think it might be for you, ask the people in your practice audience what they think. Generally, if we
are interested in and passionate about communicating our thoughts, we are not likely to be monotone. We are
rarely monotone when talking to friends and family about matters of importance to us, so pick topics you care
about.

Rate

How quickly or slowly you say the words of your speech is the rate. Too little rate (i.e. speaking too slowly)
will make it sound like you may not fully know your speech or what you are talking about, and will ultimately
cost you some credibility with your audience. It may also result in the audience being bored and lose focus on
what you are saying. Rate is one reason you should try to record yourself, even if just audio on your phone,
beforehand and be mindful of time when you practice. Your voice's rate will affect the time it takes to give the
speech.

   By contrast, too much rate (i.e. speaking too fast) can be overly taxing on an audience's ability to keep up
with and digest what you are saying. It sometimes helps to imagine that your speech is a jog or run that you
and your friends (the audience) are taking together. You (as the speaker) are setting the pace based on how
quickly you speak. If you start sprinting, it may be too difficult for your audience to keep up and they may give
up halfway through. If you know you speak quickly, especially when nervous, be sure to practice slowing down
and writing yourself delivery cues in your notes to maintain a more comfortable rate. As always, recording and
timing your speech during practice helps.

   You especially will want to maintain a good, deliberate rate at the beginning of your speech because your
audience will be getting used to your voice. We have all called a business where the person answering the
phone mumbles the name of the business in a rushed way. We aren't sure if we called the right number.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 86
Since the introduction is designed to get the audience's attention and interest in your speech, you will want to
focus on clear delivery there. Regulating rate is another reason why video-recording yourself can be so helpful
because we often to not realize how fast we speak.

Pauses

The common misconception for public speaking students is that pausing during your speech is bad, but that
isn't necessarily true. You pause in normal conversations, so you shouldn't be afraid of pausing while speaking.
This is especially true if you are making a particularly important point or want for a statement to have a more
powerful impact: you will want to give the audience a moment to digest what you have said.

   For example, consider the following statement: "Because of issues like pollution and overpopulation, in 50
years the earth's natural resources will be so depleted that it will become difficult for most people to obtain
enough food to survive." Following a statement like this, you want to give your audience just a brief moment to
fully consider what you are saying. Hopefully they will think something along the lines of What if I'm still alive
then? or What will my children do? and become more interested in hearing what you have to say.

   Of course, there is such a thing as pausing too much, both in terms of frequency and length. Someone
who pauses too often (after each sentence) may come off seeming like they don't know their speech very well.
Someone who pauses too long (more than a few seconds), runs the risk of the audience feeling uncomfortable
or, even worse becoming distracted or letting their attention wander. We are capable of processing words
more quickly than anyone can speak clearly, which is one of the reasons listening is difficult. Pauses should be
controlled to maintain attention of the audience.

Vocalized pauses

At various points during your speech, you may find yourself in need of a brief moment to collect your thoughts
or prepare for the next section of your speech. At those moments, you will be pausing, but we don't always
like to let people know that we're pausing. So what many of us do in an attempt to "trick" the audience is fill
in those pauses with sounds so that it appears that we haven't actually paused. These are known as vocalized
pauses, or sometimes "fillers." Another term for them is "nonfluencies."

   Everyone uses vocalized pauses to some degree, but not everyone's are problematic. This obviously becomes
an issue when the vocalized pauses become distracting due to their overuse. We have little doubt that you can
remember a time when you were speaking to someone who said the word "like" after every three words and
you became focused on it. One of your authors remembers attending a wedding and (inadvertently) began
counting the number of times the best man said "like" during his toast (22 was the final count). The most
common vocalized pause is "uh," but then there are others. Can you think of any?

   The bad news here is that there is no quick fix for getting rid of your vocalized pauses. They are so ingrained
into all of our speech patterns that getting rid of them is a challenge. However, there is a two-step process you
can employ to begin eliminating them. First, you need to identify what your particular vocalized pause is. Do
you say "um," "well," or "now" before each sentence? Do you finish each thought with, "you know?" Do you use
"like" before every adjective (as in "he was like so unhappy")?

   After figuring out what your vocalized pause is, the second step is to carefully and meticulously try to catch
yourself when you say it. If you hear yourself saying "uh," remind yourself, I need to try to not say that. Catching
yourself and being aware of how often you use vocalized pauses will help you begin the process of reducing
your dependence on them and hopefully get rid of them completely.

   One of the authors uses a game in her class that she adopted from a couple of disc jockeys she used to hear.

87 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
It is called the "uh game." The callers had to name six things in a named category (items in a refrigerator,
pro-football teams, makes of cars, etc.) in twenty seconds without saying a vocalized pause word or phrase. It
sounds easy, but it isn't, especially on the spot with a radio audience. It is a good way to practice focusing on
the content and not saying a vocalized pause.

   The ten items listed above represent the major delivery issues you will want to be aware of when giving a
speech, but it is by no means an exhaustive list. There is however, one final piece of delivery advice we would
like to offer. We know that no matter how hard you practice and how diligent you are in preparing for your
speech, you are most likely going to mess up some aspect of your speech when you give it in class, at least a
little. That's normal. Everyone does it. The key is to not make a big deal about it or let the audience know you
messed up. Odds are that they will never even realize your mistake if you don't tell them there was a mistake.
Saying something like "I can't believe I messed that up" or "Can I start over?" just telegraphs to the audience
your mistake. In fact, you have most likely never heard a perfect speech delivered in your life. It is likely that
you just didn't realize that the speaker missed a line or briefly forgot what they wanted to say.

   Practice your speech beforehand, at home or elsewhere, the way you will give it in class.
   Since you know you are likely going to make some sort of mistake in class, use your practice time at home
to work on how you will deal with those mistakes. If you say a word incorrectly or start reading the wrong
sentence, don't go back and begin that section anew. That's not what you would do in class, so just correct
yourself and move on. If you practice dealing with your mistakes at home, you will be better prepared for the
inevitable errors that will find their way into your speech in class.
   A final thought on practice. We have all heard, "Practice makes perfect." That is not always true. Practice
makes permanent; the actions become habitual. If you practice incorrectly, your performance will be incorrect.
Be sure your practice is correct.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 88
              3.6 Public Speaking Online

Traditionally, public speaking has been understood as a face-to-face exchange between a designated speaker
and an audience. In fact, when you imagine a public speaker, you likely picture a person standing on a stage
with a podium and speaking in front of a live audience.

   However, new media and digital technologies have begun expanding both our access to public speakers and
our platforms to speak and reach new audiences. YouTube--a global video sharing service--has more than 2.7
billion monthly users (Global Media Insight, 2024), and these are just people who log in! If you're like us, you've
likely watched hours of content published on YouTube, from instructional videos to political commentary. You
have probably also accessed hundreds of videos on Instagram, Facebook, or other media sites. With access to
these platforms, speakers are now able to broadcast their insights and advocacies to a global audience.

   Businesses, too, have begun using online public speaking. Webinars, video conferences, and digital
speakers have permeated professional industries, and it's becoming increasingly important to consider best
practices for creating speeches and being in the audience for online public speeches.

   With this growth in popularity, we have a growth in the number of problems and common behaviors (or
misbehaviors) in web conferencing and, thus, online public speaking. Much of the advice on web conference
public speaking comes as antidotes to the worst practices that have developed in them:

89 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    1. the audience's multitasking (and thus not fully attending to the webinar)

    2. the audience's being bored to death and tuning out (or even falling asleep)

Both of these conditions come from the fact that the communication is mediated and that, in many cases, the
speaker and audience don't see each other. Even when the participants use their web cameras (which doesn't
always happen), the screen is often covered with a slide and the speaker is invisible. Therefore, the speaker has
to depend on something else to address the temptation to multitask or nod off.

   Like any approach toward public speaking, online public speaking offers a variety of opportunities and
constraints. Below, we outline what digital public speaking is and how to prepare to speak online.

   Online Public Speaking
   Online public speaking--also known as digital oratory--is a "thesis-driven, vocal, embodied public address
that is housed within (online) new media platforms" (Lind, 2012, p. 164). Like all public speeches, an online
speech should be well-prepared, organized, well-reasoned, and well-rehearsed. Purpose, synchronicity, and
the audience all play key roles in online public speaking.

                                                   Purpose

Online speaking opportunities are not created equally, and each speech will have a different general
purpose--informing, persuading, or entertaining. Remember that just like other forms of public speaking,
digital oratory requires a thesis statement, and the purpose of your speech will dictate how you craft the
information that you're going to present. With ready access to video technology that can be transmitted
through our phones, it can be tempting to log in and let our followers into our lives through a stream-
of-consciousness vlog, but that's not the type of digital oratory that constitutes prepared public speaking.
Instead, prepare by considering your purpose for speaking and your thesis, then organize your speech around
the answer.

   For example, you might be participating in--or leading--a live webinar via Zoom or recording an
instructional video that explains how to use a new piece of technology and which you might upload to
YouTube. Each speech will have a different purpose and, in turn, different expectations on what you should
include. Once you've identified the goal, use later chapters in this text to begin crafting content.

   Pro-tip: Know your purpose for speaking.

                                                Synchronicity

Synchronicity describes whether your digital oratory will be delivered live or recorded for people to use later;
if you're presenting a speech live, you're speaking synchronously, meaning your audience is experiencing it in
real-time. Some online public speeches occur synchronously. For example, if you're speaking to a non-profit
organization about a local food pantry project through Zoom and the members of the organization are tuning
in live to watch and hear your presentation, the speech is synchronous. In synchronous online speaking, many
of the same face-to-face speaking principles apply. Live presentations are ephemeral, meaning they happen
once. In synchronous online speaking--unless it's being recorded--you have one chance to create a clear
message, so it's imperative that your content and information are crafted for clear understanding.

   Alternatively, you may speak asynchronously, meaning that the speech may be recorded and watched at
a different time. YouTube, for example, houses many asynchronous videos, allowing audiences to tune in
and watch when their schedule allows it. With an asynchronous video, speakers may have additional time to

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 90
record, watch, and re-do if necessary. Similarly, audiences also have the ability to re-watch your presentation
or pause the speech, if needed.

   Each option provides different opportunities and constraints.
   In synchronous speaking, you may be more comfortable adopting and applying face-to-face public speaking
strategies, including integrating live audience feedback. It's common in synchronous online speaking for
audiences to post questions or provide live feedback, allowing you to adjust your content and fill in gaps. If
there is a technological mishap, however, you can't correct it later. The mishap also happens in real time, and
those barriers can influence your credibility as a speaker.
   In asynchronous speaking, you can control the content more easily because you can re-record the material
to fix any technological errors. However, in asynchronous speaking, you cannot get live feedback from your
audience, so you may be unaware if there's a key question or issue they need answered.

                                                The Audience

New media has expanded the audience pool for public speaking. In traditional public speaking, the audience
is often limited to those individuals who show up for the event--the audience is explicit (the people who are
physically present in the audience) or discrete (or targeted audience). In online speaking, you may have a
discrete or dispersed audience (an audience whose members hear the speech in different times and locations).
These different audience types, along with synchronicity, alter how audience engagement can occur.

   Consider our earlier example about presenting to a non-profit organization through Zoom. In this example,
it's likely that you're aware of who the audience is, so you're able to link your content to the discrete (or defined)
audience. However, in other instances, your audience may be dispersed and more difficult to determine. If
you become passionate about a local policy, for example, and decide to post a speech on YouTube, the audience
is dispersed because it's unclear who will click the link. With a dispersed audience, it can be difficult to make
specific references or calls to action because geographic locations may alter what individuals are able to do.

   With a dispersed audience, there's also an increased risk that audience members won't view your digital
speech. Digital communication has led to information overload - we've all experienced it. If you're like us, you
might scan through Instagram stories, clicking past images or videos that don't catch your attention. If you're
posting a digital speech with a less-defined audience, the first few lines--the attention-getter--become crucial
to hook them into watching. Spend a little extra time crafting and rehearsing your attention-getter.

   Being a Member of the Audience: You'll likely be an audience member for many online public
speeches--synchronous and asynchronous. Remember to take your position as an audience member seriously
and avoid negative comments or trolling behavior. Even if you don't know the speaker, how you contribute to
the dialogue online (or how you communicate) still functions constitutively, so make sure the world-making
that you're participating in is ethical.

   As you can see, there are quite a few variations that define the context of a digital speech: an informative,
asynchronous speech with a discrete audience; a persuasive synchronous speech with a dispersed audience.
The more information you have about these variations, the more you can be prepared to digitally speak with
confidence and clarity.

                                        Rehearsing to Speak Online

Rehearsing to speak online can feel a bit odd, especially when video software enters the mix. You'll be more
effective in rehearsal if you're aware of the speaking context, including the categories mentioned in the

91 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
previous section: purpose, synchronicity, and audience. Knowing the context will and should inform how you
rehearse for a digital speech because you should always rehearse under the conditions that you'll speak.

   Pro-Tip: Rehearse under the conditions that you'll speak.
   Integrate the presentation strategies for an online speech as you would for other speeches--including
the purposeful development of verbal, nonverbal delivery, and presentation aids. There are a few additional
variables for delivering a speech digitally that we'll track below.

                                               Verbal Delivery

Verbal delivery is key in a digital speech--particularly webinars or web conferencing where your vocals overlay
a slideshow and your body isn't visible to an audience. Verbal enunciation, punctuation, rate, and pauses
become key to maintaining your audiences' attention. If monotone and monorate speaking is horrible for
face-to-face speaking, it is truly the "kiss of death" for web speaking. The key word is "energy"; an energetic
voice has tonal variation and emphasis, variation in pace and meter, planned pauses, and sometimes word
play (which can be subtle or overt, but shouldn't be overdone--this isn't Dr. Seuss).

   Audio-recording yourself during rehearsal on your smartphone or other device is a good first step, followed
by thinking critically and honestly about whether your voice is listless, flat, or lacks energy. Since we tend
to have a lower energy level when we sit, some experts suggest that web conference speakers stand to
approximate the real speaking experience. As we have mentioned repeatedly throughout this book, preparing
means practicing your speech orally and physically, many times.

   Sound and projection are two variables that can affect your verbal delivery in digital contexts. It's important
to rehearse with any technology--including a microphone--that will be present and in the physical context
that you'll record the formal speech. If you have a microphone, you will need to alter your projection level. If
you don't have a microphone, be aware of how the recording device will pick up sound--including your voice
and other noise around you.

   Be sensitive about what can be heard on camera if you aren't careful like interruptions by barking dogs,
passing traffic outside, the voices of others who are not on camera, papers near the speakers, or the sounds of
toilets flushing or lawn crews working next door.

   Remember that extra noise is distracting: it can influence your credibility and the likelihood that an
audience will continue listening.

   Pro-tip: Many rounds of rehearsal are necessary for improving your online presentation.

                                             Nonverbal Delivery

When rehearsing your nonverbal delivery, ask, "What's visible in the video?"
   If your body is visible, you should rehearse with Chapter 3 in mind. As you rehearse, be conscious of where

the camera will be. Will there be just one? Will there be multiple cameras? How far away is the camera? In
some instances, audiences may have the ability to view your speech from multiple vantage points. Being aware
of where those cameras are--one or multiple--is key to rehearsing your eye contact and facial expressions.
Eye contact is still a key part of a digital speech. While you can avoid staring directly into the camera for an
extended period of time, audiences still want some form of engagement, and eye contact allows you to make
that connection. If you are recording the speech with or without a live audience, view the camera as your
"audience substitute."

   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Tg9vBPUXtY&t=60s

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 92
                                        Background and Lighting

Your background is also part of your video's nonverbal aesthetics. Make sure that you consider how the
background might translate to your audience. Is it messy? Distracting? Is it a white background? If so, you
should avoid wearing white and disappearing into the walls. Are there windows behind you with bright light
streaming through, making you almost invisible? If so, can you close the blinds or curtains or move? Can you
set up a ring light to offset the light coming through outside sources and enhance your appearance? Do you
have a ceiling fan whirring above your head? If so, turn it off while you record. Does your video conferencing
software have filters that blur out imperfections that might otherwise be heightened by visual photography?

   Pro-tip: Make sure you have adequate lighting.

    1. Never be in front of a window where you are backlit.
    2. Always have adequate lighting on your face.
    3. Use a lamp or lighting system to light your face and adjust it properly.
    4. If you use a ring light, try bouncing it off the ceiling so you do not get light rings in your pupils.
    5. Avoid using an overhead light because it casts shadows under your eyes.

                                           Camera Positioning

Because your facial expressions and body language are also visible in a digital speech, you will want to pay
some attention to how the camera(s) is positioned. Don't position the camera so closely that your head fills the
frame, or so far away that you are a tiny object in the frame. To look your best, position the camera so that
you are viewed from above from between 15 to 30 from eye level. Filming yourself at eye-level might make
your facial features appear flat, while filming yourself from below eye level gives the impression that you are

93 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
towering over your audience. If your camera is in your laptop computer, try balancing it on a small stack of
books to achieve an optimal level.

   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7ppTAA-1tm0
   Pro-tip: Frame the shot. Depending on the type of speech, you want to frame your head or do a 3/4 shot. It
is best to frame the shot so the audience can see your gestures.
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KYNO7cAzuYQ
   Pro-tip: Talk directly into the camera to connect with your audience.
   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sTFWC1PiLVE&t=3s

                                      Wardrobe, Hair, and Makeup

Wear appropriate clothing on all parts of your body. By now, everyone has heard at least one story of someone
in a Zoom meeting who stood up to reveal that he was wearing pajamas or sweatpants below more formal
clothing on top, or worse. Dress as if the audience might see your entire body to avoid such embarrassment.
Also, make sure that your clothing looks good on camera in terms of color and lighting in your setting. Avoid
noisy jewelry such as earrings or bangles that jingle if you move. Style your hair the way you would if you were
meeting with this audience in person. Also, if you normally wear cosmetics when you meet with this type of
audience in person, wear them on camera as well. Your goal is to look just as you would in the same setting if
you were meeting face to face.

   For more detailed information, check out "Six Tips for Looking Great in a Zoom Meeting," Jefferson Graham
(2020).

                                               Dress Rehearsal

Rehearse under these conditions and record your facial expressions to see how they are translating to others.
Is your body language clear? Do some gestures or facial expressions look exaggerated? Can you adjust the
camera position or lighting? Are your clothing and accessories distracting or do they make you fade into the
background? Do you look professional? A videoed rehearsal will provide you with answers to these questions.

   Remember that effective rehearsal occurs under the conditions that you'll speak. Your goal is to create an
aesthetic experience that honors the purpose of your speech, so being accountable to all nonverbal factors will
increase your ethos.

                                     Additional Pro-Preparation Tips:

   Stand up (if possible) so that you have more breath support during your presentation.

   Make sure you will not be interrupted during the web conference.

   Have notes and anything else you need at hand. While you can use a computer to display them, be
      conscious of your audience's ability to see you reading.

   If you can be seen, be seen--use the technology to your advantage so that you are not an entirely
      disembodied voice talking over slides.

   Watch your practice video to make sure there are no issues for the listeners. Make sure the ending isn't
      cut off.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 94
   Edit the video if necessary.

                                             Presentation Aids

In some cases, an online speech will include presentation aids. It's important to determine a) if the
presentation aid is necessary and b) if you're able to provide that presentation aid in a different form.

   First, are you certain you need a presentation aid? It can be tempting to use a presentation aid for a digital
speech to avoid being visible to the audience. After all, it's common for digital presentation software to display
either a visual aid or your body. Don't use a visual aid to avoid being seen because the audience will be much
more interested in your embodied presentation. Second, do you know how to share your visual aid via the
digital platform you will be speaking through? As with all other aspects of online public speaking, you need to
practice beforehand so that you know what your audience will see as well as how to quickly switch from your
screen to the visual aid and back again. Demonstrating technical competence

   If you deem that a presentation aid is absolutely necessary (or required) also, ask: do I need to provide
it live or in the recording? If you're presenting to a discrete audience and want to provide a graph or some
data, send the information in a report ahead of time. This will allow your audience to feel acquainted with
the information and can spare you from having an additional technological component. You want to avoid
information overload as you speak and presentation aids can often cause more of a distraction than serve as an
aid. Therefore, keep your visuals simple. One rule business speakers like to use is the "10-20-30: rule: No more
than 10 slides, no more than 20 words on the slides, and no font smaller than 30 point." Using 30 point font
will definitely minimize the amount of text. Inserting short videos and planning interactivity (such as polls,
which the software supports) are also helpful.

   Like any public speech, when speaking online, you are responsible for crafting an effective advocacy that is
composed of well-reasoned arguments that are delivered with purposeful aesthetic choices. Rehearse under
the conditions that you'll speak. Be confident that you're aware of

   the technology you will need,

   where it will be placed,

   which technology that you are responsible for running, and

   how your embodiment of information translates.

Pro-tip: If you can be seen, be seen; use the technology to your advantage so that you are not an entirely
disembodied voice talking over slides.

   Sharing Audiovisual Recordings
   If you are recording an asynchronous presentation to share with others, post it to a cloud first (such as
Canvas's Studio, SoundCloud or YouTube) and post a link and/or embed it on the corresponding project
discussion board on Canvas. Audiovisual recording files are too large to be emailed easily. Other participants
will not want to download a large file to view your presentation, so embedding or providing a link will make it
easier on everyone. Remember to change the privacy settings so that your link is viewable to everyone.
   Conclusion
   Mastering online delivery in public speaking is a critical skill in today's digital age. Speaking in a virtual
environment may present new and unique challenges, such as managing technology, engaging with a remote
and, often diverse, audience, and adapting traditional speaking techniques to an online setting. Whether
you are addressing a live audience via Zoom or recording a video for YouTube, understanding the nuances
of purpose, synchronicity, and audience engagement is crucial. By paying careful attention to verbal and

95 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
nonverbal delivery, background aesthetics, camera positioning, and the use of presentation aids, you can
create compelling and professional digital speeches. With preparation, practice, and an understanding of the
online speaking techniques presented in this chapter, speakers can successfully convey their message and
leave a lasting impact on their audience.

   References
   Global Media Insight. (2024, August 1). YOUTUBE STATISTICS 2024 (DEMOGRAPHICS, USERS BY
COUNTRY, and MORE). https://www.globalmediainsight.com/blog/youtube-users-statistics/
   Goodman, & Green, (n.d.) Online delivery considerations. Public Speaking. Maricopa Community Colleges.
https://open.maricopa.edu/com225/chapter/online-delivery/
   Graham, J. (2020). Six tips for looking great in a Zoom meeting. USA Today. https://www.usatoday.com/
story/tech/2020/04/11/zoom-meetings-go-better-these-6-tips-look-your-best/5125980002/
   Lind, S. (2012). Teaching digital oratory: Public speaking 2.0. Communication Teacher, 26(3), 163-169.
   Lousiana Library Network. (2022). It's about them: Public speaking in the 21st century.
https://louis.pressbooks.pub/publicspeaking/chapter/online-public-speaking/
   Lumen Learning. (n.d.). Introduction to speaking online. Public Speaking.
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-publicspeaking/chapter/introduction-to-speaking-online/
   Mead, L. (2021). Chapter 34: Speaking to a Camera: Making eye contact is key. Advanced Public Speaking.
https://uark.pressbooks.pub/speaking/chapter/speaking-to-a-camera/
   Schechter, S. (2023). Chapter 16: Public speaking online. Public Speaking For Today's Audiences.
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/speaking/chapter/chapter-16/

                                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 96
                    3.7 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

         1. As a class or with a group of friends, discuss what makes an effective speaker. Write the traits or characteristics on the
             board.

        2. Why do many people think that Memorized Speaking is the best method of delivery? What do you think? Which
             method do you feel best suits most occasions?

        3. How does delivery of a presentation differ between in-person and online settings?
        4. Which aspects of delivery discussed in Section 3:5: What to do When Delivering Your Speech are you most concerned

             about for your speech delivery? Discuss with a classmate or group. Do you have any tips for improving those aspects of
             speech delivery?

                                                   Activities

            1. Volunteer to take turns delivering a sample speech using the ABCs or your favorite poem or song in
                 conversational form in front of the class. Be sure to incorporate facial expressions, gestures, movement, vocal
                 characteristics, and eye contact. Discuss your feelings and thoughts as you presented. Provide feedback to others
                 after they present.

            2. Set a timer on your phone for one to two minutes and record yourself presenting an impromptu speech. Choose a
                 topic you are able to speak about like, "What is the best vacation you have ever taken?" or "What is your favorite
                 book or movie?" or "Why did you come to OSU?" Speaking off the cuff can help mitigate anxiety and give you
                 priceless practice and mental confidence when a presentation counts.

            3. List three areas of delivery that you would like to improve this semester. Based on tips in Section 3:5: What to do
                 When Delivering Your Speech, how will you improve these aspects of delivery in your next speech?

            4. The entire class forms a circle (sitting or standing). Each class member thinks of their favorite childhood cartoon
                 or film and a couple of reasons why it is the best. Each class member will deliver an impromptu speech about their
                 favorite cartoon or film while making eye contact with everyone in the circle and without using a vocalized pause.
                 If the speaker uses a vocalized pause, other class members let them know and they will begin their impromptu

97 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
speech again until everyone can make eye contact with the circle without using a vocalized pause.

                                       THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 98
                          Chapter 4: Ethics

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Explain the three levels of the ethics pyramid and how they might be used in evaluating the ethical choices of a public speaker
   or listener.

 Apply the National Communication Association (NCA) Credo for Ethical Communication to the context of public speaking.
 Apply ethics to your public speaking preparation process.
 Describe free speech as outlined in the First Amendment to the US Constitution and how free speech relates to other

   guaranteed freedoms.
 Discuss patterns of media ownership, the relationship of media and globalization, and the effects of diversity (or lack

   thereof) or media representations.
 Employ media-literacy skills to evaluate media messages.

                          Key Terms

 Distortion
 Ends
 Ethical Pyramid
 Free Speech
 Globalization
 Intent
 Means
 Media Convergence
 Media Imperialism
 Media Literacy
 Plagiarism
 Social Learning Theory

99 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                4.1 The Ethics Pyramid

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1574#audio-1574-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 100
 "Our lives begin to end the day we become silent about things that matter." -Martin Luther
                                               King, Jr.

The sun shone brightly on the library lawn as students went about their day, engrossed in their studies or
leisurely conversations. Among them, Pistol Pete strolled, his presence exuding the vibrant spirit of Oklahoma
State University. Suddenly, a commotion drew his attention to a figure standing on a soapbox, fervently
preaching his beliefs to a gathering crowd of students.

   It was Preacher Bob, known for his fiery speeches and confrontational style. Pete observed as Preacher Bob's
words turned from passionate to hostile, his voice rising in volume and his demeanor becoming aggressive.
Pete's heart sank as he witnessed his fellow students being subjected to a barrage of insults and derogatory
remarks.

   With a sense of duty and a desire to stand up for his peers, Pete approached the scene. His footsteps were
purposeful, his eyes focused, and his voice filled with conviction. Taking a deep breath, he stepped forward,
drawing the attention of the crowd and Preacher Bob.

   In a calm and composed manner, Pete addressed Preacher Bob, acknowledging his right to freedom of
speech while emphasizing the importance of respect and understanding within a diverse community. He
encouraged open dialogue and the exchange of ideas without resorting to demeaning or offensive language.

   Pete's words resonated with the students gathered around, who had felt disheartened and attacked by
Preacher Bob's inflammatory rhetoric. They listened intently as Pete reminded them of the values they held as
a university community - inclusivity, empathy, and mutual respect.

   As the crowd absorbed Pete's message, a wave of understanding and unity washed over them. They began to
engage in a peaceful and constructive dialogue, countering prejudice with thoughtful questions and rational
arguments. Pete's presence had diffused the tension, providing a platform for open-mindedness and fostering
an environment of tolerance and acceptance.

   In that moment, Pistol Pete demonstrated the power of his role as a unifying figure. By respectfully
addressing Preacher Bob's actions while defending the rights and dignity of his fellow students, he created an
atmosphere where diverse perspectives could be heard and respected.

   As Pete walked away from the library lawn, he knew that the impact of his actions extended far beyond
that moment. He had empowered his fellow students to stand up against prejudice, to engage in meaningful
conversations, and to foster an inclusive community that celebrated the richness of different backgrounds and
beliefs.

   With a renewed sense of pride, Pistol Pete continued his journey, knowing that his presence would always
be a beacon of unity, respect, and unwavering support for his fellow students at Oklahoma State University.
How do ethics play a role in your daily communication?

101 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                                    Ethics Today

Every day, people around the world make ethical decisions regarding public speech. Is it ever appropriate to
lie to a group of people if it's in the group's best interest? As a speaker, should you use evidence within a speech
that you are not sure is correct if it supports the speech's core argument? As a listener, should you refuse to
listen to a speaker with whom you fundamentally disagree? These three examples represent ethical choices
speakers and listeners face in the public speaking context. In this chapter, we will explore what it means to be
both an ethical speaker and an ethical listener. To help you understand the issues involved with thinking about
ethics, this chapter begins by presenting a model for ethical communication known as the ethics pyramid. We
will then show how the National Communication Association (NCA) Credo for Ethical Communication can be
applied to public speaking. The chapter will conclude with a general discussion of free speech.

   The word "ethics" can mean different things to different people. Whether it is an ethical lapse in business
or politics or a disagreement about medical treatments and end-of-life choices, people come into contact
with ethical dilemmas regularly. Speakers and listeners of public speech face numerous ethical dilemmas as
well. What kinds of support material and sources are ethical to use? How much should a speaker adapt to an
audience without sacrificing his or her own views? What makes a speech ethical?

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 102
   Elspeth Tilley, a public communication ethics expert from Massey University, proposes a structured
approach to thinking about ethics (Tilley, 2005). Her ethics pyramid involves three basic concepts: intent,
means, and ends. The graphic above illustrates the Tilley pyramid.

INTENT

According to Tilley, the first major consideration to be aware of when examining the ethicality of something
is the issue of intent. To be an ethical speaker or listener, it is important to begin with ethical intentions. For
example, if we agree that honesty is ethical, it follows that ethical speakers will prepare their remarks with the
intention of telling the truth to their audiences. Similarly, if we agree that it is ethical to listen with an open
mind, it follows that ethical listeners will be intentional about letting a speaker make his or her case before
forming judgments.

   One option for assessing intent is to talk with others about how ethical they think a behavior is; if you get a
variety of answers, it might be a sign that the behavior is not ethical and should be avoided. A second option is
to check out existing codes of ethics. Many professional organizations, including the Independent Computer

103 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Consultants Association, American Counseling Association, and American Society of Home Inspectors, have
codes of conduct or ethical guidelines for their members. Individual corporations such as Monsanto, Coca-
Cola, Intel, and ConocoPhillips also have ethical guidelines for how their employees should interact with
suppliers or clients. Even when specific ethical codes are not present, you can apply general ethical principles,
such as whether a behavior is beneficial for the majority or whether you would approve of the same behavior if
you were listening to a speech instead of giving it.

   In addition, it is important to be aware that people can engage in unethical behavior unintentionally. For
example, suppose we agree that it is unethical to take someone else's words and pass them off as your own--a
behavior known as plagiarism. What happens if a speaker makes a statement that he believes he thought of
on his own, but the statement is actually quoted from a radio commentator whom he heard without clearly
remembering doing so? The plagiarism was unintentional, but does that make it ethical?

MEANS

Tilley describes the means you use to communicate with others as the second level of the ethics pyramid.
According to McCroskey, Wrench, and Richmond (McCroskey, Wrench, & Richmond, 2003), "means" are the
tools or behaviors we employ to achieve a desired outcome. We must realize that there are a range of possible
behavioral choices for any situation and that some choices are good, some are bad, and some fall in between.

   For example, suppose you want your friend Marty to spend an hour reviewing a draft of your speech
according to criteria, such as audience appropriateness, adequate research, strong support of assertions, and
dynamic introduction and conclusion. What means might you use to persuade Marty to do you this favor? You
might explain that you value Marty's opinion and will gladly return the favor the next time Marty is preparing a
speech (good means), or you might threaten to tell a professor that Marty cheated on a test (bad means). While
both of these means may lead to the same end--having Marty agree to review your speech--one is clearly more
ethical than the other.

ENDS

The final part of the ethics pyramid is the ends. According to McCroskey, Wrench, and Richmond (McCroskey,
Wrench, & Richmond, 2003), ends are those outcomes that you desire to achieve. Examples of ends might
include persuading your audience to make a financial contribution for your participation in Relay for Life,
persuading a group of homeowners that your real estate agency would best meet their needs, or informing

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 104
your fellow students about newly required university fees. Whereas the means are the behavioral choices we
make, the ends are the results of those choices.

   Like intentions and means, ends can be good or bad, or they can fall into a gray area where it is unclear
just how ethical or unethical they are. For example, suppose a city council wants to balance the city's annual
budget. Balancing the budget may be a good end, assuming that the city has adequate tax revenues and areas
of discretionary spending for nonessential services for the year in question. However, voters might argue that
balancing the budget is a bad end if the city lacks these things for the year in question, because in that case
balancing the budget would require raising taxes, curtailing essential city services, or both.

   When examining ends, we need to think about both the source and the receiver of the message or behavior.
Some end results could be good for the source but bad for the receiver, or vice versa. Suppose, for example,
that Anita belongs to a club that is raffling off a course of dancing lessons. Anita sells Ben a ten-dollar raffle
ticket. However, Ben later thinks it over and realizes that he has no desire to take dancing lessons and that if
he should win the raffle, he will never take the lessons. Anita's club has gained ten dollars--a good end--but
Ben has lost ten dollars--a bad end. Again, the ethical standards you and your audience expect to be met will
help in deciding whether a particular combination of speaker and audience ends is ethical.

            THINKING THROUGH THE PYRAMID

Ultimately, understanding ethics is a matter of balancing all three parts of the ethical pyramid: intent, means,
and ends. When thinking about the ethics of a given behavior, Tilley recommends asking yourself three basic
questions:

    1. "Have I discussed the ethicality of the behavior with others and come to a general consensus that the
         behavior is ethical?"

    2. "Does the behavior adhere to known codes of ethics?"
    3. "Would I be happy if the outcomes of the behavior were reversed and applied to me?" (Tilley, 2005)

While you do not need to ask yourself these three questions before enacting every behavior as you go through
a day, they do provide a useful framework for thinking through a behavior when you are not sure whether
a given action, or statement, may be unethical. Ultimately, understanding ethics is a matter of balancing all
three parts of the ethical pyramid: intent, means, and ends.

                                             References

McCroskey, J. C., Wrench, J. S., & Richmond, V. P. (2003). Principles of public speaking. Indianapolis, IN: The
College Network.

   Tilley, E. (2005). The ethics pyramid: Making ethics unavoidable in the public relations process. Journal of
Mass Media Ethics, 20, 305-320.

105 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                               THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 106
             4.2 Ethics in Public Speaking

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1577#audio-1577-1

107 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
The study of ethics in human communication is hardly a recent endeavor. One of the earliest discussions
of ethics in communication (and particularly in public speaking) was conducted by the ancient Greek
philosopher Plato in his dialogue Phaedrus. In the centuries since Plato's time, an entire subfield within the
discipline of human communication has developed to explain and understand communication ethics.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 108
             COMMUNICATION CODE OF ETHICS

In 1999, the National Communication Association officially adopted the Credo for Ethical Communication (see
the text box). Ultimately, the NCA Credo for Ethical Communication is a set of beliefs communication scholars
have about the ethics of human communication.

     NATIONAL COMMUNICATION ASSOCIATION CREDO FOR
                     ETHICAL COMMUNICATION

   Questions of right and wrong arise whenever people communicate. Ethical communication is fundamental to
   responsible thinking, decision making, and the development of relationships and communities within and across
   contexts, cultures, channels, and media. Moreover, ethical communication enhances human worth and dignity by
   fostering truthfulness, fairness, responsibility, personal integrity, and respect for self and others. We believe that
   unethical communication threatens the quality of all communication and consequently the well-being of individuals
   and the society in which we live. Therefore we, the members of the National Communication Association, endorse
   and are committed to practicing the following principles of ethical communication:

        We advocate truthfulness, accuracy, honesty, and reason as essential to the integrity of communication.
        We endorse freedom of expression, diversity of perspective, and tolerance of dissent to achieve the informed

           and responsible decision making fundamental to a civil society.
        We strive to understand and respect other communicators before evaluating and responding to their

           messages.
        We promote access to communication resources and opportunities as necessary to fulfill human potential

           and contribute to the well-being of families, communities, and society.
        We promote communication climates of caring and mutual understanding that respect the unique needs and

           characteristics of individual communicators.
        We condemn communication that degrades individuals and humanity through distortion, intimidation,

           coercion, and violence, and through the expression of intolerance and hatred.
        We are committed to the courageous expression of personal convictions in pursuit of fairness and justice.
        We advocate sharing information, opinions, and feelings when facing significant choices while also

           respecting privacy and confidentiality.
        We accept responsibility for the short- and long-term consequences of our own communication and expect

           the same of others.
   Source: http://www.natcom.org/Default.aspx?id=134&terms=Credo

109 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
     APPLYING THE NCA CREDO TO PUBLIC SPEAKING

The NCA Credo for Ethical Communication is designed to inspire discussions of ethics related to all aspects
of human communication. For our purposes, we want to think about each of these principles in terms of how
they affect public speaking.

WE ADVOCATE TRUTHFULNESS, ACCURACY, HONESTY,
AND REASON AS ESSENTIAL TO THE INTEGRITY OF
COMMUNICATION

As public speakers, one of the first ethical areas we should be concerned with is information honesty. While
there are cases where speakers have blatantly lied to an audience, it is more common for speakers to prove a

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 110
point by exaggerating, omitting facts that weigh against their message, or distorting information. We believe
that speakers build a relationship with their audiences, and that lying, exaggerating, or distorting information
violates this relationship. Ultimately, a speaker will be more persuasive by using reason and logical arguments
supported by facts rather than relying on emotional appeals designed to manipulate the audience.

   It is also important to be honest about where all your information comes from in a speech. As speakers,
examine your information sources and determine whether they are biased or have hidden agendas. For
example, you are not likely to get accurate information about nonwhite individuals from a neo-Nazi website.
While you may not know all your sources of information firsthand, you should attempt to find objective
sources that do not have an overt or covert agenda that skews the argument you are making.

   The second part of information honesty is to fully disclose where we obtain the information in our speeches.
As ethical speakers, it is important to always cite your sources of information within the body of a speech.
Whether you conducted an interview or read a newspaper article, you must tell your listeners where the
information came from. Using someone else's words or ideas without giving credit is called plagiarism. The
word "plagiarism" stems from the Latin word plagiaries, or kidnapper. The American Psychological Association
states in its publication manual that ethical speakers do not claim "words and ideas of another as their own;
they give credit where credit is due" (American Psychological Association, 2001).

   In the previous sentence, we placed quotation marks around the sentence to indicate that the words came
from the American Psychological Association and not from us. When speaking informally, people sometimes
use "air quotes" to signal direct quotations--but this is not a recommended technique in public speaking.
Instead, speakers need to verbally tell an audience when they are using someone else's information. The
consequences for failing to cite sources during public speeches can be substantial. When Senator Joseph Biden
was running for president of the United States in 1988, reporters found that he had plagiarized portions of his
stump speech from British politician Neil Kinnock. Biden was forced to drop out of the race as a result. More
recently, the student newspaper at Malone University in Ohio alleged that the university president, Gary W.
Streit, had plagiarized material in a public speech. Streit retired abruptly as a result.

   Even if you are not running for president of the United States or serving as a college president, citing
sources is important to you as a student. Many universities have policies that include dismissal from the
institution for student plagiarism of academic work, including public speeches. Our university's policies
regarding Academic Integrity can be found here. Failing to cite your sources might result, at best, in lower
credibility with your audience and, at worst, in a failing grade on your assignment or expulsion from your
school. We cannot emphasize enough the importance of giving credit to the speakers and authors whose ideas
we pass on within our own speeches and writing.

   Speakers tend to fall into one of three major traps with plagiarism. The first trap is failing to tell the
audience the source of a direct quotation. In the previous paragraph, we used a direct quotation from the
American Psychological Association; if we had not used the quotation marks and clearly listed where the
cited material came from, you, as a reader, wouldn't have known the source of that information. To avoid
plagiarism, you always need to tell your audience when you are directly quoting information within a speech.

   The second plagiarism trap public speakers fall into is paraphrasing what someone else said or wrote
without giving credit to the speaker or author. For example, you may have read a book and learned that
there are three types of schoolyard bullying. In the middle of your speech you talk about those three types of
schoolyard bullying. If you do not tell your audience where you found that information, you are plagiarizing.
Typically, the only information you do not need to cite is information that is general knowledge. General
knowledge is information that is publicly available and widely known by a large segment of society. For
example, you would not need to provide a citation within a speech for the name of Delaware's capital. Although

111 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
many people do not know the capital of Delaware without looking it up, this information is publicly available
and easily accessible, so assigning credit to one specific source is not useful or necessary.

   The third plagiarism trap that speakers fall into is re-citing someone else's sources within a speech. To
explain this problem, let's look at a brief segment from a research paper written by Wrench, DiMartino,
Ramirez, Oviedio, and Tesfamariam:

   The main character on the hit Fox television show House, Dr. Gregory House, has one basic mantra, "It's a basic truth
   of the human condition that everybody lies. The only variable is about what" (Shore & Barclay, 2005). This notion that
   "everybody lies" is so persistent in the series that t-shirts have been printed with the slogan. Surprisingly, research has
   shown that most people do lie during interpersonal interactions to some degree. In a study conducted by Turner, Edgley,
   and Olmstead (1975), the researchers had 130 participants record their own conversations with others. After recording
   these conversations, the participants then examined the truthfulness of the statements within the interactions. Only
   38.5% of the statements made during these interactions were labeled as "completely honest."

In this example, we see that the authors of this paragraph cited information from two external sources: Shore
and Barclay and Tummer, Edgley, and Olmstead. These two groups of authors are given credit for their ideas.
The authors make it clear that they did not produce the television show House or conduct the study that found
that only 38.5 percent of statements were completely honest. Instead, these authors cited information found
in two other locations. This type of citation is appropriate.

   However, if a speaker read the paragraph and said the following during a speech, it would be plagiarism:
"According to Wrench DiMartino, Ramirez, Oviedio, and Tesfamariam, in a study of 130 participants, only 38.5
percent of the responses were completely honest." In this case, the speaker is attributing the information cited
to the authors of the paragraph, which is not accurate. If you want to cite the information within your speech,
you need to read the original article by Turner, Edgley, and Olmstead and cite that information yourself.

   There are two main reasons we do this. First, Wrench, DiMartino, Ramirez, Oviedio, and Tesfamariam may
have mistyped the information. Suppose the study by Turner, Edgley, and Olstead really actually found that
58.5 percent of the responses were completely honest. If you cited the revised number (38.5 percent) from the
paragraph, you would be further spreading incorrect information.

   The second reason we do not re-cite someone else's sources within our speeches is because it's intellectually
dishonest. You owe your listeners an honest description of where the facts you are relating came from, not just
the name of an author who cited those facts. It is more work to trace the original source of a fact or statistic,
but by doing that extra work you can avoid this plagiarism trap.

WE ENDORSE FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION, DIVERSITY OF
PERSPECTIVE, AND TOLERANCE OF DISSENT TO ACHIEVE
THE INFORMED AND RESPONSIBLE DECISION MAKING

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 112
FUNDAMENTAL TO A CIVIL SOCIETY

113 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 114
This ethical principle affirms that a civil society depends on freedom of expression, diversity of perspective,
and tolerance of dissent and that informed and responsible decisions can only be made if all members of
society are free to express their thoughts and opinions. Further, it holds that diverse viewpoints, including
those that disagree with accepted authority, are important for the functioning of a democratic society.

   If everyone only listened to one source of information, then we would be easily manipulated and controlled.
For this reason, we believe that individuals should be willing to listen to a range of speakers on a given subject.
As listeners or consumers of communication, we should realize that this diversity of perspectives enables us
to be more fully informed on a subject. Imagine voting in an election after listening only to the campaign
speeches of one candidate. The perspective of that candidate would be so narrow that you would have no
way to accurately understand and assess the issues at hand or the strengths and weaknesses of the opposing
candidates. Unfortunately, some voters do limit themselves to listening only to their candidate of choice and,
as a result, base their voting decisions on incomplete--and, not infrequently, inaccurate--information.

   Listening to diverse perspectives includes being willing to hear dissenting voices. Dissent is by nature
uncomfortable, as it entails expressing opposition to authority, often in very unflattering terms. Legal scholar
Steven H. Shiffrin has argued in favor of some symbolic speech (e.g., flag burning) because we as a society
value the ability of anyone to express their dissent against the will and ideas of the majority (Shiffrin, 1999).
Ethical communicators will be receptive to dissent, no matter how strongly they may disagree with the
speaker's message because they realize that a society that forbids dissent cannot function democratically.

   Ultimately, honoring free speech and seeking out a variety of perspectives is very important for all listeners.

115 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
WE STRIVE TO UNDERSTAND AND RESPECT OTHER
COMMUNICATORS BEFORE EVALUATING AND
RESPONDING TO THEIR MESSAGES

   This is another ethical characteristic that is specifically directed at receivers of a message. As listeners, we
often let our perceptions of a speaker's nonverbal behavior--his or her appearance, posture, mannerisms, eye
contact, and so on--determine our opinions about a message before the speaker has said a word. We may also
find ourselves judging a speaker based on information we have heard about him or her from other people.
Perhaps you have heard from other students that a particular teacher is a really boring lecturer or is really
entertaining in class. Even though you do not have personal knowledge, you may prejudge the teacher and his
or her message based on information you have been given from others. The NCA credo reminds us that to be
ethical listeners, we need to avoid such judgments and instead make an effort to listen respectfully; only when
we have understood a speaker's viewpoint are we ready to begin forming our opinions of the message.

   Listeners should try to objectively analyze the content and arguments within a speech before deciding how
to respond. Especially when we disagree with a speaker, we might find it difficult to listen to the content of the
speech and, instead, work on creating a rebuttal the entire time the speaker is talking. When this happens, we
do not strive to understand the speaker and do not respect the speaker.

   Of course, this does not just affect the listener in the public speaking situation. As speakers, we are often
called upon to evaluate and refute potential arguments against our positions. While we always want our
speeches to be as persuasive as possible, we do ourselves and our audiences a disservice when we downplay,

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 116
distort, or refuse to mention important arguments from the opposing side. Fairly researching and evaluating
counterarguments is an important ethical obligation for the public speaker.

WE PROMOTE ACCESS TO COMMUNICATION RESOURCES
AND OPPORTUNITIES AS NECESSARY TO FULFILL HUMAN
POTENTIAL AND CONTRIBUTE TO THE WELL-BEING OF
FAMILIES, COMMUNITIES, AND SOCIETY

   Human communication is a skill that can and should be taught. We strongly believe that you can become
a better, more ethical speaker. One of the reasons the authors of this book teach courses in public speaking
and wrote this college textbook on public speaking is that we, as communication professionals, have an ethical
obligation to provide others, including students like you, with resources and opportunities to become better
speakers.

117 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
WE PROMOTE COMMUNICATION CLIMATES OF CARING
AND MUTUAL UNDERSTANDING THAT RESPECT THE
UNIQUE NEEDS AND CHARACTERISTICS OF INDIVIDUAL
COMMUNICATORS

   Speakers need to take a two-pronged approach when addressing any audience: caring about the audience
and understanding the audience. When you as a speaker truly care about your audience's needs and desires,
you avoid setting up a manipulative climate. This is not to say that your audience will always perceive their
own needs and desires in the same way you do, but if you make an honest effort to speak to your audience in a
way that has their best interests at heart, you are more likely to create persuasive arguments that are not just
manipulative appeals.

   Second, it is important for a speaker to create an atmosphere of mutual understanding. To do this, you
should first learn as much as possible about your audience, a process called audience analysis.

   To create a climate of caring and mutual respect, it is important for us as speakers to be open with our
audiences so that our intentions and perceptions are clear. Nothing alienates an audience faster than a
speaker with a hidden agenda unrelated to the stated purpose of the speech. One of our coauthors once
listened to a speaker give a two-hour talk, allegedly about workplace wellness, which actually turned out to be
an infomercial for the speaker's weight-loss program. In this case, the speaker clearly had a hidden (or not-so-
hidden) agenda, which made the audience feel disrespected.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 118
WE CONDEMN COMMUNICATION THAT DEGRADES
INDIVIDUALS AND HUMANITY THROUGH DISTORTION,
INTIMIDATION, COERCION, AND VIOLENCE AND
THROUGH THE EXPRESSION OF INTOLERANCE AND
HATRED

   This ethical principle is very important for all speakers. Hopefully, intimidation, coercion, and violence will
not be part of your public speaking experiences, but some public speakers have been known to call for violence
and incite mobs of people to commit atrocities. Thus distortion and expressions of intolerance and hatred are
of special concern when it comes to public speaking.

   Distortion occurs when someone purposefully twists information in a way that detracts from its original
meaning. Unfortunately, some speakers take information and use it in a manner that is not in the spirit of
the original information. One place we see distortion frequently is in the political context, where politicians
cite a statistic or the results of a study and either completely alter the information or use it in a deceptive
manner. FactCheck.org, a project of the Annenberg Public Policy Center (http://www.factcheck.org), and
the St. Petersburg Times's Politifact (http://www.politifact.com) are nonpartisan organizations devoted to
analyzing political messages and demonstrating how information has been distorted.

   Expressions of intolerance and hatred that are to be avoided include using ageist, heterosexist, racist,
sexist, and any other form of speech that demeans or belittles a group of people. Hate speech from all sides of
the political spectrum in our society is detrimental to ethical communication. As such, we as speakers should

119 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
be acutely aware of how an audience may perceive words that could be considered bigoted. For example,
suppose a school board official involved in budget negotiations used the word "shekels" to refer to money,
which he believes the teachers' union should be willing to give up (Associated Press, 2011). The remark would
be likely to prompt accusations of anti-Semitism and to distract listeners from any constructive suggestions
the official might have for resolving budget issues. Although the official might insist that he meant no offense,
he damaged the ethical climate of the budget debate by using a word associated with bigotry.

   At the same time, it is important for listeners to pay attention to expressions of intolerance or hatred.
Extremist speakers sometimes attempt to disguise their true agendas by avoiding bigoted "buzzwords" and
using mild-sounding terms instead. For example, a speaker advocating the overthrow of a government might
use the term "regime change" instead of "revolution"; similarly, proponents of genocide in various parts of the
world have used the term "ethnic cleansing" instead of "extermination." By listening critically to the gist of a
speaker's message as well as the specific language he or she uses, we can see how that speaker views the world.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 120
WE ARE COMMITTED TO THE COURAGEOUS EXPRESSION
OF PERSONAL CONVICTIONS IN PURSUIT OF FAIRNESS
AND JUSTICE

   We believe that finding and bringing to light situations of inequality and injustice within our society is
important. Public speaking has been used throughout history to point out inequality and injustice, from
Patrick Henry arguing against the way the English government treated the American colonists and Sojourner
Truth describing the evils of slavery to Martin Luther King Jr.'s "I Have a Dream" speech and Army Lt.
Dan Choi's speeches arguing that the military's "don't ask, don't tell policy" is unjust. Many social justice
movements have started because young public speakers have decided to stand up for what they believe is fair
and just.

WE ADVOCATE SHARING INFORMATION, OPINIONS, AND

121 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
FEELINGS WHEN FACING SIGNIFICANT CHOICES WHILE
ALSO RESPECTING PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY

This ethical principle involves balancing personal disclosure with discretion. It is perfectly normal for speakers
to want to share their own personal opinions and feelings about a topic; however, it is also important to
highlight information within a speech that represents your own thoughts and feelings. Your listeners have a
right to know the difference between facts and personal opinions.

   Similarly, we have an obligation to respect others' privacy and confidentiality when speaking. If information
is obtained from printed or publicly distributed material, it's perfectly appropriate to use that information
without getting permission, as long as you cite it. However, when you have a great anecdote one of your
friends told you in confidence, or access to information that is not available to the general public, it is best to
seek permission before using the information in a speech.

   This ethical obligation even has legal implications in many government and corporate contexts. For
example, individuals who work for the Central Intelligence Agency are legally precluded from discussing their
work in public without prior review by the agency. And companies such as Google also have policies requiring
employees to seek permission before engaging in public speaking in which sensitive information might be
leaked.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 122
WE ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE SHORT- AND
LONG-TERM CONSEQUENCES OF OUR OWN
COMMUNICATION AND EXPECT THE SAME OF OTHERS

   The last statement of NCA's ethical credo may be the most important one. We live in a society where
a speaker's message can literally be heard around the world in a matter of minutes, thanks to our global
communication networks. Extreme remarks made by politicians, media commentators, and celebrities, as
well as ordinary people, can unexpectedly "go viral" with regrettable consequences. It is not unusual to see
situations where a speaker talks hatefully about a specific group, but when one of the speaker's listeners
violently attacks a member of the group, the speaker insists that he or she had no way of knowing that this
could possibly have happened. Washing one's hands of responsibility is unacceptable: all speakers should
accept responsibility for the short-term and long-term consequences of their speeches. Although it is certainly
not always the speaker's fault if someone commits an act of violence, the speaker should take responsibility for
her or his role in the situation. This process involves being truly reflective and willing to examine how one's
speech could have tragic consequences.

   Furthermore, attempting to persuade a group of people to take any action means you should make sure that
you understand the consequences of that action. Whether you are persuading people to vote for a political
candidate or just encouraging them to lose weight, you should know what the short-term and long-term
consequences of that decision could be. While our predictions of short-term and long-term consequences may

123 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
not always be right, we have an ethical duty to at least think through the possible consequences of our speeches
and the actions we encourage.

          PRACTICING ETHICAL PUBLIC SPEAKING

Thus far in this section we've introduced you to the basics of thinking through the ethics of public speaking.
Knowing about ethics is essential, but even more important to being an ethical public speaker is putting that
knowledge into practice by thinking through possible ethical pitfalls prior to standing up and speaking out.
Below is a list of some examples of unethical public speaking behaviors based on our discussion in this chapter.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 124
125 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                             References

American Psychological Association. (2001). Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (5th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author, p. 349.

   Associated Press. (2011, May 5). Conn. shekel shellacking. New York Post.
   Shiffrin, S. H. (1999). Dissent, injustice and the meanings of America. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 126
                    4.3 Free Speech

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1581#audio-1581-1

127 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 128
                    WHAT IS FREE SPEECH?

Free speech has been a constitutional right since the founding of our nation, and according to Merriam
Webster's Dictionary of Law, free speech entails "the right to express information, ideas, and opinions free of
government restrictions based on content and subject only to reasonable limitations (as the power of the
government to avoid a clear and present danger) esp. as guaranteed by the First and Fourteenth Amendments
to the U.S. Constitution" (Freedom of speech). Free speech is especially important to us as public speakers
because expressing information and ideas is the purpose of public speaking. It is also important to audiences
of public speeches because free speech allows us to hear and consider multiple points of view so that we can
make more informed decisions.

129 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
     THE FIRST AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION

Free speech was so important to the founders of the United States that it is included in the first of the ten
amendments to the US Constitution that are known as the Bill of Rights. This is not surprising, considering
that many American colonists had crossed the Atlantic to escape religious persecution and that England had
imposed many restrictions on personal freedoms during the colonial era. The text of the First Amendment
reads, "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise
thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble,
and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances" (National Archives and Records Administration,
2011).

   The freedoms protected by the First Amendment may seem perfectly natural today, but they were
controversial in 1791 when the Bill of Rights was enacted. Proponents argued that individuals needed
protection from overreaching powers of government, while opponents believed these protections were
unnecessary and that amending them to the Constitution could weaken the union.

   Freedom of speech, of the press, of religion, of association, of assembly and petition are all guaranteed in
amendments to the US Constitution. Free speech allows us to exercise our other First Amendment rights.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 130
Freedom of assembly means that people can gather to discuss and protest issues of importance to them. If free
speech were not protected, citizens would not be able to exercise their right to protest about activities such as
war or policies such as health care reform.

   Free speech does not mean, however, that every US citizen has the legal right to say anything at any time.
If your speech is likely to lead to violence or other illegal acts, it is not protected. One recent example is a
2007 Supreme Court decision in the Morse et al. v. Frederick case. In this case, a high school student held up a
sign reading "Bong Hits 4 Jesus" across from the school during the 2002 Olympic Torch Relay. The principal
suspended the teenager, and the teen sued the principal for violating his First Amendment rights. Ultimately,
the court decided that the principal had the right to suspend the student because he was advocating illegal
behavior (Supreme Court of the United States, 2007).

   The meaning of "free speech" is constantly being debated by politicians, judges, and the public, even within
the United States, where this right has been discussed for over two hundred years. As US citizens, it is
important to be aware of both the protections afforded by free speech and its limits so that we can be both
articulate speakers and critical listeners when issues such as antiwar protests at military funerals or speech
advocating violence against members of specific groups come up within our communities.

                                             References

Freedom of speech. (n.d.). In Merriam-Webster's dictionary of law. Retrieved from Dictionary.com website:
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/freedom%20of%20speech

   National Archives and Records Administration. (2011). Bill of rights transcription. Retrieved from
http://www.archives.gov/exhibits/charters/bill_of_rights_transcript.html

   Supreme Court of the United States. (2007). Syllabus: Morse et al. v. Frederick. No. 06-278. Argued March
19, 2007-Decided June 25, 2007. Retrieved from http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/06pdf/06-278.pdf

131 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                4.5 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. Robert is preparing a speech about legalizing marijuana use in the United States. He knows that his roommate
     wrote a paper on the topic last semester and asks his roommate about the paper in an attempt to gather
     information. During his speech, Robert orally cites his roommate by name as a source of his information but does
     not report that the source is his roommate, whose experience is based on writing a paper. In what ways does
     Robert's behavior violate the guidelines set out in the NCA Credo for Ethical Communication?

2. Do you feel we have freedom of speech in our country? How has free speech been challenged and defended in our
     country?

3. Why do you think the U.S. Supreme Court has historically considered flag burning and pornography to be "free
     speech acts"?

4. Why do you think the authors of the NCA Credo for Ethical Communication included a statement about the
     importance of listening before responding to speakers? Why do you think our culture often places more of an
     emphasis on speaking than listening? And, what impact does this have on our communication?

5. What do you think it means to accept responsibility for your own communication and expect the same of other
     communicators?

6. Think about the following scenarios involving an ethical dilemma. How would you react?
       You attend a political debate on campus. The candidate's speech contains many ideas that you do not agree with. How can
          you demonstrate ethical listening during the speech?
       You are preparing to give a persuasive speech and realize that you have lost the citation information for one of your
          primary sources. You cannot find the link to your source again. What would you do to ethically prepare for the speech?

                                           Activities

1. In class, review the NCA Credo for Ethical Communication together out loud. After reading/discussing the Credo,
     students can discuss the following in small groups:
       What aspects of the Credo are most important to you?

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 132
                     Is there anything missing from the Credo?
                     Who is a speaker/celebrity/athlete/family member/friend who embodies these principles of ethical communication? Why

                        do you think this person is especially ethical? How could we model their behavior in our own communication?
                     Finally, create one to three statements that we can add to our own SPCH 2713 Credo for Ethical Communication. These

                        can be as long or as brief as you like and do not need to use the same language as the Credo.
                     As a class, create our SPCH 2713 Credo for Ethical Communication - the instructor should record each group's statements

                        and then discuss as a class.

                                                     Case Study

      In class, form four or five groups. Each group will be given a different scenario to discuss the ethical implications of the
      conversations/language. As a group, can you reach a consensus on how ethical behavior is or is not illustrated? Trigger
      Warning: Some of these scenarios are sensitive and may cause you to experience a variety of emotional responses.

      Case 1: In his speech about covid protocols, Jason referred to covid-19 as "the Chinese virus." Many in the audience were
      visibly offended by his language choice, while some audience members snickered at the label and/or the awkwardness of the
      expression. How did Jason's language align or misalign with ethical considerations of public speaking?

      Case 2: After a group presentation, the professor referred to a transgendered classmate by their "dead name" (the name they
      no longer go by) multiple times and continually used the wrong pronouns. Knowing this is an important violation to
      acknowledge, how do you think you can address the professor's misgendering in an ethical manner? Would/should you say
      something? Would/should it be in public or private?

      Case 3: One of your group members has a speaking impediment that impacts their fluency when speaking. Despite this, the
      group member enjoys speaking in public and asks to present the largest section of the presentation. You are concerned
      about their ability to complete their speaking portion in a timely manner so that the project meets the time criteria. Should
      you ask them to take a smaller section of the presentation? How do you handle this scenario in an ethical manner?

      Case 4: In a persuasive speech in class, Rebecca advocates working out and eating healthy. During her speech, she body
      shamed audience members when she said, "Besides, no one wants to date a fat person!" Knowing the issues that impact self
      esteem, mental health, and body image, how do you as an audience member address this offense ethically in the question
      and answer session?

      Case 5: Aaron gave a presentation about the January 6th capitol riot and analogized former President Trump's supporters to
      being members of a cult. Knowing that in Oklahoma, there are probably more conservative leaning folks (possibly Trump
      supporters), do you think Aaron's language aligned or misaligned with ethical considerations of public speaking? How do
      you think his language impacts the audience?

133 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         Chapter 5: Audience Analysis

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Recognize the value of acknowledging your audience.
 Explain how to adapt your speech to your audience's needs including choosing a worthwhile topic.
 Explain the value of speaking with credibility.
 Demonstrate how to gather and use demographic, psychographic, and situational information.
 Create effective tools for gathering audience information.
 Use your audience analysis to prepare a speech and to alter your speech while speaking.

                                                         Key Terms

 Audience Analysis
 Captive Audience
 Chronocentrism
 Demographic Analysis
 Demographic Information
 Diversity
 Elitism
 Ethnocentrism
 Ethos
 Focus Group
 Frame of Reference
 Idiom
 Interview
 Psychographic Analysis
 Psychographic Information

                                                     THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 134
     Racism
     Sexism
     Situational Analysis
     Socioeconomic Status
     Stereotyping
     Survey
     Voluntary Audience

135 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            5.1 What is Audience Analysis?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1586#audio-1586-1

              "When you know your audience, your audience knows." -Unknown

One of the consequences of the First Amendment to the Constitution, which protects our right to speak freely,
is that we focus so much on what we want to say that we often overlook the question of who our audience
is. Does your audience care what you as a speaker think? Can they see how your speech applies to their lives
and interests? The act of public speaking is a shared activity that involves interaction between speaker and

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 136
audience. In order for your speech to get a fair hearing, you need to create a relationship with your listeners.
Scholars Sprague, Stuart, and Bodary explain, "Speakers do not give speeches to audiences; they jointly create
meaning with audiences" (Sprague, et al., 2010). The success of your speech rests in large part on how your
audience receives and understands it.

   Think of a time when you heard a speech that sounded "canned" or that fell flat because the audience didn't
"get it." Chances are that this happened because the speaker neglected to consider that public speaking is an
audience-centered activity. Worse, lack of consideration for one's audience can result in the embarrassment
of alienating listeners by telling a joke they don't appreciate, or using language they find offensive. The best
way to reduce the risk of such situations is to conduct an audience analysis as you prepare your speech.

   Audience analysis is the process of gathering information about the people in your audience so that you
can understand their needs, expectations, beliefs, values, attitudes, and likely opinions. In this chapter, we
will first examine some reasons why audience analysis is important. We will then describe three different
types of audience analysis and some techniques to use in conducting audience analysis. Finally, we will explain
how you can use your audience analysis not only during the creation of your speech but also while you are
delivering it.

   As Pistol Pete, the spirited mascot of Oklahoma State University, I understand the vital importance of
connecting with my audience and tailoring my message to resonate with them. To effectively analyze my
audience, I utilize various strategies that allow me to understand their needs, values, and interests.

137 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   First and foremost, I observe the diverse composition of the Oklahoma State University community. From
students to faculty, alumni to visitors, each group brings unique perspectives and experiences to the table. By
recognizing this diversity, I can adapt my communication style to ensure inclusivity and relevance for all.

   Additionally, I pay close attention to the context and setting in which I engage with my audience. Whether
it's a sporting event, a pep rally, or a community outreach program, each environment offers distinct
opportunities to connect. By considering the expectations and atmosphere of the specific event, I can tailor
my message and delivery accordingly, ensuring maximum impact and resonance.

   Furthermore, I engage in active listening and dialogue with the Oklahoma State community. I seek
feedback, whether through formal channels or informal conversations, to gain insights into their needs,
concerns, and aspirations. This two-way communication allows me to understand their perspectives, build
trust, and ensure that my messages align with their values and aspirations.

   Lastly, I remain attuned to current events, cultural shifts, and emerging trends that shape the collective
mindset of the Oklahoma State community. By staying informed, I can address relevant topics, spark
conversations, and adapt my message to reflect the ever-evolving interests and sensitivities of my audience.

   By employing these strategies, I can effectively analyze my audience at Oklahoma State University,
understanding their diversity, needs, and aspirations. Armed with this knowledge, I can engage with
authenticity, relevance, and the unwavering spirit that defines the Orange Cowboy community. Together, we
can forge meaningful connections, foster unity, and inspire each other to reach greater heights. Go Pokes!
How can you go about learning who will be in your audience?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                                             References

Sprague, J., Stuart, D., & Bodary, D. (2010). The speaker's handbook (9th ed.). Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 138
      5.2 Why Conduct an Audience Analysis?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1589#audio-1589-1

139 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
               ACKNOWLEDGE THE AUDIENCE

Picture yourself in front of the audience, about to deliver your speech. This is the
moment when your relationship with your audience begins, and the quality of this
relationship will influence how receptive they will be to your ideas, or at least how
willing they'll be to listen to what you have to say. One of the best ways to initiate this
relationship is by finding a way to acknowledge your audience. This can be as simple
as establishing eye contact and thanking them for coming to hear your presentation.
If they've braved bad weather, are missing a world-class sports event, or are putting
up with an inconvenience such as a stuffy conference room, tell them how much you
appreciate their presence in spite of the circumstances. This can go a long way toward
getting them "on board" with your message.

   For a political candidate who is traveling from town to town giving what may be perceived as the same
campaign speech time and time again, a statement like "It's great to be here in Springfield, and I want to thank
the West Valley League of Women Voters and our hosts, the Downtown Senior Center, for the opportunity
to be with you today" lets the audience know that the candidate has at least taken the trouble to tailor the
speech to the present audience. Stephanie Coopman and James Lull tell us that Microsoft chairman Bill Gates
often adapts to his audiences by thanking them for their participation in the computer industry or for their
preparation to participate in an electronic world. The authors say, "Even those brief acknowledgments let
audience members know that Gates had prepared his speech with them in mind" (Coopman & Lull, 2009).

               CHOOSE A WORTHWHILE TOPIC

Your selection of a topic should reflect your regard for the audience. There is no universal list of good or bad
topics, but you have an ethical responsibility to select a topic that will be worth listening to. As a student, you
are probably sensitive to how unpleasant it would be to listen to a speech on a highly complex or technical
topic that you found impossible to understand. However, have you considered that audiences do not want to
waste their time or attention listening to a speech that is too simple? Many students find themselves tempted
to choose an easy topic, or a topic they already know a great deal about. This is an understandable temptation;
if you are like most students, you have many commitments and the demands on your time are considerable.
Many experts encourage students to begin with something they already know. However, our experience tells
us that students often do this simply to reduce their workload. For example, if the purpose of your speech is
to inform or persuade students in your public speaking class, a topic such as fitness, drunk driving, the Greek
system (campus fraternities and sororities), or credit card responsibility may be easy for you to address, but it
is unlikely to go very far toward informing your audience, and in all likelihood, it will not be persuading them
either. Instead, your audience members and your professor will quickly recognize that you were thinking of
your own needs rather than those of your audience.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 140
   To avoid this trap, it behooves you to seek a topic that will be novel and interesting both for you and for
your audience. It will also be important to do some credible research in order to ensure that even the most
informed audience members will learn something from you. There are many topics that could provide a
refreshing departure from your usual academic studies. Topics such as the Bermuda Triangle, biopiracy, the
environmental niche of sharks, the green lifestyle, and the historic Oneida Community all provide interesting
views of human and natural phenomena not usually provided in public education. Such topics might be more
likely to hold the interest of your classroom audience than topics they've heard about time and time again.

   You should be aware that your audience will not have the same set of knowledge that you do. For instance, if
you are speaking about biopiracy, you should probably define it and give a clear example. If your speech is on
the green lifestyle, it would be important to frame it as a realistic choice, not a goal so remote as to be hopeless.
In each case, you should use audience analysis to consider how your audience will respond to you, your topic,
and your message.

                            CLARITY

Nothing is more lamentable than a rhetorical actor who endeavors to make grandiose the impressions of
others through the utilization of an elephantine albeit nonsensical argot--or nothing is worse than a speaker
who tries to impress the audience with a giant vocabulary that no one understands. In the first portion of the
preceding sentence, we pulled out as many polysyllabic words as we could find. Unfortunately, most people
will just find the sentence wordy and the meaning will pass right over their heads. As such, we as public
speakers must ensure that we are clear in what we say.

   Make sure that you state your topic clearly at the outset, using words that your audience will understand.
Letting them know what to expect from your speech shows consideration for them as listeners and lets them
know that you value their time and attention.

   Throughout your speech, define your terms clearly and carefully in order to avoid misleading or alarming
people by mistake. Be careful not to use jargon or "insider" language that will exclude listeners who aren't
"in the know." If you approach audience analysis in haste, you might find yourself presenting a speech with
no clear message. You might avoid making any statements outright from fear of offending. It is much better
to know to whom you're speaking and to present a clear, decisive message that lets listeners know what you
think.

141 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   CONTROVERSIAL TOPICS ARE IMPORTANT AND RISKY

Some of the most interesting topics are controversial. They are controversial topics because people have deeply
felt values and beliefs on different sides of those topics. For instance, before you choose nuclear energy as
your topic, investigate the many voices speaking out both in favor and against increasing its use. Many people
perceive nuclear energy as a clean, reliable, and much-needed source of energy. Others say that even the
mining of uranium is harmful to the environment, that we lack satisfactory solutions for storing nuclear
waste, and that nuclear power plants are vulnerable to errors and attacks. Another group might view the issue
economically, believing that industry needs nuclear energy. Engineers might believe that if the national grid
could be modernized, we would have enough energy, and that we should strive to use and waste less energy
until modernization is feasible. Some might feel deep concern about our reliance on foreign oil. Others might
view nuclear energy as more tried-and-true than other alternatives. The topic is extremely controversial, and
yet it is interesting and very important.

   You shouldn't avoid controversy altogether, but you should choose your topic carefully. Moreover, how you
treat your audience is just as important as how you treat your topic. If your audience has widely diverse views,
take the time to acknowledge the concerns they have. Treat them as intelligent people, even if you don't trust
the completeness or the accuracy of their beliefs about your topic.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 142
        ADAPT YOUR SPEECH TO AUDIENCE NEEDS

When preparing a speech for a classroom audience consisting of other students and your professor, you may
feel that you know their interests and expectations fairly well. However, we learn public speaking in order to
be able to address other audiences where we can do some good. In some cases, your audience might consist
of young children who are not ready to accept the fact that a whale is not a fish or that the moon is always
round even though it sometimes appears to be a crescent or a half circle. In other cases, your audience might
include retirees living on fixed incomes and who therefore might not agree that raising local taxes is a vital
"investment in the future."

   Even in an audience that appears to be homogeneous--composed of people who are very similar to one
another--different listeners will understand the same ideas in different ways. Every member of every
audience has his or her own frame of reference--the unique set of perspectives, experience, knowledge,
and values belonging to every individual. An audience member who has been in a car accident caused by a
drunk driver might not appreciate a lighthearted joke about barhopping. Similarly, stressing the importance
of graduate school might be discouraging to audience members who don't know whether they can even afford
to stay in college to complete an undergraduate degree.

143 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   These examples illustrate why audience analysis--the process of learning all you reasonably can about your
audience--is so centrally important. Audience analysis includes consideration of demographic information,
such as the gender, age range, marital status, race, and ethnicity of the people in your audience. Another,
perhaps less obvious, demographic factor is socioeconomic status, which refers to a combination of
characteristics including income, wealth, level of education, and occupational prestige. Each of these
dimensions gives you some information about which kinds of topics, and which aspects of various topics, will
be well received.

   Suppose you are preparing to give an informative speech about early childhood health care. If your audience
is a group of couples who have each recently had a new baby and who live in an affluent suburb, you can expect
that they will be young adults with high socioeconomic status; they will likely be eager to know about the very
best available health care for their children, whether they are healthy or have various medical problems. In
contrast, if your audience is a group of nurses, they may differ in age, but will be similar in education and
occupational prestige. They will already know quite a lot about the topic, so you will want to find an aspect that
may be new for them, such as community health care resources for families with limited financial resources or
for referring children with special needs. As another example, if you are addressing a city council committee
that is considering whether to fund a children's health care initiative, your audience is likely to have very mixed
demographics.

   Audience analysis also takes into account what market researchers call psychographic information, which
is more personal and more difficult to predict than demographics. Psychographic information involves the
beliefs, attitudes, and values that your audience members embrace. Respecting your audience means that you
avoid offending, excluding, or trivializing the beliefs and values they hold. Returning to the topic of early
childhood health care, you can expect new parents to be passionate about wanting the best for their child.
The psychographics of a group of nurses would revolve around their professional competence and the need to
provide "standard of care" for their patients. In a city council committee meeting, the topic of early childhood
health care may be a highly personal and emotional issue for some of your listeners, while for others it may be
strictly a matter of dollars and cents.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 144
              CONSIDER AUDIENCE DIVERSITY

Diversity is a key dimension of audience membership and, therefore, of audience analysis. While the term
"diversity" is often used to refer to racial and ethnic minorities, it is important to realize that audiences can be
diverse in many other ways as well. Being mindful of diversity means being respectful of all people and striving
to avoid racism, ethnocentrism, sexism, ageism, elitism, and other assumptions. An interesting "ism" that is
not often mentioned is chronocentrism, or the assumption that people today are superior to people who lived
in earlier eras (Russell, 1991).

   Sociologists John R. Logan and Wenquan Zhang analyzed racial and ethnic diversity in US cities and
observed a pattern that rewrites the traditional "rules" of neighborhood change (Logan & Zhang, 2010).
Whereas in our grandparents' day a racially mixed neighborhood was one with African American and white
residents, in recent decades, many more people from a variety of Asian and Latin American countries have
immigrated to the United States. As a result, many cities have neighborhoods that are richly diverse with
Asian, Hispanic, and African American cultural influences as well as those of white European Americans.
Each cultural group consists of people from many communities and occupations. Each cultural group came
to the United States for different reasons and came from different communities and occupations within their
original cultures. Even though it can be easy to assume that people from a culture are exactly like each other,

145 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
we undermine our credibility when we create our message as though members of these cultures are carbon
copies of each other.

   One of the author's classes included two students from China. During a discussion of cultural similarity and
difference, one remarked, "I thought we would have the same tastes in food because we are both from China,
but she likes different spices and cooking techniques than I do."

   While race, ethnicity, and culture may be relatively visible aspects of diversity, there are many other aspects
that are less obvious, so your audience is often more diverse than you might initially think. Suppose you are
going to give a talk on pool safety to residents of a very affluent suburban community--will all your audience
members be wealthy? No. There might be some who are unemployed, some who are behind on their mortgage
payments, some who live in rented rooms, not to mention some who work as babysitters or housekeepers.
Furthermore, if your listeners have some characteristic in common, it doesn't mean that they all think alike.
For instance, if your audience consists of people who are members of military families, don't assume that they
all have identical beliefs about national security. If there are many business students in your audience, don't
assume they all agree about the relative importance of ethics and profits. Instead, recognize that a range of
opinion exists.

   This is where the frame of reference becomes an important concept. People have a wide variety of reasons
for making the choices they make and for doing the things they do. For instance, a business student, while
knowing that profitability is important, might have a strong interest in green lifestyles, low energy use, and
alternative energy sources, areas of economic development that might require a great deal of investment
before profits are realized. In fact, some business students may want to be involved in a paradigm shift away
from "business as usual."

   These examples illustrate how important it is to use audience analysis to avoid stereotyping--taking for
granted that people with a certain characteristic in common have the same likes, dislikes, values, and beliefs.
All members of our audiences deserve to have the same sensitivity and the same respect extended to them as
unique individuals. Respecting diversity is not merely a responsibility within public speaking; it should be a
responsibility we strive to embrace in all our human interactions.

            AVOID OFFENDING YOUR AUDIENCE

It might seem obvious that speakers should use audience analysis to avoid making offensive remarks, but even
very experienced speakers sometimes forget this basic rule. People are members of groups they didn't choose
and can't change. We didn't choose our race, ethnicity, sex, age, sexual orientation, intellectual potential, or
appearance. We already know that jokes aimed at people because of their membership in these groups are not
just politically incorrect but also ethically wrong.

   It is not only insensitive humor that can offend an audience. Speakers also need to be aware of language and
nonverbal behaviors that state or imply a negative message about people based on their various membership
groups. Examples include language that suggests that all scientists are men, that all relationships are
heterosexual, or that all ethnic minorities are unpatriotic. By the same token, we should avoid embedding
assumptions about people in our messages. Even the most subtle suggestion may not go unnoticed. For

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 146
example, if, in your speech, you assume that elderly people are frail and expensively medicated, you may offend
people whose elder loved ones do not conform in any way to your assumptions.

   Scholars Samovar and McDaniel tell us that ethical language choices require four guidelines:

    1. Be accurate; present the facts accurately.
    2. Be aware of the emotional impact; make sure that you don't manipulate feelings.
    3. Avoid hateful words; refrain from language that disparages or belittles people.
    4. Be sensitive to the audience; know how audience members prefer to be identified (e.g., Native

         American instead of Indian, women instead of girls, African American instead of black, disabled
         instead of crippled) (Samovar & McDaniel, 2007).

If you alienate your audience, they will stop listening. They will refuse to accept your message, no matter
how true or important it is. They might even become hostile. If you fail to recognize the complexity of your
audience members and if you treat them as stereotypes, they will resent your assumptions and doubt your
credibility.

         ETHICAL SPEAKING IS SINCERE SPEAKING

Ethos is the term Aristotle used to refer to what we now call credibility: the perception that the speaker is
honest, knowledgeable, and rightly motivated. Your ethos, or credibility, must be established as you build
rapport with your listeners. Have you put forth the effort to learn who they are and what you can offer to them
in your speech? Do you respect them as individual human beings? Do you respect them enough to serve their
needs and interests? Is your topic relevant and appropriate for them? Is your approach honest and sensitive
to their preexisting beliefs? Your ability to answer these questions in a constructive way must be based on the
best demographic and psychographic information you can use to learn about your listeners.

   The audience needs to know they can trust the speaker's motivations, intentions, and knowledge. They must
believe that the speaker has no hidden motives, will not manipulate or trick them, and has their best interests
at heart.

   In order to convey regard and respect for the audience, you must be sincere. You must examine the motives
behind your topic choice, the true purpose of your speech, and your willingness to do the work of making
sure the content of the speech is true and represents reality. This can be difficult for students who face time
constraints and multiple demands on their efforts. However, the attitude you assume for this task represents,
in part, the kind of professional, citizen, parent, and human being you want to be. Even if you've given this
issue little thought up to now, you can examine your motives and the integrity of your research and message
construction. Ethically, you should.

147 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                             References

Coopman, S. J., & Lull, J. (2009). Public speaking: The evolving art. Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage.
   Logan, J. R., and Zhang, C. (2010). Global neighborhoods: New pathways to diversity and separation.

American Journal of Sociology, 115, 1069-1109.
   Russell, J. (1991). Inventing the flat earth. History Today, 41(8), 13-19.
   Samovar, L. A., & McDaniel, E. R. (2007). Public speaking in a multicultural society. Los Angeles, CA: Roxbury.
   Shahid, A. (2011, June 24). Rick Perry's Jose Cuervo joke at Latino convention bombs in Texas, as governor

mulls 2012 GOP bid. New York Daily News. Retrieved from http://www.nydailynews.com/news/politics/2011/06/
24/2011-06-24_rick_perrys_jose_cuervo_joke_at_latino_convention_ bombs_in_texas_as_governor_mul.html

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 148
        5.3 Three Types of Audience Analysis

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1592#audio-1592-1

   While audience analysis does not guarantee against errors in judgment, it will help you make good choices
in topic, language, style of presentation, and other aspects of your speech. The more you know about your
audience, the better you can serve their interests and needs. There are certainly limits to what we can learn

149 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
through information collection, and we need to acknowledge that before making assumptions, but knowing
how to gather and use information through audience analysis is an essential skill for successful speakers.

                  DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS

As indicated earlier, demographic information includes factors such as gender, age range, marital status, race
and ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. In your public speaking class, you probably already know how many
students are male and female, their approximate ages, and so forth. But how can you assess the demographics
of an audience ahead of time if you have had no previous contact with them? In many cases, you can ask
the person or organization that has invited you to speak; it's likely that they can tell you a lot about the
demographics of the people who are expected to come to hear you.

   Whatever method you use to form your demographic analysis, exercise respect from the outset. For
instance, if you are collecting information about whether audience members have ever been divorced, be
aware that not everyone will want to answer your questions. You can't require them to do so, and you may not
make assumptions about their reluctance to discuss the topic. You must allow them their privacy.

AGE

There are certain things you can learn about an audience based on age. For instance, if your audience members
are first-year college students, you can assume that they have grown up in the post-9/11 era and have limited
memory of what life was like before the "war on terror." If your audience includes people in their forties and
fifties, it is likely they remember a time when people feared they would contract the AIDS virus from shaking
hands or using a public restroom. People who are in their sixties today came of age during the 1960s, the era of
the Vietnam War and a time of social confrontation and experimentation. They also have frames of reference
that contribute to the way they think, but it may not be easy to predict which side of the issues they support.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 150
GENDER

Gender can define human experience. Clearly, most women have had a different cultural experience from that
of men within the same culture. Some women have found themselves excluded from certain careers. Some
men have found themselves blamed for the limitations imposed on women. In books such as You Just Don't
Understand and Talking from 9 to 5, linguist Deborah Tannen has written extensively on differences between
men's and women's communication styles. Tannen explains, "This is not to say that all women and all men,
or all boys and girls, behave any one way. Many factors influence our styles, including regional and ethnic
backgrounds, family experience and individual personality. But gender is a key factor, and understanding its
influence can help clarify what happens when we talk" (Tannen, 1994).

   Marriage tends to impose additional roles on both men and women and divorce even more so, especially
if there are children. Even if your audience consists of young adults who have not yet made occupational or
marital commitments, they are still aware that gender and the choices they make about issues such as careers
and relationships will influence their experience as adults.

CULTURE

In past generations, Americans often used the metaphor of a "melting pot" to symbolize the assimilation
of immigrants from various countries and cultures into a unified, harmonious "American people." Today,
we are aware of the limitations in that metaphor, and have largely replaced it with a multiculturalist view
that describes the American fabric as a "patchwork" or a "mosaic." We know that people who immigrate do
not abandon their cultures of origin in order to conform to a standard American identity. In fact, cultural
continuity is now viewed as a healthy source of identity.

   We also know that subcultures and cocultures exist within and alongside larger cultural groups. For
example, while we are aware that Native American people do not all embrace the same values, beliefs, and
customs as mainstream white Americans, we also know that members of the Navajo nation have different
values, beliefs, and customs from those of members of the Sioux or the Seneca. We know that African
American people in urban centers like Detroit and Boston do not share the same cultural experiences as
those living in rural Mississippi. Similarly, white Americans in San Francisco may be culturally rooted in the
narrative of distant ancestors from Scotland, Italy, or Sweden or in the experience of having emigrated much
more recently from Australia, Croatia, or Poland.

   Not all cultural membership is visibly obvious. For example, people in German American and Italian
American families have widely different sets of values and practices, yet others may not be able to differentiate
members of these groups. Differences are what make each group interesting and are important sources of
knowledge, perspectives, and creativity.

151 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
RELIGION

There is wide variability in religion as well. The Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life found in a nationwide
survey that 84 percent of Americans identify with at least one of a dozen major religions, including
Christianity, Judaism, Buddhism, Islam, Hinduism, and others. Within Christianity alone, there are half a
dozen categories including Roman Catholic, Mormon, Jehovah's Witness, Orthodox (Greek and Russian), and
a variety of Protestant denominations. Another 6 percent said they were unaffiliated but religious, meaning
that only one American in ten is atheist, agnostic, or "nothing in particular" (Pew Forum on Religion & Public
Life, 2008).

   Even within a given denomination, a great deal of diversity can be found. For instance, among Roman
Catholics alone, there are people who are devoutly religious, people who self-identify as Catholic but do not
attend mass or engage in other religious practices, and others who faithfully make confession and attend mass
but who openly question Papal doctrine on various issues. Catholicism among immigrants from the Caribbean
and Brazil is often blended with indigenous religion or with religion imported from the west coast of Africa. It
is very different from Catholicism in the Vatican.

   The dimensions of diversity in the religion demographic are almost endless, and they are not limited by
denomination. Imagine conducting an audience analysis of people belonging to an individual congregation
rather than a denomination: even there, you will most likely find a multitude of variations that involve how
one was brought up, adoption of a faith system as an adult, how strictly one observes religious practices, and
so on.

   Yet, even with these multiple facets, religion is still a meaningful demographic lens. It can be an indicator
of probable patterns in family relationships, family size, and moral attitudes.

GROUP MEMBERSHIP

In your classroom audience alone, there will be students from a variety of academic majors. Every major
has its own set of values, goals, principles, and codes of ethics. A political science student preparing for law
school might seem to have little in common with a student of music therapy, for instance. In addition, there
are other group memberships that influence how audience members understand the world. Fraternities and
sororities, sports teams, campus organizations, political parties, volunteerism, and cultural communities all
provide people with ways of understanding the world as it is and as we think it should be.

   Because public speaking audiences are very often members of one group or another, group membership is
a useful and often easy to access facet of audience analysis. The more you know about the associations of your
audience members, the better prepared you will be to tailor your speech to their interests, expectations, and
needs.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 152
EDUCATION

Education is expensive, and people pursue education for many reasons. Some people seek to become
educated, while others seek to earn professional credentials. Both are important motivations. If you know
the education levels attained by members of your audience, you might not know their motivations, but you
will know to what extent they could somehow afford the money for an education, afford the time to get an
education, and survive educational demands successfully.

   The kind of education is also important. For instance, an airplane mechanic undergoes a very different kind
of education and training from that of an accountant or a software engineer. This means that not only the
attained level of education but also the particular field is important in your understanding of your audience.

OCCUPATION

People choose occupations for reasons of motivation and interest, but their occupations also influence their
perceptions and their interests. There are many misconceptions about most occupations. For instance, many
people believe that teachers work an eight-hour day and have summers off. When you ask teachers, however,
you might be surprised to find out that they take work home with them for evenings and weekends, and
during the summer, they may teach summer school as well as taking courses in order to keep up with new
developments in their fields. But even if you don't know those things, you would still know that teachers have
had rigorous generalized and specialized qualifying education, that they have a complex set of responsibilities
in the classroom and the institution, and that, to some extent, they have chosen a relatively low-paying
occupation over such fields as law, advertising, media, fine and performing arts, or medicine. If your audience
includes doctors and nurses, you know that you are speaking to people with differing but important
philosophies of health and illness. Learning about those occupational realities is important in avoiding wrong
assumptions and stereotypes. We insist that you not assume that nurses are merely doctors "lite." Their skills,
concerns, and responsibilities are almost entirely different, and both are crucially necessary to effective health
care.

153 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Penn State - MLK speaking to a crowd at Rec Hall - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.

                 PSYCHOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS

Earlier, we mentioned psychographic information, which includes such things as values, opinions, attitudes,
and beliefs. Authors Grice and Skinner present a model in which values are the basis for beliefs, attitudes,
and behaviors (Grice & Skinner, 2009). Values are the foundation of their pyramid model. They say, "A value
expresses a judgment of what is desirable and undesirable, right and wrong, or good and evil. Values are
usually stated in the form of a word or phrase. For example, most of us probably share the values of equality,
freedom, honesty, fairness, justice, good health, and family. These values compose the principles or standards
we use to judge and develop our beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors."

   It is important to recognize that, while demographic information is fairly straightforward and verifiable,
psychographic information is much less clear-cut. Two different people who both say they believe in equal
educational opportunity may have very different interpretations of what "equal opportunity" means. People
who say they don't buy junk food may have very different standards for what specific kinds of foods are
considered "junk food."

   We also acknowledge that people inherit some values from their family upbringing, cultural influences, and
life experiences. The extent to which someone values family loyalty and obedience to parents, thrift, humility,
and work may be determined by these influences more than by individual choice.

   Psychographic analysis can reveal preexisting notions that limit your audience's frame of reference. By
knowing about such notions ahead of time, you can address them in your speech. Audiences are likely to have
two basic kinds of preexisting notions: those about the topic and those about the speaker.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 154
PREEXISTING NOTIONS ABOUT YOUR TOPIC

Many things are a great deal more complex than we realize. Media stereotypes often contribute to our
oversimplifications. For instance, one of your authors, teaching public speaking in the past decade, was
surprised to hear a student claim that "the hippies meant well, but they did it wrong." Aside from the question
of the "it" that was done wrong, there was a question about how little the student actually knew about the
diverse hippy cultures and their aspirations. The student seemed unaware that some of "the hippies" were the
forebears of such things as organic bakeries, natural food co-ops, urban gardens, recycling, alternative energy,
wellness, and other arguably positive developments.

   It's important to know your audience in order to make a rational judgment about how their views of your
topic might be shaped. In speaking to an audience that might have differing definitions, you should take care
to define your terms in a clear, honest way.

   At the opposite end from oversimplification is the level of sophistication your audience might embody. Your
audience analysis should include factors that reveal it. Suppose you are speaking about trends in civil rights in
the United States. You cannot pretend that advancement of civil rights is virtually complete nor can you claim
that no progress has been made. It is likely that in a college classroom, the audience will know that although
much progress has been made, there are still pockets of prejudice, discrimination, and violence. When you
speak to an audience that is cognitively complex, your strategy must be different from one you would use for
an audience that is less educated in the topic. With a cognitively complex audience, you must acknowledge
the overall complexity while stating that your focus will be on only one dimension. With an audience that's
uninformed about your topic, that strategy in a persuasive speech could confuse them; they might well prefer
a black-and-white message with no gray areas. You must decide whether it is ethical to represent your topic
this way.

   When you prepare to do your audience analysis, include questions that reveal how much your audience
already knows about your topic. Try to ascertain the existence of stereotyped, oversimplified, or prejudiced
attitudes about it. This could make a difference in your choice of topic or in your approach to the audience and
topic.

PREEXISTING NOTIONS ABOUT YOU

People form opinions readily. For instance, we know that students form impressions of teachers the moment
they walk into our classrooms on the first day. You get an immediate impression of our age, competence, and
attitude simply from our appearance and nonverbal behavior. In addition, many have heard other students
say what they think of us.

   The same is almost certainly true of you. But it's not always easy to get others to be honest about their
impressions of you. They're likely to tell you what they think you want to hear. Sometimes, however, you do
know what others think. They might think of you as a jock, a suit-wearing conservative, a nature lover, and
so on. Based on these impressions, your audience might expect a boring speech, a shallow speech, a sermon,

155 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
and so on. However, your concern should still be serving your audience's needs and interests, not debunking
their opinions of you or managing your image. In order to help them be receptive, you address their interests
directly, and make sure they get an interesting, ethical speech.

                   SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS

The next type of analysis is called the situational audience analysis because it focuses on characteristics
related to the specific speaking situation. The situational audience analysis can be divided into two main
questions:

    1. How many people came to hear my speech and why are they here? What events, concerns, and needs
         motivated them to come? What is their interest level, and what else might be competing for their
         attention?

    2. What is the physical environment of the speaking situation? What is the size of the audience, layout of
         the room, existence of a podium or a microphone, and availability of digital media for visual aids? Are
         there any distractions, such as traffic noise?

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 156
AUDIENCE SIZE

In a typical class, your audience is likely to consist of twenty to thirty listeners. This audience size gives you the
latitude to be relatively informal within the bounds of good judgment. It isn't too difficult to let each audience
member feel as though you're speaking to him or her. However, you would not become so informal that you
allow your carefully prepared speech to lapse into shallow entertainment. With larger audiences, it's more
difficult to reach out to each listener, and your speech will tend to be more formal, staying more strictly within
its careful outline. You will have to work harder to prepare visual and audio material that reaches the people
sitting at the back of the room, including possibly using amplification.

OCCASION

There are many occasions for speeches. Awards ceremonies, conventions and conferences, holidays, and other
celebrations are some examples. However, there are also less joyful reasons for a speech, such as funerals,
disasters, and the delivery of bad news. As always, there are likely to be mixed reactions. For instance, award
ceremonies are good for community and institutional morale, but we wouldn't be surprised to find at least a
little resentment from listeners who feel deserving but were overlooked. Likewise, for a speech announcing
bad news, it is likely that at least a few listeners will be glad the bad news wasn't even worse. If your speech
is to deliver bad news, it's important to be honest but also to avoid traumatizing your audience. For instance,
if you are a condominium board member speaking to a residents' meeting after the building was damaged
by a hurricane, you will need to provide accurate data about the extent of the damage and the anticipated
cost and time required for repairs. At the same time, it would be needlessly upsetting to launch into a graphic
description of injuries suffered by people, animals, and property in neighboring areas not connected to your
condominium complex.

   Some of the most successful speeches benefit from situational analysis to identify audience concerns related
to the occasion. For example, when the president of the United States gives the annual State of the Union
address, the occasion calls for commenting on the condition of the nation and outlining the legislative agenda
for the coming year. The speech could be a formality that would interest only "policy wonks," or with the
use of good situational audience analysis, it could be a popular event reinforcing the connection between the
president and the American people. In January 2011, knowing that the United States' economy was slowly
recovering and that jobless rates were still very high, President Barack Obama and his staff knew that the focus
of the speech had to be on jobs. Similarly, in January 2003, President George W. Bush's State of the Union
speech focused on the "war on terror" and his reasons for justifying the invasion of Iraq. If you look at the
history of State of the Union Addresses, you'll often find that the speeches are tailored to the political, social,
and economic situations facing the United States at those times.

157 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
VOLUNTARINESS OF AUDIENCE

A voluntary audience gathers because they want to hear the speech, attend the event, or participate in an
event. A classroom audience, in contrast, is likely to be a captive audience. Captive audiences are required to
be present or feel obligated to do so. Given the limited choices perceived, a captive audience might give only
grudging attention. Even when there's an element of choice, the likely consequences of nonattendance will
keep audience members from leaving. The audience's relative perception of choice increases the importance
of holding their interest.

   Whether or not the audience members chose to be present, you want them to be interested in what you have
to say. Almost any audience will be interested in a topic that pertains directly to them. However, your audience
might also be receptive to topics that are indirectly or potentially pertinent to their lives. This means that if
you choose a topic such as advances in the treatment of spinal cord injury or advances in green technology,
you should do your best to show how these topics are potentially relevant to their lives or careers.

   However, there are some topics that appeal to audience curiosity even when it seems there's little chance of
direct pertinence. For instance, topics such as Blackbeard the pirate or ceremonial tattoos among the Maori
might pique the interests of various audiences. Depending on the instructions you get from your instructor,
you can consider building an interesting message about something outside the daily foci of our attention.

PHYSICAL SETTING

The physical setting can make or break even the best speeches, so it is important to exercise as much control
as you can over it. In your classroom, conditions might not be ideal, but at least the setting is familiar.
Still, you know your classroom from the perspective of an audience member, not a speaker standing in the
front--which is why you should seek out any opportunity to rehearse your speech during a minute when the
room is empty. If you will be giving your presentation somewhere else, it is a good idea to visit the venue ahead
of time if at all possible and make note of any factors that will affect how you present your speech. In any case,
be sure to arrive well in advance of your speaking time so that you will have time to check that the microphone
works, to test out any visual aids, and to request any needed adjustments in lighting, room ventilation, or other
factors to eliminate distractions and make your audience more comfortable.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 158
                                             References

Grice, G. L., & Skinner, J. F. (2009). Mastering public speaking: The handbook (7th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
   Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life. (2008, February). Summary of key findings. In U.S. religious landscape

survey. Retrieved from http://religions.pewforum.org/reports#
   Tannen, D. (1994, December 11). The talk of the sandbox: How Johnny and Suzy's playground chatter

prepares them for life at the office. The Washington Post. Retrieved from http://www9.georgetown.edu/faculty/
tannend/sandbox.htm

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

159 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
          5.4 Conducting Audience Analysis

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1595#audio-1595-1

   Now that we have described what audience analysis is and why it is important, let's examine some details of
how to conduct it. Exactly how can you learn about the people who will make up your audience?

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 160
                    DIRECT OBSERVATION

One way to learn about people is to observe them. By observing nonverbal patterns of behavior, you can learn
a great deal as long as you are careful how you interpret the behaviors. For instance, do people greet each
other with a handshake, a hug, a smile, or a nod? Do members of opposite sexes make physical contact?
Does the setting suggest more conservative behavior? By listening in on conversations, you can find out
the issues that concern people. Are people in the campus center talking about political unrest in the Middle
East? About concerns over future Pell Grant funding? We suggest that you consider the ethical dimensions
of eavesdropping, however. Are you simply overhearing an open conversation, or are you prying into a highly
personal or private discussion?

                 INTERVIEWS AND SURVEYS

Because your demographic analysis will be limited to your most likely audience, your most accurate way to
learn about them is to seek personal information through interviews and surveys. An interview is a one-on-
one exchange in which you ask questions of a respondent, whereas a survey is a set of questions administered
to several--or, preferably, many--respondents. Interviews may be conducted face-to-face, by phone, or by
written means, such as texting. They allow more in-depth discussion than surveys, and they are also more time
consuming to conduct. Surveys are also sometimes conducted face-to-face or by phone, but online surveys are
increasingly common. You may collect and tabulate survey results manually, or set up an automated online
survey through the free or subscription portals of sites like Survey Monkey and Zoomerang. Using an online
survey provides the advantage of keeping responses anonymous, which may increase your audience members'
willingness to participate and to answer personal questions. Surveys are an efficient way to collect information
quickly; however, in contrast to interviews, they don't allow for follow-up questions to help you understand
why your respondent gave a certain answer.

   When you use interviews and surveys, there are several important things to keep in mind:

   Make sure your interview and survey questions are directly related to your speech topic. Do not use
      interviews to delve into private areas of people's lives. For instance, if your speech is about the debate
      between creationism and evolution, limit your questions to their opinions about that topic; do not
      meander into their beliefs about sexual behavior or their personal religious practices.

   Create and use a standard set of questions. If you "ad lib" your questions so that they are phrased
      differently for different interviewees, you will be comparing "apples and oranges" when you compare the
      responses you've obtained.

   Keep interviews and surveys short, or you could alienate your audience long before your speech is even
      outlined. Tell them the purpose of the interview or survey and make sure they understand that their
      participation is voluntary.

161 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Don't rely on just a few respondents to inform you about your entire audience. In all likelihood, you have
      a cognitively diverse audience. In order to accurately identify trends, you will likely need to interview or
      survey at least ten to twenty people.

In addition, when you conduct interviews and surveys, keep in mind that people are sometimes less than
honest in describing their beliefs, attitudes, and behavior. This widely recognized weakness of interviews and
survey research is known as socially desirable responding: the tendency to give responses that are considered
socially acceptable. Marketing professor Ashok Lalwani divides socially desirable responding into two types:
(1) impression management, or intentionally portraying oneself in a favorable light and (2) self-deceptive
enhancement, or exaggerating one's good qualities, often unconsciously (Lalwani, 2009).

   You can reduce the effects of socially desirable responding by choosing your questions carefully. As
marketing consultant Terry Vavra advises, "one should never ask what one can't logically expect respondents
to honestly reveal" (Vavra, 2009). For example, if you want to know audience members' attitudes about body
piercing, you are likely to get more honest answers by asking "Do you think body piercing is attractive?" rather
than "How many piercings do you have and where on your body are they located?"

                        FOCUS GROUPS

A focus group is a small group of people who give you feedback about their perceptions. As with interviews
and surveys, in a focus group you should use a limited list of carefully prepared questions designed to get at
the information you need to understand their beliefs, attitudes, and values specifically related to your topic.

   If you conduct a focus group, part of your task will be striking a balance between allowing the discussion to
flow freely according to what group members have to say and keeping the group focused on the questions. It's
also your job to guide the group in maintaining responsible and respectful behavior toward each other.

   In evaluating focus group feedback, do your best to be receptive to what people had to say, whether or not
it conforms to what you expected. Your purpose in conducting the group was to understand group members'
beliefs, attitudes, and values about your topic, not to confirm your assumptions.

      USING EXISTING DATA ABOUT YOUR AUDIENCE

Occasionally, existing information will be available about your audience. For instance, if you have a student
audience, it might not be difficult to find out what their academic majors are. You might also be able to find out

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 162
their degree of investment in their educations; for instance, you could reasonably assume that the seniors in
the audience have been successful students who have invested at least three years pursuing a higher education.
Sophomores have at least survived their first year but may not have matched the seniors in demonstrating
strong values toward education and the work ethic necessary to earn a degree.

   In another kind of an audience, you might be able to learn other significant facts. For instance, are they
veterans? Are they retired teachers? Are they members of a voluntary civic organization such as the Lions
Club or Mothers Against Drunk Driving (MADD)? This kind of information should help you respond to their
concerns and interests.

   In other cases, you may be able to use demographics collected by public and private organizations.
Demographic analysis is done by the US Census Bureau through the American Community Survey, which
is conducted every year, and through other specialized demographic surveys (Bureau of the Census, 2011;
Bureau of the Census, 2011). The Census Bureau analysis generally captures information about people in all
the regions of the United States, but you can drill down in census data to see results by state, by age group, by
gender, by race, and by other factors.

   Demographic information about narrower segments of the United States, down to the level of individual
zip codes, is available through private organizations such as The Nielsen Company (http://www.claritas.com/
MyBestSegments/Default.jsp?ID=20&SubID=&pageName=ZIP%2BCode%2BLook-up) and Sperling's Best
Places (http://www.bestplaces.net). Sales and marketing professionals use this data, and you may find it useful
for your audience analysis as well.

                                             References

Bureau of the Census. (2011). About the American community survey. Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/
acs/www/about_the_survey/american_community_survey/.

   Bureau of the Census. (2011). Demographic surveys. Retrieved from http://www.census.gov/aboutus/
sur_demo.html

   Lalwani, A. K. (2009, August). The distinct influence of cognitive busyness and need for closure on cultural
differences in socially desirable responding. Journal of Consumer Research, 36, 305-316. Retrieved from
http://business.utsa.edu/marketing/files/phdpapers/lalwani2_2009-jcr.pdf

   Vavra, T. G. (2009, June 14). The truth about truth in survey research. Retrieved from
http://www.terryvavra.com/customer-research/the-truth-about-truth-in-survey-research

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

163 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
          5.5 Using Your Audience Analysis

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1598#audio-1598-1

A good audience analysis takes time, thought, preparation, implementation, and processing. If done well,
it will yield information that will help you interact effectively with your audience. Professional speakers,
corporate executives, sales associates, and entertainers all rely on audience analysis to connect with their
listeners. So do political candidates, whose chances of gaining votes depend on crafting the message and

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 164
mood to appeal to each specific audience. One audience might be preoccupied with jobs, another with property
taxes, and another with crime. Similarly, your audience analysis should help you identify the interests of your
audience. Ultimately, a successful audience analysis can guide you in preparing the basic content of your
speech and help you adjust your speech "on the fly." Utilizing the communication accommodation theory is
one effective way to prepare and adjust your speech based on your audience analysis.

                            Communication Accommodation Theory

Communication accommodation theory is a theory that explores why and how people modify their
communication to fit situational, social, cultural, and relational contexts. (Giles et al., 1973). Within
communication accommodation, conversational partners may use convergence, meaning a person makes his
or her communication more like another person's. People who are accommodating in their communication
style are seen as more competent, which illustrates the benefits of communicative flexibility. In order to be
flexible, of course, people have to be aware of and monitor their own and others' communication patterns.
Conversely, conversational partners may use divergence, meaning a person uses communication to
emphasize the differences between his or her conversational partner and his or herself.

   Convergence and divergence can take place within the same conversation and may be used by one or
both conversational partners. Convergence functions to make others feel at ease, to increase understanding,
and to enhance social bonds. Divergence may be used to intentionally make another person feel unwelcome
or perhaps to highlight a personal, group, or cultural identity. For example, African American women use
certain verbal communication patterns when communicating with other African American women as a way
to highlight their racial identity and create group solidarity. In situations where multiple races interact, the
women usually do not use those same patterns, instead accommodating the language patterns of the larger
group.

   Utilizing your audience analysis and the communication accommodation theory in advance will allow you
to be prepared to adjust both the content and delivery of your speech as needed in order to best reach your
audience.

   PREPARE CONTENT WITH YOUR AUDIENCE IN MIND

The first thing a good audience analysis can do is help you focus your content for your specific audience. If
you are planning on a delivering a persuasive speech on why people should become vegans and you find out
through analysis that half of your audience are daughters and sons of cattle ranchers, you need to carefully
think through your approach to the content. Maybe you'll need to tweak your topic to focus on just the benefits
of veganism without trying to persuade the audience explicitly. The last thing you want to do as a speaker is
stand before an audience who is highly negative toward your topic before you ever open your mouth. While
there will always be some naysayers in any audience, if you think through your topic with your audience in

165 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
mind, you may be able to find a topic that will be both interesting to you as a speaker and beneficial to your
audience as well.

   In addition to adjusting the topic of your speech prior to the speaking event, you can also use your audience
analysis to help ensure that the content of your speech will be as clear and understandable as humanly
possible. We can use our audience analysis to help sure that we are clear.

   One area of clarity to be careful of is the use of idioms your audience may not know. An idiom is a word
or phrase where the meaning cannot be predicted from normal, dictionary definitions. Many idioms are
culturally or temporally based. For example, the phrase "according to Hoyle" indicates that something is done
"by the book" or "by the rules," as in "These measurements aren't according to Hoyle, but they're close enough
to give a general idea." Most of us have no clue who Hoyle was or what this idiom means. It refers to Edmond
Hoyle, who wrote some of the most popular card-playing rule books back in the 1700s in England. Today, card
game enthusiasts may understand the intent of "according to Hoyle," but for most people it no longer carries
specific meaning. When thinking about your speech, be careful not to accidentally use idioms that you find
commonplace but your audience may not.

  ADJUSTING YOUR SPEECH BASED ON YOUR ANALYSIS

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 166
   In addition to using audience analysis to help formulate speech content, we can also use our audience
analysis to make adjustments during the actual speech. These adjustments can pertain to the audience and to
the physical setting.

   The feedback you receive from your audience during your speech is a valuable indication of ways to adjust
your presentation. If you're speaking after lunch and notice audience members looking drowsy, you can make
adjustments to liven up the tone of your speech. You could use humor. You could raise your voice slightly.
You could pose some questions and ask for a show of hands to get your listeners actively involved. As another
example, you may notice from frowns and headshaking that some listeners aren't convinced by the arguments
you are presenting. In this case, you could spend more time on a specific area of your speech and provide
more evidence than you originally intended. Good speakers can learn a lot by watching their audience while
speaking and then make specific adjustments to both the content and delivery of the speech to enhance the
speech's ultimate impact.

   The second kind of adjustment has to do with the physical setting for your speech. For example, your
situational analysis may reveal that you'll be speaking in a large auditorium when you had expected a nice, cozy
conference room. If you've created visual aids for a small, intimate environment, you may have to omit it, or
tell your listeners that they can view it after the presentation. You may also need to account for a microphone.
If you're lucky enough to have a cordless microphone, then you won't have to make too many adjustments to
your speaking style. If, on the other hand, the microphone is corded or is attached to an unmovable podium,
you'll have to make adjustments to how you deliver the presentation.

   In preparing a speech about wealth distribution in the United States, one of our students had the opposite
problem. Anticipating a large room, she had planned to use a one-hundred-foot tape measure to illustrate the
percentage of the nation's wealth owned by the top one-fifth of the population. However, when she arrived she
found that the room was only twelve by twenty feet, so that she had to walk back and forth zigzagging the tape
from end to end to stretch out one hundred feet. Had she thought more creatively about how to adapt to the
physical setting, she could have changed her plans to use just ten feet of the tape measure to symbolize 100
percent of the wealth.

                                            References

Giles, H., Taylor, D. M., & Bourhis, R. (1973). Toward a theory of interpersonal accommodation through
language: Some Canadian data. Language and Society, 2(2), 177-92.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

167 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                5.6 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. What are some ways that you can establish common ground with your classmates as the audience?
2. Ceally wants to educate his college classmates about the increased use of profanity in contemporary music. He

     would like to play sound clips of some of the most offensive lyrics to illustrate his point. Would you advise Ceally
     to play these songs, even though doing so might offend or upset members of the audience? Why?
3. Tynisha wants to convince her audience that we need a ban on alcoholic drinks at sporting events. Her survey
     results suggest that nearly 85% of her audience wants to continue the current policy of allowing alcohol sales at
     athletic events. Should she change her purpose to fit the existing attitudes of her audience? Why or why not? How
     can she establish common ground with this audience?
4. What are some ways you can establish ethos with your audience before, during and after your presentation?
5. Why is it important to understand the demographics, psychographics, and interests of your audience? What are
     the pitfalls of not conducting any audience analysis before speaking?
6. Think of other areas of life in which audience analysis (or something like it) is essential (for example: needs
     assessments, strategic planning, individualized education planning). Why is it important to first understand the
     unique needs of a group before offering information or solutions to problems? How can we use our
     understanding of audience analysis to inform our communication in other areas of life?

                                           Activities

1. Identify your values. On a sheet of paper, take a minute to write down how you would spend a million dollars on
     others. Next, take a minute to write down how you would spend a million dollars on yourself. Finally, review your
     two lists and identify common themes. What you choose to spend your money on reflects your values. Here are a
     few ideas of some of the value categories that may include things you would buy: items for your family, home,
     community, health, education, adventure, luxury, or nature/environment. These would be some of the values by
     which you live your life.

2. Form six groups. Each group will be given a different type of product (i.e. cereal box, pizza restaurant, big-box
     store, movie, TV show). Groups perform an audience analysis including demographics and psychographics on the

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 168
                 target audience for that product. Finally, groups create and deliver an advertisement to their target audience.
                 Discuss the following:
                     Who was the target audience intended by each group?
                     Was the class able to determine the type of audience (demographics and psychographics) each group was targeting? How?
                     In this activity, what do the cereal boxes, restaurants, stores, movies, etc. represent in the public speaking situation?
                     Why is it important for speakers to imagine/analyze their target audience before creating or delivering a speech?

169 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                Chapter 6: Culture

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Define culture and describe personal, social, and cultural identities.
 Summarize non-dominant and dominant identity development.
 Define the social constructionist view of culture and identity.
 Discuss how each of the four cultural identities discussed affects and/or relates to communication.
 Define intercultural communication and list the six dialectics of intercultural communication.
 Discuss how intercultural communication affects interpersonal relationships.
 Define intercultural communication competence.
 Summarize the three ways to cultivate intercultural communication competence that are discussed.
 Apply the concept of "thinking under the influence" as a reflective skill for building intercultural communication

   competence.

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Ableism
 Acculturated
 Ascribed Identity
 Avowed Identity
 Code-switching
 Culture
 Cultural Identity
 Dialectic
 Dichotomies
 Digital Divide
 Dominant Identities
 Essentialize
 Ethnocentrism

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 170
     Feminism
     Gender
     Heterosexism
     Intercultural Communication
     Intercultural Communication Competence
     Intersectionality
     Non-Dominant Identities
     Personal Identity
     Race
     Salience
     Sex
     Sexual Orientation
     Social constructionism
     Social Identity
     Transgender

171 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
           6.1 Culture and Communication

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1602#audio-1602-1

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 172
  "Cultural differences should not separate us from each other, but rather cultural diversity
      brings a collective strength that can benefit all of humanity." -Robert Alan Aurthur

Humans have always been diverse in their cultural beliefs and practices. But as new technologies have led
to the perception that our world has shrunk, and demographic and political changes have brought attention
to cultural differences, people communicate across cultures more now than ever before. The oceans and
continents that separate us can now be traversed instantly with an e-mail, phone call, tweet, or status update.
Additionally, our workplaces, schools, and neighborhoods have become more integrated in terms of race and
gender, increasing our interaction with domestic diversity. The Disability Rights Movement and Gay Rights
Movement have increased the visibility of people with disabilities and sexual minorities. But just because we
are exposed to more difference doesn't mean we understand it, can communicate across it, or appreciate it.
This chapter will help you do all three.

   Pistol Pete found himself grappling with a profound conflict. Known for his unwavering spirit and deep love
for his country, Pete was a symbol of unity and school pride. But recent events of police brutality and systemic
injustice had cast a shadow over the land he held dear, causing distress among the Black students at OSU,
including one of his closest friends, James.

173 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Pete and James had shared many moments on and off the field, their bond going beyond their shared love
for their university. James had always been there for Pete, supporting him in every endeavor, just as Pete had
stood by him. The recent unrest had affected James deeply, and Pete could see the pain and frustration in his
friend's eyes. The usually vibrant and positive James now wore a look of weariness, his spirits dampened by
the grim reality that he and many others faced.

   This personal connection made the issue even more real and urgent for Pete. He felt a strong urge to support
his friend and the other students who were feeling the same distress. But at the same time, his patriotism
stirred within him, his deep-rooted respect for the country conflicting with the disheartening circumstances.

   Pete decided to lean into the conflict rather than shy away from it. He reached out to James, engaging in
heartfelt conversations about the experiences and fears James was dealing with. He attended open dialogues
and town hall meetings to understand the broader experiences of the Black students at OSU. Through these
interactions, Pete was striving not only to comprehend the gravity of their concerns but also to explore how
he, as Pistol Pete, could contribute to the solution.

   As Pete listened to James and the other students, he began to understand that standing up against injustice
and advocating for equality was, in itself, a deeply patriotic act. It was about aspiring for a better, fairer
country -- a place where everyone, including his dear friend James, could feel safe, valued, and respected.

   Motivated by this newfound understanding, Pete used his platform to promote awareness, foster unity, and
advocate for change. His actions sent a clear message of his commitment to the OSU community, reinforcing
the idea that patriotism and support for the fight against systemic injustice were not mutually exclusive but
could harmoniously coexist.

   Navigating this delicate balance was challenging, but Pistol Pete, driven by his love for his friend and his
community, was determined to play his part in fostering a more inclusive and equitable environment at
Oklahoma State University. What qualities and actions demonstrate Pete's intercultural competence during
this challenging situation?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 174
       6.2 Foundations of Culture and Identity

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1607#audio-1607-1

  Culture is a complicated word to define, as there are at least six common ways that
culture is used in the United States. For the purposes of exploring the communicative
aspects of culture, we will define culture as the ongoing negotiation of learned and
patterned beliefs, attitudes, values, and behaviors. Unpacking the definition, we can

175 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
see that culture shouldn't be conceptualized as stable and unchanging. Culture is
"negotiated," and as we will learn later in this chapter, culture is dynamic, and cultural
changes can be traced and analyzed to better understand why our society is the
way it is. The definition also points out that culture is learned, which accounts for
the importance of socializing institutions like family, school, peers, and the media.
Culture is patterned in that there are recognizable widespread similarities among
people within a cultural group. There is also deviation from and resistance to those
patterns by individuals and subgroups within a culture, which is why cultural patterns
change over time. Last, the definition acknowledges that culture influences our
beliefs about what is true and false, our attitudes including our likes and dislikes, our
values regarding what is right and wrong, and our behaviors. It is from these cultural
influences that our identities are formed.

      PERSONAL, SOCIAL, AND CULTURAL IDENTITIES

Ask yourself the question "Who am I?" We develop a sense of who we are based on what is reflected back on us
from other people. Our parents, friends, teachers, and the media help shape our identities. While this happens
from birth, most people in Western societies reach a stage in adolescence where maturing cognitive abilities
and increased social awareness lead them to begin to reflect on who they are. This begins a lifelong process
of thinking about who we are now, who we were before, and who we will become (Tatum, B. D., 2000). Our
identities make up an important part of our self-concept and can be broken down into three main categories:
personal, social, and cultural identities (see examples in graphic below).

   We must avoid the temptation to think of our identities as constant. Instead, our identities are formed
through processes that started before we were born and will continue after we are gone; therefore our
identities aren't something we achieve or complete. Two related but distinct components of our identities
are our personal and social identities (Spreckels, J. & Kotthoff, H., 2009). Personal identities include the
components of self that are primarily intrapersonal and connected to our life experiences. For example, I
consider myself a puzzle lover, and you may identify as a fan of hip-hop music. Our social identities are the
components of self that are derived from involvement in social groups with which we are interpersonally
committed.

   For example, we may derive aspects of our social identity from our family or from a community of fans for
a sports team. Social identities differ from personal identities because they are externally organized through
membership. Our membership may be voluntary (Greek organization on campus) or involuntary (family) and
explicit (we pay dues to our labor union) or implicit (we purchase and listen to hip-hop music). There are
numerous options for personal and social identities. While our personal identity choices express who we are,
our social identities align us with particular groups. Through our social identities, we make statements about
who we are and who we are not.

   Personal identities may change often as people have new experiences and develop new interests and

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 176
hobbies. A current interest in online video games may give way to an interest in graphic design. Social
identities do not change as often because they take more time to develop, as you must become interpersonally
invested. For example, if an interest in online video games leads someone to become a member of a MMORPG,
or a massively multiplayer online role-playing game community, that personal identity has led to a social
identity that is now interpersonal and more entrenched.

   Cultural identities is based on socially constructed categories that teach us a way of being and include
expectations for social behavior or ways of acting (Yep, G. A., 2002). Since we are often a part of them since
birth, cultural identities are the least changeable of the three. The ways of being and the social expectations for
behavior within cultural identities do change over time, but what separates them from most social identities
is their historical roots (Collier, M. J., 1996). For example, think of how ways of being and acting have changed
for African Americans since the civil rights movement. Additionally, common ways of being and acting within
a cultural identity group are expressed through communication. In order to be accepted as a member of
a cultural group, members must be acculturated, essentially learning and using a code that other group
members will be able to recognize. We are acculturated into our various cultural identities in obvious and less
obvious ways. We may literally have a parent or friend tell us what it means to be a man or a woman. We may
also unconsciously consume messages from popular culture that offer representations of gender.

   Any of these identity types can be ascribed or avowed. Ascribed identities are personal, social, or cultural
identities that are placed on us by others, while avowed identities are those that we claim for ourselves (Martin
& Nakayama, 2010). Sometimes people ascribe an identity to someone else based on stereotypes. You may see
a person who likes to read science-fiction books, watches documentaries, has glasses, and collects Star Trek
memorabilia and label him or her a nerd. If the person doesn't avow that identity, it can create friction, and
that label may even hurt the other person's feelings. But ascribed and avowed identities can match up. To
extend the previous example, there has been a movement in recent years to reclaim the label nerd and turn it
into a positive, and a nerd subculture has been growing in popularity. For example, MC Frontalot, a leader in
the nerdcore hip-hop movement, says that being branded a nerd in school was terrible, but now he raps about
"nerdy" things like blogs to sold-out crowds (Shipman, 2007). We can see from this example that our ascribed
and avowed identities change over the course of our lives, and sometimes they match up and sometimes not.

177 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Although some identities are essentially permanent, the degree to which we are aware of them, also known
as salience, changes. The intensity with which we avow an identity also changes based on context. For
example, a person who identifies as African American may not have difficulty deciding which box to check on
the demographic section of a survey. But if a person who identifies as African American becomes president
of her college's Black Student Union, she may more intensely avow her African American identity, which has
now become more salient. If she studies abroad in Africa her junior year, she may be ascribed an identity of
American by her new African friends rather than African American. For the Africans, their visitor's identity
as American is likely more salient than her identity as someone of African descent. If someone is biracial or
multiracial, they may change their racial identification as they engage in an identity search. One intercultural
communication scholar writes of his experiences as an "Asianlatinoamerican" (Yep, 2002). He notes
repressing his Chinese identity as an adolescent living in Peru and then later embracing his Chinese identity
and learning about his family history while in college in the United States. This example shows how even
national identity fluctuates. Obviously one can change nationality by becoming a citizen of another country,
although most people do not. My identity as a US American became very salient for me for the first time in my
life when I studied abroad in Sweden.

   Throughout modern history, cultural and social influences have established dominant and non-dominant
groups (Allen, 2011). Dominant identities historically had and currently have more resources and influence,
while non-dominant identities historically had and currently have less resources and influence. It's important
to remember that these distinctions are being made at the societal level, not the individual level. There are
obviously exceptions, with people in groups considered non-dominant obtaining more resources and power
than a person in a dominant group. However, the overall trend is that difference based on cultural groups
has been institutionalized, and exceptions do not change this fact. Because of this uneven distribution of

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 178
resources and power, members of dominant groups are granted privileges while non-dominant groups are at
a disadvantage. The main non-dominant groups must face various forms of institutionalized discrimination,
including racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism. As we will discuss later, privilege and disadvantage, like
similarity and difference, are not "all or nothing." No two people are completely different or completely similar,
and no one person is completely privileged or completely disadvantaged.

                   IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT

There are multiple models for examining identity development. Given our focus on how difference matters,
we will examine similarities and differences in nondominant and dominant identity formation. While the
stages in this model help us understand how many people experience their identities, identity development
is complex, and there may be variations. We must also remember that people have multiple identities that
intersect with each other. So, as you read, think about how circumstances may be different for an individual
with multiple nondominant and/or dominant identities.

         NONDOMINANT IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT

There are four stages of nondominant identity development (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). The first stage is
unexamined identity, which is characterized by a lack of awareness of or lack of interest in one's identity. For
example, a young woman who will later identify as a lesbian may not yet realize that a nondominant sexual
orientation is part of her identity. Also, a young African American man may question his teachers or parents
about the value of what he's learning during Black History Month. When a person's lack of interest in their
own identity is replaced by an investment in a dominant group's identity, they may move to the next stage,
which is conformity.

   In the conformity stage, an individual internalizes or adopts the values and norms of the dominant group,
often in an effort not to be perceived as different. Individuals may attempt to assimilate into the dominant
culture by changing their appearance, their mannerisms, the way they talk, or even their name. Moises,
a Chicano man interviewed in a research project about identities, narrated how he changed his "Mexican
sounding" name to Moses, which was easier for his middle-school classmates and teachers to say (Jones Jr.,
2009). He also identified as white instead of Mexican American or Chicano because he saw how his teachers
treated the other kids with "brown skin." Additionally, some gay or lesbian people in this stage of identity
development may try to "act straight." In either case, some people move to the next stage, resistance and

179 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
separation, when they realize that despite their efforts they are still perceived as different by and not included
in the dominant group.

   In the resistance and separation stage, an individual with a nondominant identity may shift away from the
conformity of the previous stage to engage in actions that challenge the dominant identity group. Individuals
in this stage may also actively try to separate themselves from the dominant group, interacting only with those
who share their nondominant identity. For example, there has been a Deaf culture movement in the United
States for decades. This movement includes people who are hearing impaired and believe that their use of a
specific language, American Sign Language (ASL), and other cultural practices constitutes a unique culture,
which they symbolize by capitalizing the D in Deaf (Allen, 2011).
While this is not a separatist movement, a person who is hearing impaired may find refuge in such a group
after experiencing discrimination from hearing people. Staying in this stage may indicate a lack of critical
thinking if a person endorses the values of the nondominant group without question.

   The integration stage marks a period where individuals with a nondominant identity have achieved a
balance between embracing their own identities and valuing other dominant and nondominant identities.
Although there may still be residual anger from the discrimination and prejudice they have faced, they may
direct this energy into positive outlets such as working to end discrimination for their own or other groups.
Moises, the Chicano man I mentioned earlier, now works to support the Chicano community in his city and
also has actively supported gay rights and women's rights.

           DOMINANT IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT

Dominant identity development consists of five stages (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). The unexamined stage
of dominant identity formation is similar to nondominant in that individuals in this stage do not think
about their or others' identities. Although they may be aware of differences--for example, between races
and genders--they either don't realize there is a hierarchy that treats some people differently than others or
they don't think the hierarchy applies to them. For example, a white person may take notice that a person
of color was elected to a prominent office. However, he or she may not see the underlying reason that it is
noticeable--namely, that the overwhelming majority of our country's leaders are white. Unlike people with a
nondominant identity who usually have to acknowledge the positioning of their identity due to discrimination
and prejudice they encounter, people with dominant identities may stay in the unexamined stage for a long
time.

   In the acceptance stage, a person with a dominant identity passively or actively accepts that some people
are treated differently than others but doesn't do anything internally or externally to address it. In the passive
acceptance stage, we must be cautious not to blame individuals with dominant identities for internalizing
racist, sexist, or heterosexist "norms." The socializing institutions we discussed earlier (family, peers, media,
religion, and education) often make oppression seem normal and natural. For example, I have had students
who struggle to see that they are in this stage say things like "I know that racism exists, but my parents
taught me to be a good person and see everyone as equal." While this is admirable, seeing everyone as equal
doesn't make it so. And people who insist that we are all equal may claim that minorities are exaggerating

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 180
their circumstances or "whining" and just need to "work harder" or "get over it." The person making these
statements acknowledges difference but doesn't see their privilege or the institutional perpetuation of various
"-isms." Although I've encountered many more people in the passive state of acceptance than the active
state, some may progress to an active state where they acknowledge inequality and are proud to be in the
"superior" group. In either case, many people never progress from this stage. If they do, it's usually because of
repeated encounters with individuals or situations that challenge their acceptance of the status quo, such as
befriending someone from a nondominant group or taking a course related to culture.

   The resistance stage of dominant identity formation is a major change from the previous in that an
individual acknowledges the unearned advantages they are given and feels guilt or shame about it. Having
taught about various types of privilege for years, I've encountered many students who want to return their
privilege or disown it. These individuals may begin to disassociate with their own dominant group because
they feel like a curtain has been opened and their awareness of the inequality makes it difficult for them
to interact with others in their dominant group. But it's important to acknowledge that becoming aware of
your white privilege, for instance, doesn't mean that every person of color is going to want to accept you as
an ally, so retreating to them may not be the most productive move. While moving to this step is a marked
improvement in regards to becoming a more aware and socially just person, getting stuck in the resistance
stage isn't productive, because people are often retreating rather than trying to address injustice. For some,
deciding to share what they've learned with others who share their dominant identity moves them to the next
stage.

   People in the redefinition stage revise negative views of their identity held in the previous stage and begin
to acknowledge their privilege and try to use the power they are granted to work for social justice. They
realize that they can claim their dominant identity as heterosexual, able-bodied, male, white, and so on, and
perform their identity in ways that counter norms. A male participant in a research project on identity said the
following about redefining his male identity:

I don't want to assert my maleness the same way that maleness is asserted all around us all the time. I don't want to contribute
to sexism. So I have to be conscious of that. There's that guilt. But then, I try to utilize my maleness in positive ways, like when
I'm talking to other men about male privilege (Jones, Jr., 2009).

   The final stage of dominant identity formation is integration. This stage is reached when redefinition is
complete and people can integrate their dominant identity into all aspects of their life, finding opportunities
to educate others about privilege while also being a responsive ally to people in nondominant identities. As
an example, some heterosexual people who find out a friend or family member is gay or lesbian may have to
confront their dominant heterosexual identity for the first time, which may lead them through these various
stages. As a sign of integration, some may join an organization like PFLAG (Parents, Families, and Friends of
Lesbians and Gays), where they can be around others who share their dominant identity as heterosexuals but
also empathize with their loved ones.

Knowing more about various types of identities and some common experiences of how dominant and
nondominant identities are formed prepares us to delve into more specifics about why difference matters.

181 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                    DIFFERENCE MATTERS

Whenever we encounter someone, we notice similarities and differences. While both are important, it is
often the differences that are highlighted and that contribute to communication troubles. We don't only
see similarities and differences on an individual level. In fact, we also place people into in-groups and out-
groups based on the similarities and differences we perceive. This is important because we then tend to react
to someone we perceive as a member of an out-group based on the characteristics we attach to the group
rather than the individual (Allen, 2011). In these situations, it is more likely that stereotypes and prejudice will
influence our communication. Learning about difference and why it matters will help us be more competent
communicators. The flip side of emphasizing difference is to claim that no differences exist and that you see
everyone as a human being. Rather than trying to ignore difference and see each person as a unique individual,
we should know the history of how differences came to be so socially and culturally significant and how they
continue to affect us today.

   Culture and identity are complex. You may be wondering how some groups came to be dominant and others
nondominant. These differences are not natural, which can be seen as we unpack how various identities have
changed over time in the next section. There is, however, an ideology of domination that makes it seem natural
and normal to many that some people or groups will always have power over others (Allen, 2011). In fact,
hierarchy and domination, although prevalent throughout modern human history, were likely not the norm
among early humans. So one of the first reasons difference matters is that people and groups are treated
unequally, and better understanding how those differences came to be can help us create a more just society.
Difference also matters because demographics and patterns of interaction are changing.

   In the United States, the population of people of color is increasing and diversifying, and visibility for
people who are gay or lesbian and people with disabilities has also increased. The 2010 Census shows that
the Hispanic and Latino/a populations in the United States are now the second largest group in the country,
having grown 43 percent since the last census in 2000 (Saenz, 2011). By 2030, racial and ethnic minorities
will account for one-third of the population (Allen, 2011). Additionally, legal and social changes have created
a more open environment for sexual minorities and people with disabilities. These changes directly affect
our interpersonal relationships. The workplace is one context where changing demographics has become
increasingly important. Many organizations are striving to comply with changing laws by implementing
policies aimed at creating equal access and opportunity. Some organizations are going further than legal
compliance to try to create inclusive climates where diversity is valued because of the interpersonal and
economic benefits it has the potential to produce.
We can now see that difference matters due to the inequalities that exist among cultural groups and due
to changing demographics that affect our personal and social relationships. Unfortunately, there are many
obstacles that may impede our valuing of difference (Allen, 2011). Individuals with dominant identities may
not validate the experiences of those in nondominant groups because they do not experience the oppression
directed at those with nondominant identities. Further, they may find it difficult to acknowledge that not
being aware of this oppression is due to privilege associated with their dominant identities. Because of this
lack of recognition of oppression, members of dominant groups may minimize, dismiss, or question the
experiences of nondominant groups and view them as "complainers" or "whiners." Recall from our earlier
discussion of identity formation that people with dominant identities may stay in the unexamined or
acceptance stages for a long time. Being stuck in these stages makes it much more difficult to value difference.

   Members of nondominant groups may have difficulty valuing difference due to negative experiences with
the dominant group, such as not having their experiences validated. Both groups may be restrained from

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 182
communicating about difference due to norms of political correctness, which may make people feel afraid
to speak up because they may be perceived as insensitive or racist. All these obstacles are common and they
are valid. However, as we will learn later, developing intercultural communication competence can help us
gain new perspectives, become more mindful of our communication, and intervene in some of these negative
cycles.

                                             References

Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity, 2nd ed. (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2011), 4.
   Collier, M. J., "Communication Competence Problematics in Ethnic Friendships," Communication

Monographs 63, no. 4 (1996): 318.
   Cullen, L. T., "Employee Diversity Training Doesn't Work," Time, April 26, 2007, accessed October 5, 2011,

http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1615183,00.html.
   Jones Jr., R. G., "Communicating Queer Identities through Personal Narrative and Intersectional

Reflexivity" (PhD diss., University of Denver, 2009), 130-32.
   Martin, J. N., and Thomas K. Nakayama, Intercultural Communication in Contexts, 5th ed. (Boston, MA:

McGraw-Hill, 2010), 166.
   Saenz, A., "Census Data Shows a Changed American Landscape," ABC News, March 21, 2011, accessed

October 9, 2011, http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/census-data-reveals-changed-american-landscape/
story?id=13206427.

   Shipman, T., "Nerds Get Their Revenge as at Last It's Hip to Be Square," The Sunday Telegraph, July 22, 2007,
35.

   Spreckels, J. and Helga Kotthoff, "Communicating Identity in Intercultural Communication," in Handbook of
Intercultural Communication, eds. Helga Kotthoff and Helen Spencer-Oatey (Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter, 2009),
415-19.

   Tatum, B. D., "The Complexity of Identity: `Who Am I?'" in Readings for Diversity and Social Justice, eds.
Maurianne Adams, Warren J. Blumfeld, Rosie Casteneda, Heather W. Hackman, Madeline L. Peters, Ximena
Zuniga (New York: Routledge, 2000), 9.

   US Office of Personnel Management, "Guidelines for Conducting Diversity Training," Training and
Development Policy, accessed October 16, 2011, http://www.opm.gov/hrd/lead/policy/divers97.asp#PART%20B.

   Vedantam, S., "Most Diversity Training Ineffective, Study Finds," The Washington Post, January 20, 2008,
accessed October 5, 2011, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/01/19/
AR2008011901899_pf.html.

   Yep, G. A., "My Three Cultures: Navigating the Multicultural Identity Landscape," in Intercultural
Communication: Experiences and Contexts, eds. Judith N. Martin, Lisa A. Flores, and Thomas K. Nakayama
(Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, 2002), 61.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

183 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
      6.3 Exploring Specific Cultural Identities

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
                                                           Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1612#audio-1612-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1612#audio-1612-2

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 184
We can get a better understanding of current cultural identities by unpacking how
they came to be. By looking at history, we can see how cultural identities that seem
to have existed forever actually came to be constructed for various political and social
reasons and how they have changed over time. Communication plays a central role
in this construction. As we have already discussed, our identities are relational and
communicative; they are also constructed. Social constructionism is a view that
argues the self is formed through our interactions with others and in relationship
to social, cultural, and political contexts (Allen, 2011). In this section, we'll explore
how the cultural identities of race, gender, sexual orientation and ability have been
constructed in the United States and how communication relates to those identities.
There are other important identities that could be discussed, like religion, age,
nationality, and class. Although they are not given their own section, consider how
those identities may intersect with the identities discussed next.

185 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                              RACE

Would it surprise you to know that human beings, regardless of how they are racially classified, share 99.9
percent of their DNA? This finding by the Human Genome Project asserts that race is a social construct, not a
biological one. The American Anthropological Association agrees, stating that race is the product of "historical
and contemporary social, economic, educational, and political circumstances" (Allen, 2011). Therefore, we'll
define race as a socially constructed category based on differences in appearance that has been used to create
hierarchies that privilege some and disadvantage others.
Race didn't become a socially and culturally recognized marker until European colonial expansion in the
1500s. As Western Europeans traveled to parts of the world previously unknown to them and encountered
people who were different from them, a hierarchy of races began to develop that placed lighter skinned
Europeans above darker skinned people. At the time, newly developing fields in natural and biological sciences
took interest in examining the new locales, including the plant and animal life, natural resources, and native
populations. Over the next three hundred years, science that we would now undoubtedly recognize as flawed,
biased, and racist legitimated notions that native populations were less evolved than white Europeans, often
calling them savages. In fact, there were scientific debates as to whether some of the native populations should
be considered human or animal. Racial distinctions have been based largely on phenotypes, or physiological
features such as skin color, hair texture, and body/facial features. Western "scientists" used these differences
as "proof" that native populations were less evolved than the Europeans, which helped justify colonial
expansion, enslavement, genocide, and exploitation on massive scales (Allen, 2011). Even though there is a
consensus among experts that race is social rather than biological, we can't deny that race still has meaning in
our society and affects people as if it were "real."

   Given that race is one of the first things we notice about someone, it's important to know how race
and communication relate (Allen, 2011). Discussing race in the United States is difficult for many reasons.
One is due to uncertainty about language use. People may be frustrated by their perception that labels
change too often or be afraid of using an "improper" term and being viewed as racially insensitive. It is
important, however, that we not let political correctness get in the way of meaningful dialogues and learning
opportunities related to difference. Learning some of the communicative history of race can make us more
competent communicators and open us up to more learning experiences.

   Racial classifications used by the government and our regular communication about race in the United
States have changed frequently, which further points to the social construction of race. Currently, the primary
racial groups in the United States are African American, Asian American, European American, Latino/a, and
Native American, but a brief look at changes in how the US Census Bureau has defined race clearly shows that
this hasn't always been the case (see graphic below). In the 1900s alone, there were twenty-six different ways
that race was categorized on census forms (Allen, 2011). The way we communicate about race in our regular
interactions has also changed, and many people are still hesitant to discuss race for fear of using "the wrong"
vocabulary.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 186
187 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Source: Adapted from Brenda J. Allen, Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity (Long Grove, IL:
Waveland Press, 2011), 71-72.

The five primary racial groups noted previously can still be broken down further to specify a particular region,
country, or nation. For example, Asian Americans are diverse in terms of country and language of origin and
cultural practices. While the category of Asian Americans can be useful when discussing broad trends, it can
also generalize among groups, which can lead to stereotypes. You may find that someone identifies as Chinese
American or Korean American instead of Asian American. In this case, the label further highlights a person's
cultural lineage. We should not assume, however, that someone identifies with his or her cultural lineage, as
many people have more in common with their US American peers than a culture that may be one or more
generations removed.

   History and personal preference also influence how we communicate about race. Culture and
communication scholar Brenda Allen notes that when she was born in 1950, her birth certificate included an
N for Negro. Later she referred to herself as colored because that's what people in her community referred to
themselves as. During and before this time, the term black had negative connotations and would likely have
offended someone. There was a movement in the 1960s to reclaim the word black, and the slogan "black is
beautiful" was commonly used. Brenda Allen acknowledges the newer label of African American but notes that
she still prefers black. The terms colored and Negro are no longer considered appropriate because they were
commonly used during a time when black people were blatantly discriminated against. Even though that
history may seem far removed to some, it is not to others. Currently, the terms African American and black are
frequently used, and both are considered acceptable. The phrase people of color is acceptable for most and is
used to be inclusive of other racial minorities. If you are unsure what to use, you could always observe how
a person refers to himself or herself, or you could ask for his or her preference. In any case, a competent
communicator defers to and respects the preference of the individual.

   The label Latin American generally refers to people who live in Central American countries. Although Spain
colonized much of what is now South and Central America and parts of the Caribbean, the inhabitants of these
areas are now much more diverse. Depending on the region or country, some people primarily trace their
lineage to the indigenous people who lived in these areas before colonization, or to a Spanish and indigenous
lineage, or to other combinations that may include European, African, and/or indigenous heritage. Latina and
Latino are labels that are preferable to Hispanic for many who live in the United States and trace their lineage
to South and/or Central America and/or parts of the Caribbean. Scholars who study Latina/o identity often
use the label Latina/o in their writing to acknowledge women who avow that identity label (Calafell, 2007). In
verbal communication you might say "Latina" when referring to a particular female or "Latino" when referring
to a particular male of Latin American heritage. When referring to the group as a whole, you could say "Latinas
and Latinos" instead of just "Latinos," which would be more gender inclusive. While Hispanic is used by the US
Census, it refers primarily to people of Spanish origin, which doesn't account for the diversity of background
of many Latinos/as. The term Hispanic also highlights the colonizer's influence over the indigenous, which
erases a history that is important to many. Additionally, there are people who claim Spanish origins and
identify culturally as Hispanic but racially as white. Labels such as Puerto Rican or Mexican American, which
further specify region or country of origin, may also be used. Just as with other cultural groups, if you are
unsure of how to refer to someone, you can always ask for and honor someone's preference.

   The history of immigration in the United States also ties to the way that race has been constructed. The
metaphor of the melting pot has been used to describe the immigration history of the United States but
doesn't capture the experiences of many immigrant groups (Allen, 2011). Generally, immigrant groups who
were white, or light skinned, and spoke English were better able to assimilate, or melt into the melting pot. But

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 188
immigrant groups that we might think of as white today were not always considered so. Irish immigrants were
discriminated against and even portrayed as black in cartoons that appeared in newspapers. In some Southern
states, Italian immigrants were forced to go to black schools, and it wasn't until 1952 that Asian immigrants
were allowed to become citizens of the United States. All this history is important, because it continues to
influence communication among races today.

               INTERRACIAL COMMUNICATION

Race and communication are related in various ways. Racism influences our communication about race and
is not an easy topic for most people to discuss. Today, people tend to view racism as overt acts such as calling
someone a derogatory name or discriminating against someone in thought or action. However, there is a
difference between racist acts, which we can attach to an individual, and institutional racism, which is not as
easily identifiable. It is much easier for people to recognize and decry racist actions than it is to realize that
racist patterns and practices go through societal institutions, which means that racism exists and doesn't have
to be committed by any one person. As competent communicators and critical thinkers, we must challenge
ourselves to be aware of how racism influences our communication at individual and societal levels.

   We tend to make assumptions about people's race based on how they talk, and often these assumptions
are based on stereotypes. Dominant groups tend to define what is correct or incorrect usage of a language,
and since language is so closely tied to identity, labeling a group's use of a language as incorrect or deviant
challenges or negates part of their identity (Yancy, 2011). We know there isn't only one way to speak English,
but there have been movements to identify a standard. This becomes problematic when we realize that
"standard English" refers to a way of speaking English that is based on white, middle-class ideals that do
not match up with the experiences of many. When we create a standard for English, we can label anything
that deviates from that "nonstandard English." Differences between standard English and what has been
called "Black English" have gotten national attention through debates about whether or not instruction in
classrooms should accommodate students who do not speak standard English. Education plays an important
role in language acquisition, and class relates to access to education. In general, whether someone speaks
standard English themselves or not, they tend to negatively judge people whose speech deviates from the
standard.

   Another national controversy has revolved around the inclusion of Spanish in common language use, such
as Spanish as an option at ATMs, or other automated services, and Spanish language instruction in school for
students who don't speak or are learning to speak English. As was noted earlier, the Latino/a population in
the United States is growing fast, which has necessitated inclusion of Spanish in many areas of public life.
This has also created a backlash, which some scholars argue is tied more to the race of the immigrants than
the language they speak and a fear that white America could be engulfed by other languages and cultures
(Speicher, 2002). This backlash has led to a revived movement to make English the official language of the
United States.
The US Constitution does not stipulate a national language, and Congress has not designated one either.
While nearly thirty states have passed English-language legislation, it has mostly been symbolic, and court

189 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
rulings have limited any enforceability (Zuckerman, 2010). The Linguistic Society of America points out that
immigrants are very aware of the social and economic advantages of learning English and do not need to be
forced. They also point out that the United States has always had many languages represented, that national
unity hasn't rested on a single language, and that there are actually benefits to having a population that is
multilingual (Linguistic Society of America, 2011). Interracial communication presents some additional verbal
challenges.

   Code-switching involves changing from one way of speaking to another between or within interactions.
Some people of color may engage in code-switching when communicating with dominant group members
because they fear they will be negatively judged. Adopting the language practices of the dominant group
may minimize perceived differences. This code-switching creates a linguistic dual consciousness in which
people are able to maintain their linguistic identities with their in-group peers but can still acquire tools and
gain access needed to function in dominant society (Yancy, 2011). White people may also feel anxious about
communicating with people of color out of fear of being perceived as racist. In other situations, people in
dominant groups may spotlight nondominant members by asking them to comment on or educate others
about their race (Allen, 2011). For example, I once taught at a private university that was predominantly white.
Students of color talked to me about being asked by professors to weigh in on an issue when discussions
of race came up in the classroom. While a professor may have been well-intentioned, spotlighting can make
a student feel conspicuous, frustrated, or defensive. Additionally, I bet the professors wouldn't think about
asking a white, male, or heterosexual student to give the perspective of their whole group.

                            GENDER

When we first meet a newborn baby, we ask whether it's a boy or a girl. This question illustrates the importance
of gender in organizing our social lives and our interpersonal relationships. A Canadian family became aware
of the deep emotions people feel about gender and the great discomfort people feel when they can't determine
gender when they announced to the world that they were not going to tell anyone the gender of their baby,
aside from the baby's siblings. Their desire for their child, named Storm, to be able to experience early
life without the boundaries and categories of gender brought criticism from many (Davis & James, 2011).
Conversely, many parents consciously or unconsciously "code" their newborns in gendered ways based on our
society's associations of pink clothing and accessories with girls and blue with boys. While it's obvious to most
people that colors aren't gendered, they take on new meaning when we assign gendered characteristics of
masculinity and femininity to them. Just like race, gender is a socially constructed category. While it is true
that there are biological differences between who we label male and female, the meaning our society places on
those differences is what actually matters in our day-to-day lives. And the biological differences are interpreted
differently around the world, which further shows that although we think gender is a natural, normal, stable
way of classifying things, it is actually not. There is a long history of appreciation for people who cross gender
lines in Native American and South Central Asian cultures, to name just two.

   You may have noticed I use the word gender instead of sex. That's because gender is an identity based
on internalized cultural notions of masculinity and femininity that is constructed through communication

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 190
and interaction. There are two important parts of this definition to unpack. First, we internalize notions
of gender based on socializing institutions, which helps us form our gender identity. Then we attempt to
construct that gendered identity through our interactions with others, which is our gender expression. Sex
is based on biological characteristics, including external genitalia, internal sex organs, chromosomes, and
hormones (Wood, 2005). While the biological characteristics between men and women are obviously different,
it's the meaning that we create and attach to those characteristics that makes them significant. The cultural
differences in how that significance is ascribed are proof that "our way of doing things" is arbitrary. For
example, cross-cultural research has found that boys and girls in most cultures show both aggressive and
nurturing tendencies, but cultures vary in terms of how they encourage these characteristics between genders.
In a group in Africa, young boys are responsible for taking care of babies and are encouraged to be nurturing
(Wood, 2005).

   Gender has been constructed over the past few centuries in political and deliberate ways that have tended
to favor men in terms of power. And various academic fields joined in the quest to "prove" there are "natural"
differences between men and women. While the "proof" they presented was credible to many at the time, it
seems blatantly sexist and inaccurate today. In the late 1800s and early 1900s, scientists who measure skulls,
also known as craiometrists, claimed that men were more intelligent than women because they had larger
brains. Leaders in the fast-growing fields of sociology and psychology argued that women were less evolved
than men and had more in common with "children and savages" than an adult (white) males (Allen, 2011).
Doctors and other decision makers like politicians also used women's menstrual cycles as evidence that they
were irrational, or hysterical, and therefore couldn't be trusted to vote, pursue higher education, or be in a
leadership position. These are just a few of the many instances of how knowledge was created by seemingly
legitimate scientific disciplines that we can now clearly see served to empower men and disempower women.
This system is based on the ideology of patriarchy, which is a system of social structures and practices that
maintains the values, priorities, and interests of men as a group (Wood, 2005). One of the ways patriarchy
is maintained is by its relative invisibility. While women have been the focus of much research on gender
differences, males have been largely unexamined. Men have been treated as the "generic" human being to
which others are compared. But that ignores that fact that men have a gender, too. Masculinities studies have
challenged that notion by examining how masculinities are performed.

   There have been challenges to the construction of gender in recent decades. Since the 1960s, scholars and
activists have challenged established notions of what it means to be a man or a woman. The women's rights
movement in the United States dates back to the 1800s, when the first women's rights convention was held
in Seneca Falls, New York, in 1848 (Wood, 2005). Although most women's rights movements have been led
by white, middle-class women, there was overlap between those involved in the abolitionist movement to
end slavery and the beginnings of the women's rights movement. Although some of the leaders of the early
women's rights movement had class and education privilege, they were still taking a risk by organizing and
protesting. Black women were even more at risk, and Sojourner Truth, an emancipated slave, faced those
risks often and gave a much noted extemporaneous speech at a women's rights gathering in Akron, Ohio, in
1851, which came to be called "Ain't I a Woman?" (Wood, 2005) Her speech highlighted the multiple layers of
oppression faced by black women.

Feminism as an intellectual and social movement advanced women's rights and our overall understanding of
gender. Feminism has gotten a bad reputation based on how it has been portrayed in the media and by some
politicians. When I teach courses about gender, I often ask my students to raise their hand if they consider
themselves feminists. I usually only have a few, if any, who do. I've found that students I teach are hesitant to
identify as a feminist because of connotations of the word. However, when I ask students to raise their hand if

191 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
they believe women have been treated unfairly and that there should be more equity, most students raise their
hand. Gender and communication scholar Julia Wood has found the same trend and explains that a desire to
make a more equitable society for everyone is at the root of feminism. She shares comments from a student
that capture this disconnect: (Wood, 2005).

      I would never call myself a feminist, because that word has so many negative connotations. I don't hate men or anything,
and I'm not interested in protesting. I don't want to go around with hacked-off hair and no makeup and sit around bashing
men. I do think women should have the same kinds of rights, including equal pay for equal work. But I wouldn't call myself a
feminist.

   It's important to remember that there are many ways to be a feminist and to realize that some of the
stereotypes about feminism are rooted in sexism and homophobia, in that feminists are reduced to "men
haters" and often presumed to be lesbians. The feminist movement also gave some momentum to the
transgender rights movement. Transgender is an umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or
expression do not match the gender they were assigned by birth. Transgender people may or may not seek
medical intervention like surgery or hormone treatments to help match their physiology with their gender
identity. The term transgender includes other labels such as transsexual, transvestite, cross-dresser, and intersex,
among others. Terms like hermaphrodite and she-male are not considered appropriate. As with other groups, it
is best to allow someone to self-identify first and then honor their preferred label. If you are unsure of which
pronouns to use when addressing someone, you can use gender-neutral language or you can use the pronoun
that matches with how they are presenting. If someone has long hair, make-up, and a dress on, but you think
their biological sex is male due to other cues, it would be polite to address them with female pronouns, since
that is the gender identity they are expressing.

   Gender as a cultural identity has implications for many aspects of our lives, including real-world contexts
like education and work. Schools are primary grounds for socialization, and the educational experience for
males and females is different in many ways from preschool through college. Although not always intentional,
schools tend to recreate the hierarchies and inequalities that exist in society. Given that we live in a patriarchal
society, there are communicative elements present in school that support this (Allen, 2011). For example,
teachers are more likely to call on and pay attention to boys in a classroom, giving them more feedback in
the form of criticism, praise, and help. This sends an implicit message that boys are more worthy of attention
and valuable than girls. Teachers are also more likely to lead girls to focus on feelings and appearance and
boys to focus on competition and achievement. The focus on appearance for girls can lead to anxieties about
body image. Gender inequalities are also evident in the administrative structure of schools, which puts men
in positions of authority more than women. While women make up 75 percent of the educational workforce,
only 22 percent of superintendents and 8 percent of high school principals are women. Similar trends exist
in colleges and universities, with women only accounting for 26 percent of full professors. These inequalities
in schools correspond to larger inequalities in the general workforce. While there are more women in the
workforce now than ever before, they still face a glass ceiling, which is a barrier for promotion to upper
management. Many of my students have been surprised at the continuing pay gap that exists between men
and women. In 2010, women earned about seventy-seven cents to every dollar earned by men (National
Committee on Pay Equity, 2011). To put this into perspective, the National Committee on Pay Equity started
an event called Equal Pay Day. In 2011, Equal Pay Day was on April 11. This signifies that for a woman to earn
the same amount of money a man earned in a year, she would have to work more than three months extra,
until April 11, to make up for the difference (National Committee on Pay Equity, 2011).

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 192
                           SEXUALITY

While race and gender are two of the first things we notice about others, sexuality is often something we view
as personal and private. Although many people hold a view that a person's sexuality should be kept private, this
isn't a reality for our society. One only needs to observe popular culture and media for a short time to see that
sexuality permeates much of our public discourse.

   Sexuality relates to culture and identity in important ways that extend beyond sexual orientation, just
as race is more than the color of one's skin and gender is more than one's biological and physiological
manifestations of masculinity and femininity. Sexuality isn't just physical; it is social in that we communicate
with others about sexuality (Allen, 2011). Sexuality is also biological in that it connects to physiological
functions that carry significant social and political meaning like puberty, menstruation, and pregnancy.
Sexuality connects to public health issues like sexually transmitted infections (STIs), sexual assault, sexual
abuse, sexual harassment, and teen pregnancy. Sexuality is at the center of political issues like abortion, sex
education, and gay and lesbian rights. While all these contribute to sexuality as a cultural identity, the focus in
this section is on sexual orientation.

   The most obvious way sexuality relates to identity is through sexual orientation. Sexual orientation refers
to a person's primary physical and emotional sexual attraction and activity. The terms we most often use
to categorize sexual orientation are heterosexual, gay, lesbian, and bisexual. Gays, lesbians, and bisexuals are
sometimes referred to as sexual minorities. While the term sexual preference has been used previously, sexual
orientation is more appropriate, since preference implies a simple choice. Although someone's preference for a
restaurant or actor may change frequently, sexuality is not as simple. The term homosexual can be appropriate
in some instances, but it carries with it a clinical and medicalized tone. As you will see in the timeline that
follows, the medical community has a recent history of "treating homosexuality" with means that most would
view as inhumane today. So many people prefer a term like gay, which was chosen and embraced by gay
people, rather than homosexual, which was imposed by a then discriminatory medical system.

   The gay and lesbian rights movement became widely recognizable in the United States in the 1950s and
continues on today, as evidenced by prominent issues regarding sexual orientation in national news and
politics. National and international groups like the Human Rights Campaign advocate for rights for gay,
lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and queer (GLBTQ) communities. While these communities are often grouped
together within one acronym (GLBTQ), they are different. Gays and lesbians constitute the most visible of the
groups and receive the most attention and funding. Bisexuals are rarely visible or included in popular cultural
discourses or in social and political movements. Transgender issues have received much more attention in
recent years, but transgender identity connects to gender more than it does to sexuality. Last, queer is a term
used to describe a group that is diverse in terms of identities but usually takes a more activist and at times
radical stance that critiques sexual categories. While queer was long considered a derogatory label, and still
is by some, the queer activist movement that emerged in the 1980s and early 1990s reclaimed the word and
embraced it as a positive. As you can see, there is a diversity of identities among sexual minorities, just as there
is variation within races and genders.

   As with other cultural identities, notions of sexuality have been socially constructed in different ways
throughout human history. Sexual orientation didn't come into being as an identity category until the late
1800s. Before that, sexuality was viewed in more physical or spiritual senses that were largely separate from
a person's identity.The graphic below traces some of the developments relevant to sexuality, identity, and
communication that show how this cultural identity has been constructed over the past 3,000 years.

193 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 194
Source: Adapted from Brenda J. Allen, Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity (Long Grove, IL:
Waveland Press, 2011), 117-25; and University of Denver Queer and Ally Commission, "Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Transgender, Intersex, and Queer History," Queer Ally Training Manual, 2008.

                             ABILITY

There is resistance to classifying ability as a cultural identity, because we follow a medical model of disability
that places disability as an individual and medical rather than social and cultural issue. While much of what
distinguishes able-bodied and cognitively able from disabled is rooted in science, biology, and physiology,
there are important sociocultural dimensions. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) defines an individual
with a disability as "a person who has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities, a person who has a history or record of such an impairment, or a person who is
perceived by others as having such an impairment" (Allen, 2011). An impairment is defined as "any temporary
or permanent loss or abnormality of a body structure or function, whether physiological or psychological"
(Allen, 2011). This definition is important because it notes the social aspect of disability in that people's life
activities are limited and the relational aspect of disability in that the perception of a disability by others
can lead someone to be classified as such. Ascribing an identity of disabled to a person can be problematic.
If there is a mental or physical impairment, it should be diagnosed by a credentialed expert. If there isn't
an impairment, then the label of disabled can have negative impacts, as this label carries social and cultural
significance. People are tracked into various educational programs based on their physical and cognitive
abilities, and there are many cases of people being mistakenly labeled disabled who were treated differently
despite their protest of the ascribed label. Students who did not speak English as a first language, for example,
were--and perhaps still are--sometimes put into special education classes.

   Ability, just as the other cultural identities discussed, has institutionalized privileges and disadvantages
associated with it. Ableism is the system of beliefs and practices that produces a physical and mental standard
that is projected as normal for a human being and labels deviations from it abnormal, resulting in unequal
treatment and access to resources. Ability privilege refers to the unearned advantages that are provided
for people who fit the cognitive and physical norms (Allen, 2011). I once attended a workshop about ability
privilege led by a man who was visually impaired. He talked about how, unlike other cultural identities that are
typically stable over a lifetime, ability fluctuates for most people. We have all experienced times when we are
more or less able.

   Perhaps you broke your leg and had to use crutches or a wheelchair for a while. Getting sick for a prolonged
period of time also lessens our abilities, but we may fully recover from any of these examples and regain our
ability privilege. Whether you've experienced a short-term disability or not, the majority of us will become less
physically and cognitively able as we get older.

   Statistically, people with disabilities make up the largest minority group in the United States, with an
estimated 20 percent of people five years or older living with some form of disability (Allen, 2011). Medical
advances have allowed some people with disabilities to live longer and more active lives than before, which
has led to an increase in the number of people with disabilities. This number could continue to increase, as

195 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
we have thousands of veterans returning from the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan with physical disabilities or
psychological impairments such as post-traumatic stress disorder.

As disability has been constructed in US history, it has intersected with other cultural identities. For example,
people opposed to "political and social equality for women cited their supposed physical, intellectual, and
psychological flaws, deficits, and deviations from the male norm." They framed women as emotional,
irrational, and unstable, which was used to put them into the "scientific" category of "feeblemindedness,"
which led them to be institutionalized (Carlson, 2001). Arguments supporting racial inequality and tighter
immigration restrictions also drew on notions of disability, framing certain racial groups as prone to mental
retardation, mental illness, or uncontrollable emotions and actions. See the graphic below for a timeline of
developments related to ability, identity, and communication. These thoughts led to a dark time in US history,
as the eugenics movement sought to limit reproduction of people deemed as deficient.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 196
197 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Source: Maggie Shreve, "The Movement for Independent Living: A Brief History," Independent Living Research
Utilization, accessed October 14, 2011, http://ilru.org/html/publications/infopaks/IL_paradigm.doc.

During the early part of the 1900s, the eugenics movement was the epitome of the move to rehabilitate or reject
people with disabilities (Allen, 2005). This was a brand of social engineering that was indicative of a strong
public support in the rationality of science to cure society's problems (Allen, 2011). A sterilization law written
in 1914 "proposed to authorize sterilization of the socially inadequate," which included the "feebleminded,
insane, criminalistic, epileptic, inebriate, diseased, blind, deaf, deformed, and dependent" (Lombardo, 2011).
During the eugenics movement in the United States, more than sixty thousand people in thirty-three states
were involuntarily sterilized (Allen, 2011). Although the eugenics movement as it was envisioned and enacted
then is unthinkable today, some who have studied the eugenics movement of the early 1900s have issued
warnings that a newly packaged version of eugenics could be upon us. As human genome mapping and DNA
manipulation become more accessible, advanced genetic testing could enable parents to eliminate undesirable
aspects or enhance desirable characteristics of their children before they are born, creating "designer children"
(Spice, 2005).

   Much has changed for people with disabilities in the United States in the past fifty years. The independent
living movement (ILM) was a part of the disability rights movement that took shape along with other social
movements of the 1960s and 1970s. The ILM calls for more individual and collective action toward social
change by people with disabilities. Some of the goals of the ILM include reframing disability as a social and
political rather than just a medical issue, a shift toward changing society rather than just rehabilitating people
with disabilities, a view of accommodations as civil rights rather than charity, and more involvement by people
with disabilities in the formulation and execution of policies relating to them (Longmore, 2003). As society
better adapts to people with disabilities, there will be more instances of interability communication taking
place.

   Interability communication is communication between people with differing ability levels; for example,
a hearing person communicating with someone who is hearing impaired or a person who doesn't use a
wheelchair communicating with someone who uses a wheelchair. Since many people are unsure of how
to communicate with a person with disabilities, following are the "Ten Commandments of Etiquette for
Communicating with People with Disabilities" to help you in communicating with persons with disabilities:1

    1. When talking with a person with a disability, speak directly to that person rather than through a
         companion or sign-language interpreter.

    2. When introduced to a person with a disability, it is appropriate to offer to shake hands. People with
         limited hand use or an artificial limb can usually shake hands. (Shaking hands with the left hand is an
         acceptable greeting.)

    3. When meeting a person who is visually impaired, always identify yourself and others who may be
         with you. When conversing in a group, remember to identify the person to whom you are speaking.

    4. If you offer assistance, wait until the offer is accepted. Then listen to or ask for instructions.

    5. Treat adults as adults. Address people who have disabilities by their first names only when extending
         the same familiarity to all others. (Never patronize people who use wheelchairs by patting them on the
         head or shoulder.)

    6. Leaning on or hanging on to a person's wheelchair is similar to leaning or hanging on to a person and

1. "Effective Interaction: Communication with and about People with Disabilities in the Workplace," accessed November 5, 2012,
      http://www.dol.gov/odep/pubs/fact/effectiveinteraction.htm#.UJgp8RjqJJ8.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 198
         is generally considered annoying. The chair is part of the personal body space of the person who uses
         it.

    7. Listen attentively when you're talking with a person who has difficulty speaking. Be patient and wait
         for the person to finish, rather than correcting or speaking for the person. If necessary, ask short
         questions that require short answers, a nod, or a shake of the head. Never pretend to understand if
         you are having difficulty doing so. Instead, repeat what you have understood and allow the person to
         respond. The response will clue you in and guide your understanding.

    8. When speaking with a person who uses a wheelchair or a person who uses crutches, place yourself at
         eye level in front of the person to facilitate the conversation.

    9. To get the attention of a person who is deaf, tap the person on the shoulder or wave your hand. Look
         directly at the person and speak clearly, slowly, and expressively to determine if the person can read
         your lips. Not all people who are deaf can read lips. For those who do lip read, be sensitive to their
         needs by placing yourself so that you face the light source and keep hands, cigarettes, and food away
         from your mouth when speaking.

   10. Relax. Don't be embarrassed if you happen to use accepted, common expressions such as "See you
         later" or "Did you hear about that?" that seem to relate to a person's disability. Don't be afraid to ask
         questions when you're unsure of what to do.

                                             References

Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2005), 145.
   Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity, 2nd ed. (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2011), 12.
   Allen, G. E., "Social Origins of Eugenics," Eugenics Archive, accessed October 16, 2011,

http://www.eugenicsarchive.org/eugenics/list2.pl.
   Calafell, B. M., Latina/o Communication Studies: Theorizing Performance (New York: Peter Lang, 2007), 1-9.
   Carlson, L., "Cognitive Ableism and Disability Studies: Feminist Reflections on the History of Mental

Retardation," Hypatia 16, no. 4 (2001): 127.
   Davis, L., and Susan Donaldson James, "Canadian Mother Raising Her `Genderless' Baby, Storm, Defends

Her Family's Decision," ABC News, May 30, 2011, accessed October 12, 2011, http://abcnews.go.com/Health/
genderless-baby-controversy-mom -defends-choice-reveal-sex/story?id=13718047.

   Linguistic Society of America, "Resolution: English Only," December 28, 1986, accessed October 12, 2011,
http://www.lsadc.org/info/lsa-res-english.cfm.

   Lombardo, P., "Eugenic Sterilization Laws," Eugenics Archive, accessed October 16, 2011,
http://www.eugenicsarchive.org/eugenics/list2.pl.

   Longmore, P. K., Why I Burned My Book and Other Essays on Disability (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press, 2003), 114.

   National Committee on Pay Equity, "Wage Gap over Time," accessed October 12, 2011, http://www.pay-
equity.org/info-time.html.

   Speicher, B. L., "Problems with English-Only Policies," Management Communication Quarterly 15, no. 4 (2002):
621.

   Spice, B., "Duquesne Focuses on the Perils of Modern `Eugenics'" Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, February 7, 2005,
accessed October 16, 2011, http://www.post-gazette.com/pg/05038/453781.stm.

199 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Wood, J. T., Gendered Lives: Communication, Gender, and Culture, 5th ed. (Belmont, CA: Thomas Wadsworth,
2005), 19.

   Yancy, G., "The Scholar Who Coined the Term Ebonics: A Conversation with Dr. Robert L. Williams," Journal
of Language, Identity, and Education 10, no. 1 (2011): 41-51.

   Zuckerman, M. A., "Constitutional Clash: When English-Only Meets Voting Rights," Yale Law and Policy
Review 28 (2010): 353-54.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 200
          6.4 Intercultural Communication

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1617#audio-1617-1

             "The beauty of the world lies in the diversity of its people." -Unknown
It is through intercultural communication that we come to create, understand, and

201 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
transform culture and identity. Intercultural communication is communication
between people with differing cultural identities. One reason we should study
intercultural communication is to foster greater self-awareness (Martin & Nakayama,
2010). Our thought process regarding culture is often "other focused," meaning that
the culture of the other person or group is what stands out in our perception.
However, the old adage "know thyself" is appropriate, as we become more aware
of our own culture by better understanding other cultures and perspectives.
Intercultural communication can allow us to step outside of our comfortable, usual
frame of reference and see our culture through a different lens. Additionally, as we
become more self-aware, we may also become more ethical communicators as we
challenge our ethnocentrism, or our tendency to view our own culture as superior to
other cultures.

   Difference matters, and studying intercultural communication can help us better negotiate our changing
world. Changing economies and technologies intersect with culture in meaningful ways (Martin &
Nakayama). As was noted earlier, technology has created for some a global village where vast distances are now
much shorter due to new technology that make travel and communication more accessible and convenient
(McLuhan, 1967). However, as the following "Getting Plugged In" box indicates, there is also a digital divide,
which refers to the unequal access to technology and related skills that exists in much of the world. People in
most fields will be more successful if they are prepared to work in a globalized world. Obviously, the global
market sets up the need to have intercultural competence for employees who travel between locations of a
multinational corporation. Perhaps less obvious may be the need for teachers to work with students who do
not speak English as their first language and for police officers, lawyers, managers, and medical personnel to
be able to work with people who have various cultural identities.

    INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION: A DIALECTICAL
                           APPROACH

Intercultural communication is complicated, messy, and at times contradictory. Therefore it is not always easy
to conceptualize or study. Taking a dialectical approach allows us to capture the dynamism of intercultural
communication. A dialectic is a relationship between two opposing concepts that constantly push and pull
one another (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). To put it another way, thinking dialectically helps us realize that
our experiences often occur in between two different phenomena. This perspective is especially useful for
interpersonal and intercultural communication, because when we think dialectically, we think relationally.
This means we look at the relationship between aspects of intercultural communication rather than viewing
them in isolation. Intercultural communication occurs as a dynamic in-betweenness that, while connected to
the individuals in an encounter, goes beyond the individuals, creating something unique. Holding a dialectical

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 202
perspective may be challenging for some Westerners, as it asks us to hold two contradictory ideas
simultaneously, which goes against much of what we are taught in our formal education. Thinking
dialectically helps us see the complexity in culture and identity because it doesn't allow for dichotomies.
Dichotomies are dualistic ways of thinking that highlight opposites, reducing the ability to see gradations
that exist in between concepts. Dichotomies such as good/evil, wrong/right, objective/subjective, male/female,
in-group/out-group, black/white, and so on form the basis of much of our thoughts on ethics, culture, and
general philosophy, but this isn't the only way of thinking (Marin & Nakayama, 1999). Many Eastern cultures
acknowledge that the world isn't dualistic. Rather, they accept as part of their reality that things that seem
opposite are actually interdependent and complement each other. I argue that a dialectical approach is useful
in studying intercultural communication because it gets us out of our comfortable and familiar ways of
thinking. Since so much of understanding culture and identity is understanding ourselves, having an
unfamiliar lens through which to view culture can offer us insights that our familiar lenses will not.
Specifically, we can better understand intercultural communication by examining six dialectics (see the
graphic below) (Martin & Nakayama, 1999).

Cultural-Individual Dialectic

The cultural-individual dialectic captures the interplay between patterned behaviors learned from a cultural
group and individual behaviors that may be variations on or counter to those of the larger culture. This
dialectic is useful because it helps us account for exceptions to cultural norms. For example, earlier we learned
that the United States is said to be a low-context culture, which means that we value verbal communication
as our primary, meaning-rich form of communication. Conversely, Japan is said to be a high-context culture,

203 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
which means they often look for nonverbal clues like tone, silence, or what is not said for meaning. However,
you can find people in the United States who intentionally put much meaning into how they say things,
perhaps because they are not as comfortable speaking directly what's on their mind. We often do this in
situations where we may hurt someone's feelings or damage a relationship. Does that mean we come from a
high-context culture? Does the Japanese man who speaks more than is socially acceptable come from a low-
context culture? The answer to both questions is no. Neither the behaviors of a small percentage of individuals
nor occasional situational choices constitute a cultural pattern.

Personal-Contextual Dialectic

The personal-contextual dialectic highlights the connection between our personal patterns of and preferences
for communicating and how various contexts influence the personal. In some cases, our communication
patterns and preferences will stay the same across many contexts. In other cases, a context shift may lead us to
alter our communication and adapt. For example, an American businesswoman may prefer to communicate
with her employees in an informal and laid-back manner. When she is promoted to manage a department in
her company's office in Malaysia, she may again prefer to communicate with her new Malaysian employees
the same way she did with those in the United States. In the United States, we know that there are some
accepted norms that communication in work contexts is more formal than in personal contexts. However, we
also know that individual managers often adapt these expectations to suit their own personal tastes. This type
of managerial discretion would likely not go over as well in Malaysia where there is a greater emphasis put on
power distance (Hofstede, 1991). So while the American manager may not know to adapt to the new context
unless she has a high degree of intercultural communication competence, Malaysian managers would realize
that this is an instance where the context likely influences communication more than personal preferences.

Differences-Similarities Dialectic

The differences-similarities dialectic allows us to examine how we are simultaneously similar to and different
from others. As was noted earlier, it's easy to fall into a view of intercultural communication as "other
oriented" and set up dichotomies between "us" and "them." When we over-focus on differences, we can end up
polarizing groups that actually have things in common. When we over-focus on similarities, we essentialize,
or reduce/overlook important variations within a group. This tendency is evident in most of the popular,
and some of the academic, conversations regarding "gender differences." The book Men Are from Mars and
Women Are from Venus makes it seem like men and women aren't even species that hail from the same planet.
The media is quick to include a blurb from a research study indicating again how men and women are
"wired" to communicate differently. However, the overwhelming majority of current research on gender and
communication finds that while there are differences between how men and women communicate, there are
far more similarities (Allen, 2011). Even the language we use to describe the genders sets up dichotomies.
That's why I suggest that my students use the term other gender instead of the commonly used opposite sex. I
have a mom, a sister, and plenty of female friends, and I don't feel like any of them are the opposite of me.
Perhaps a better title for a book would be Women and Men Are Both from Earth.

Static-Dynamic Dialectic

The static-dynamic dialectic suggests that culture and communication change over time yet often appear to be
and are experienced as stable. Although it is true that our cultural beliefs and practices are rooted in the past,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 204
we have already discussed how cultural categories that most of us assume to be stable, like race and gender,
have changed dramatically in just the past fifty years. Some cultural values remain relatively consistent over
time, which allows us to make some generalizations about a culture. For example, cultures have different
orientations to time. The Chinese have a longer-term orientation to time than do Europeans (Lustig & Koester,
2006). This is evidenced in something that dates back as far as astrology. The Chinese zodiac is done annually
(The Year of the Monkey, etc.), while European astrology was organized by month (Taurus, etc.). While this
cultural orientation to time has been around for generations, as China becomes more Westernized in terms of
technology, business, and commerce, it could also adopt some views on time that are more short term.

History/Past-Present/Future Dialectic

The history/past-present/future dialectic reminds us to understand that while current cultural conditions
are important and that our actions now will inevitably affect our future, those conditions are not without
a history. We always view history through the lens of the present. Perhaps no example is more entrenched
in our past and avoided in our present as the history of slavery in the United States. Where I grew up in
the Southern United States, race was something that came up frequently. The high school I attended was 30
percent minorities (mostly African American) and also had a noticeable number of white teens (mostly male)
who proudly displayed Confederate flags on their clothing or vehicles.

  I remember an instance in a history class where we were discussing slavery and the
subject of repatriation, or compensation for descendants of slaves, came up. A white
male student in the class proclaimed, "I've never owned slaves. Why should I have to
care about this now?" While his statement about not owning slaves is valid, it doesn't
acknowledge that effects of slavery still linger today and that the repercussions of
such a long and unjust period of our history don't disappear over the course of a few
generations.

Privileges-Disadvantages Dialectic

The privileges-disadvantages dialectic captures the complex interrelation of unearned, systemic advantages
and disadvantages that operate among our various identities. As was discussed earlier, our society consists of
dominant and nondominant groups. Our cultures and identities have certain privileges and/or disadvantages.
To understand this dialectic, we must view culture and identity through a lens of intersectionality, which
asks us to acknowledge that we each have multiple cultures and identities that intersect with each other.
Because our identities are complex, no one is completely privileged and no one is completely disadvantaged.
For example, while we may think of a white, heterosexual male as being very privileged, he may also have a
disability that leaves him without the able-bodied privilege that a Latina woman has. This is often a difficult
dialectic for my students to understand, because they are quick to point out exceptions that they think
challenge this notion. For example, many people like to point out Oprah Winfrey as a powerful African
American woman. While she is definitely now quite privileged despite her disadvantaged identities, her
trajectory isn't the norm. When we view privilege and disadvantage at the cultural level, we cannot let
individual exceptions distract from the systemic and institutionalized ways in which some people in our
society are disadvantaged while others are privileged.

   As these dialectics reiterate, culture and communication are complex systems that intersect with and
diverge from many contexts. A better understanding of all these dialectics helps us be more critical thinkers
and competent communicators in a changing world.

205 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                         VIDEO CLIP 6.2

Veiled Woman Eyes French Presidency
   <a class="replaced-iframe" href="http://youtube.com/watch?v=DXh5csMHSPY" data-iframe-code="
   //youtube.com/watch?v=DXh5csMHSPY"
   ">(click to see video)

INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION AND RELATIONSHIPS

Intercultural relationships are formed between people with different cultural identities and include friends,
romantic partners, family, and coworkers. Intercultural relationships have benefits and drawbacks. Some of
the benefits include increasing cultural knowledge, challenging previously held stereotypes, and learning new
skills (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). For example, I learned about the Vietnamese New Year celebration Tet from
a friend I made in graduate school. This same friend also taught me how to make some delicious Vietnamese
foods that I continue to cook today. I likely would not have gained this cultural knowledge or skill without the
benefits of my intercultural friendship. Intercultural relationships also present challenges, however.

   The dialectics discussed earlier affect our intercultural relationships. The similarities-differences dialectic
in particular may present challenges to relationship formation (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). While differences
between people's cultural identities may be obvious, it takes some effort to uncover commonalities that can
form the basis of a relationship. Perceived differences in general also create anxiety and uncertainty that is
not as present in intracultural relationships. Once some similarities are found, the tension within the dialectic
begins to balance out and uncertainty and anxiety lessen. Negative stereotypes may also hinder progress
toward relational development, especially if the individuals are not open to adjusting their preexisting beliefs.
Intercultural relationships may also take more work to nurture and maintain. The benefit of increased cultural
awareness is often achieved, because the relational partners explain their cultures to each other. This type of
explaining requires time, effort, and patience and may be an extra burden that some are not willing to carry.
Last, engaging in intercultural relationships can lead to questioning or even backlash from one's own group. I
experienced this type of backlash from my white classmates in middle school who teased me for hanging out
with the African American kids on my bus. While these challenges range from mild inconveniences to more
serious repercussions, they are important to be aware of. As noted earlier, intercultural relationships can take
many forms. The focus of this section is on friendships and romantic relationships, but much of the following
discussion can be extended to other relationship types.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 206
               INTERCULTURAL FRIENDSHIPS

Even within the United States, views of friendship vary based on cultural identities. Research on friendship
has shown that Latinos/as value relational support and positive feedback, Asian Americans emphasize
exchanges of ideas like offering feedback or asking for guidance, African Americans value respect and mutual
acceptance, and European Americans value recognition of each other as individuals (Coller, 1996). Despite
the differences in emphasis, research also shows that the overall definition of a close friend is similar across
cultures. A close friend is thought of as someone who is helpful and nonjudgmental, who you enjoy spending
time with but can also be independent, and who shares similar interests and personality traits (Lee, 2006).

   Intercultural friendship formation may face challenges that other friendships do not. Prior intercultural
experience and overcoming language barriers increase the likelihood of intercultural friendship formation
(Sias et al., 2008). In some cases, previous intercultural experience, like studying abroad in college or living
in a diverse place, may motivate someone to pursue intercultural friendships once they are no longer in
that context. When friendships cross nationality, it may be necessary to invest more time in common
understanding, due to language barriers. With sufficient motivation and language skills, communication
exchanges through self-disclosure can then further relational formation. Research has shown that individuals
from different countries in intercultural friendships differ in terms of the topics and depth of self-disclosure,
but that as the friendship progresses, self-disclosure increases in depth and breadth (Chen & Nakazawa,
2009). Further, as people overcome initial challenges to initiating an intercultural friendship and move toward
mutual self-disclosure, the relationship becomes more intimate, which helps friends work through and move
beyond their cultural differences to focus on maintaining their relationship. In this sense, intercultural
friendships can be just as strong and enduring as other friendships (Lee, 2006).

   The potential for broadening one's perspective and learning more about cultural identities is not always
balanced, however. In some instances, members of a dominant culture may be more interested in sharing
their culture with their intercultural friend than they are in learning about their friend's culture, which
illustrates how context and power influence friendships (Lee, 2006). A research study found a similar power
dynamic, as European Americans in intercultural friendships stated they were open to exploring everyone's
culture but also communicated that culture wasn't a big part of their intercultural friendships, as they just saw
their friends as people. As the researcher states, "These types of responses may demonstrate that it is easiest
for the group with the most socioeconomic and socio-cultural power to ignore the rules, assume they have
the power as individuals to change the rules, or assume that no rules exist, since others are adapting to them
rather than vice versa" (Collier, 1996). Again, intercultural friendships illustrate the complexity of culture and
the importance of remaining mindful of your communication and the contexts in which it occurs.

         CULTURE AND ROMANTIC RELATIONSHIPS

Romantic relationships are influenced by society and culture, and still today some people face discrimination
based on who they love. Specifically, sexual orientation and race affect societal views of romantic relationships.

207 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Although the United States, as a whole, is becoming more accepting of gay and lesbian relationships, there is
still a climate of prejudice and discrimination that individuals in same-gender romantic relationships must
face. Despite some physical and virtual meeting places for gay and lesbian people, there are challenges for
meeting and starting romantic relationships that are not experienced for most heterosexual people (Peplau &
Spalding, 2000).

   As we've already discussed, romantic relationships are likely to begin due to merely being exposed to
another person at work, through a friend, and so on. But some gay and lesbian people may feel pressured
into or just feel more comfortable not disclosing or displaying their sexual orientation at work or perhaps
even to some family and friends, which closes off important social networks through which most romantic
relationships begin. This pressure to refrain from disclosing one's gay or lesbian sexual orientation in the
workplace is not unfounded, as it is still legal in twenty-nine states (as of November 2012) to fire someone for
being gay or lesbian (Human Rights Campaign, 2012). There are also some challenges faced by gay and lesbian
partners regarding relationship termination. Gay and lesbian couples do not have the same legal and societal
resources to manage their relationships as heterosexual couples; for example, gay and lesbian relationships
are not legally recognized in most states, it is more difficult for a gay or lesbian couple to jointly own property
or share custody of children than heterosexual couples, and there is little public funding for relationship
counseling or couples therapy for gay and lesbian couples.

   While this lack of barriers may make it easier for gay and lesbian partners to break out of an unhappy or
unhealthy relationship, it could also lead couples to termination who may have been helped by the sociolegal
support systems available to heterosexuals (Peplau & Spalding, 2000).

   Despite these challenges, relationships between gay and lesbian people are similar in other ways to those
between heterosexuals. Gay, lesbian, and heterosexual people seek similar qualities in a potential mate, and
once relationships are established, all these groups experience similar degrees of relational satisfaction
(Peplau & Spalding, 2000). Despite the myth that one person plays the man and one plays the woman in a
relationship, gay and lesbian partners do not have set preferences in terms of gender role. In fact, research
shows that while women in heterosexual relationships tend to do more of the housework, gay and lesbian
couples were more likely to divide tasks so that each person has an equal share of responsibility (Peplau &
Spalding, 2000). A gay or lesbian couple doesn't necessarily constitute an intercultural relationship, but as we
have already discussed, sexuality is an important part of an individual's identity and connects to larger social
and cultural systems. Keeping in mind that identity and culture are complex, we can see that gay and lesbian
relationships can also be intercultural if the partners are of different racial or ethnic backgrounds.

   While interracial relationships have occurred throughout history, there have been more historical taboos
in the United States regarding relationships between African Americans and white people than other racial
groups. Antimiscegenation laws were common in states and made it illegal for people of different racial/ethnic
groups to marry. It wasn't until 1967 that the Supreme Court ruled in the case of Loving versus Virginia, declaring
these laws to be unconstitutional (Pratt, 1995). It wasn't until 1998 and 2000, however, that South Carolina and
Alabama removed such language from their state constitutions (Lovingday.org, 2011). The organization and
website lovingday.org commemorates the landmark case and works to end racial prejudice through education.

   Even after these changes, there were more Asian-white and Latino/a-white relationships than there were
African American-white relationships (Gaines Jr. & Brennan, 2011). Having already discussed the importance
of similarity in attraction to mates, it's important to note that partners in an interracial relationship, although
culturally different, tend to be similar in occupation and income. This can likely be explained by the situational
influences on our relationship formation we discussed earlier--namely, that work tends to be a starting
ground for many of our relationships, and we usually work with people who have similar backgrounds to us.

   There has been much research on interracial couples that counters the popular notion that partners may be

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 208
less satisfied in their relationships due to cultural differences. In fact, relational satisfaction isn't significantly
different for interracial partners, although the challenges they may face in finding acceptance from other
people could lead to stressors that are not as strong for intracultural partners (Gaines Jr. & Brennan, 2011).
Although partners in interracial relationships certainly face challenges, there are positives. For example, some
mention that they've experienced personal growth by learning about their partner's cultural background,
which helps them gain alternative perspectives. Specifically, white people in interracial relationships have
cited an awareness of and empathy for racism that still exists, which they may not have been aware of before
(Gaines Jr. & Liu, 2000).

                                             References

Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity, 2nd ed. (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2011), 55.
   ben-Aaron, D., "Bringing Broadband to Finland's Bookdocks," Bloomberg Businessweek, July 19, 2010, 42.
   Chen, Y. and Masato Nakazawa, "Influences of Culture on Self-Disclosure as Relationally Situated in

Intercultural and Interracial Friendships from a Social Penetration Perspective," Journal of Intercultural
Communication Research 38, no. 2 (2009): 94. doi:10.1080/17475750903395408.

   Coller, M. J., "Communication Competence Problematics in Ethnic Friendships," Communication Monographs
63, no. 4 (1996): 324-25.

   De La Baume, M. and J. David Goodman, "First Fines over Wearing Veils in France," The New York Times (The
Lede: Blogging the News), September 22, 2011, accessed October 10, 2011, http://thelede.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/
09/22/first-fines-over -wearing-full-veils-in-france.

   Fraser, C., "The Women Defying France's Fall-Face Veil Ban," BBC News, September 22, 2011, accessed
October 10, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-15023308.

   Gaines Jr. S. O., and Kelly A. Brennan, "Establishing and Maintaining Satisfaction in Multicultural
Relationships," in Close Romantic Relationships: Maintenance and Enhancement, eds. John Harvey and Amy Wenzel
(Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 2011), 239.

   Stanley O. Gaines Jr., S. O., and James H. Liu, "Multicultural/Multiracial Relationships," in Close
Relationships: A Sourcebook, eds. Clyde Hendrick and Susan S. Hendrick (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2000), 105.

   Hofstede, G., Cultures and Organizations: Softwares of the Mind (London: McGraw-Hill, 1991), 26.
   Human Rights Campaign, "Pass ENDA NOW", accessed November 5, 2012, http://www.hrc.org/campaigns/
employment-non-discrimination-act.
   Lee, P., "Bridging Cultures: Understanding the Construction of Relational Identity in Intercultural
Friendships," Journal of Intercultural Communication Research 35, no. 1 (2006): 11. doi:10.1080/17475740600739156.
   Loving Day, "The Last Laws to Go," Lovingday.org, accessed October 11, 2011, http://lovingday.org/last-laws-
to-go.
   Lustig, M. W., and Jolene Koester, Intercultural Competence: Interpersonal Communication across Cultures, 2nd
ed. (Boston, MA: Pearson, 2006), 128-29.
   Martin, J. N., and Thomas K. Nakayama, Intercultural Communication in Contexts, 5th ed. (Boston, MA:
McGraw-Hill, 2010), 4.
   Martin, J. N., and Thomas K. Nakayama, "Thinking Dialectically about Culture and Communication,"
Communication Theory 9, no. 1 (1999): 14.
   McLuhan, M., The Medium Is the Message (New York: Bantam Books, 1967).
   Peplau, L. A. and Leah R. Spalding, "The Close Relationships of Lesbians, Gay Men, and Bisexuals," in Close
Relationships: A Sourcebook, eds. Clyde Hendrick and Susan S. Hendrick (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2000), 113.

209 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Pratt, R. A., "Crossing the Color Line: A Historical Assessment and Personal Narrative of Loving v. Virginia,"
Howard Law Journal 41, no. 2 (1995): 229-36.

   Sias, P. M., Jolanta A. Drzewiecka, Mary Meares, Rhiannon Bent, Yoko Konomi, Maria Ortega, and Colene
White, "Intercultural Friendship Development," Communication Reports 21, no. 1 (2008): 9. doi:10.1080/
08934210701643750.

   Smith, P., "The Digital Divide," New York Times Upfront, May 9, 2011, 6.
   Sylvester, D. E., and Adam J. McGlynn, "The Digital Divide, Political Participation, and Place," Social Science
Computer Review 28, no. 1 (2010): 64-65. doi:10.1177/0894439309335148.
   van Deursen, A. and Jan van Dijk, "Internet Skills and the Digital Divide," New Media and Society 13, no. 6
(2010): 893. doi:10.1177/1461444810386774.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 210
   6.5 Intercultural Communication Competence

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1619#audio-1619-1

Throughout this chapter we have been putting various tools in our communication
toolbox to improve our communication competence. Many of these tools can be
translated into intercultural contexts. While building any form of competence
requires effort, building intercultural communication competence often requires us
to take more risks. Some of these risks require us to leave our comfort zones and
adapt to new and uncertain situations. In this section, we will learn some of the skills
needed to be an interculturally competent communicator.

211 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
  COMPONENTS OF INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION
                         COMPETENCE

Intercultural communication competence (ICC) is the ability to communicate effectively and appropriately in
various cultural contexts. There are numerous components of ICC. Some key components include motivation,
self- and other knowledge, and tolerance for uncertainty.

Motivation

Initially, a person's motivation for communicating with people from other cultures must be considered.
Motivation refers to the root of a person's desire to foster intercultural relationships and can be intrinsic or
extrinsic (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). Put simply, if a person isn't motivated to communicate with people
from different cultures, then the components of ICC discussed next don't really matter. If a person has a
healthy curiosity that drives him or her toward intercultural encounters in order to learn more about self and
others, then there is a foundation from which to build additional competence-relevant attitudes and skills.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 212
This intrinsic motivation makes intercultural communication a voluntary, rewarding, and lifelong learning
process. Motivation can also be extrinsic, meaning that the desire for intercultural communication is driven
by an outside reward like money, power, or recognition. While both types of motivation can contribute to ICC,
context may further enhance or impede a person's motivation to communicate across cultures.

   Members of dominant groups are often less motivated, intrinsically and extrinsically, toward intercultural
communication than members of nondominant groups, because they don't see the incentives for doing so.
Having more power in communication encounters can create an unbalanced situation where the individual
from the nondominant group is expected to exhibit competence, or the ability to adapt to the communication
behaviors and attitudes of the other. Even in situations where extrinsic rewards like securing an overseas
business investment are at stake, it is likely that the foreign investor is much more accustomed to adapting to
United States business customs and communication than vice versa. This expectation that others will adapt to
our communication can be unconscious, but later ICC skills we will learn will help bring it to awareness.

   The unbalanced situation I just described is a daily reality for many individuals with nondominant
identities. Their motivation toward intercultural communication may be driven by survival in terms of
functioning effectively in dominant contexts. Recall the phenomenon known as code-switching discussed
earlier, in which individuals from nondominant groups adapt their communication to fit in with the dominant
group. In such instances, African Americans may "talk white" by conforming to what is called "standard
English," women in corporate environments may adapt masculine communication patterns, people who are
gay or lesbian may self-censor and avoid discussing their same-gender partners with coworkers, and people
with nonvisible disabilities may not disclose them in order to avoid judgment.

   While intrinsic motivation captures an idealistic view of intercultural communication as rewarding in
its own right, many contexts create extrinsic motivation. In either case, there is a risk that an individual's
motivation can still lead to incompetent communication. For example, it would be exploitative for an
extrinsically motivated person to pursue intercultural communication solely for an external reward and then
abandon the intercultural relationship once the reward is attained. These situations highlight the relational
aspect of ICC, meaning that the motivation of all parties should be considered. Motivation alone cannot create
ICC.

Self and Other-Knowledge

Knowledge supplements motivation and is an important part of building ICC. Knowledge includes self- and
other-awareness, mindfulness, and cognitive flexibility. Building knowledge of our own cultures, identities,
and communication patterns takes more than passive experience (Martin & Nakayama). We learn who we
are through our interactions with others. Developing cultural self-awareness often requires us to get out of
our comfort zones. Listening to people who are different from us is a key component of developing self-
knowledge. This may be uncomfortable, because we may realize that people think of our identities differently
than we thought. For example, when I lived in Sweden, my Swedish roommates often discussed how they
were wary of befriending students from the United States. They perceived US Americans to be shallow because
they were friendly and exciting while they were in Sweden but didn't remain friends once they left. Although
I was initially upset by their assessment, I came to see the truth in it. Swedes are generally more reserved
than US Americans and take longer to form close friendships. The comparatively extroverted nature of the
Americans led some of the Swedes to overestimate the depth of their relationship, which ultimately hurt them
when the Americans didn't stay in touch. This made me more aware of how my communication was perceived,
enhancing my self-knowledge. I also learned more about communication behaviors of the Swedes, which
contributed to my other-knowledge.

213 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   The most effective way to develop other-knowledge is by direct and thoughtful encounters with other
cultures. However, people may not readily have these opportunities for a variety of reasons. Despite the overall
diversity in the United States, many people still only interact with people who are similar to them. Even in a
racially diverse educational setting, for example, people often group off with people of their own race. While
a heterosexual person may have a gay or lesbian friend or relative, they likely spend most of their time with
other heterosexuals. Unless you interact with people with disabilities as part of your job or have a person with
a disability in your friend or family group, you likely spend most of your time interacting with able-bodied
people. Living in a rural area may limit your ability to interact with a range of cultures, and most people do
not travel internationally regularly. Because of this, we may have to make a determined effort to interact with
other cultures or rely on educational sources like college classes, books, or documentaries. Learning another
language is also a good way to learn about a culture, because you can then read the news or watch movies in
the native language, which can offer insights that are lost in translation. It is important to note though that
we must evaluate the credibility of the source of our knowledge, whether it is a book, person, or other source.
Also, knowledge of another language does not automatically equate to ICC.

   Developing self- and other-knowledge is an ongoing process that will continue to adapt and grow as
we encounter new experiences. Mindfulness and cognitive complexity will help as we continue to build
our ICC (Pusch, 2009). Mindfulness is a state of self- and other-monitoring that informs later reflection
on communication interactions. As mindful communicators we should ask questions that focus on the
interactive process like "How is our communication going? What are my reactions? What are their reactions?"
Being able to adapt our communication in the moment based on our answers to these questions is a skill
that comes with a high level of ICC. Reflecting on the communication encounter later to see what can
be learned is also a way to build ICC. We should then be able to incorporate what we learned into our
communication frameworks, which requires cognitive flexibility. Cognitive flexibility refers to the ability
to continually supplement and revise existing knowledge to create new categories rather than forcing new
knowledge into old categories. Cognitive flexibility helps prevent our knowledge from becoming stale and
also prevents the formation of stereotypes and can help us avoid prejudging an encounter or jumping to
conclusions. In summary, to be better intercultural communicators, we should know much about others and
ourselves and be able to reflect on and adapt our knowledge as we gain new experiences.

Tolerance of Uncertainty

Motivation and knowledge can inform us as we gain new experiences, but how we feel in the moment
of intercultural encounters is also important. Tolerance for uncertainty refers to an individual's attitude
about and level of comfort in uncertain situations (Martin & Nakayama, 2010). Some people perform better
in uncertain situations than others, and intercultural encounters often bring up uncertainty. Whether
communicating with someone of a different gender, race, or nationality, we are often wondering what we
should or shouldn't do or say. Situations of uncertainty most often become clearer as they progress, but the
anxiety that an individual with a low tolerance for uncertainty feels may lead them to leave the situation or
otherwise communicate in a less competent manner. Individuals with a high tolerance for uncertainty may
exhibit more patience, waiting on new information to become available or seeking out information, which
may then increase the understanding of the situation and lead to a more successful outcome (Pusch, 2009).
Individuals who are intrinsically motivated toward intercultural communication may have a higher tolerance
for uncertainty, in that their curiosity leads them to engage with others who are different because they find
the self- and other-knowledge gained rewarding.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 214
     CULTIVATING INTERCULTURAL COMMUNICATION
                         COMPETENCE

How can ICC be built and achieved? This is a key question we will address in this section. Two main ways to
build ICC are through experiential learning and reflective practices (Bednarz, 2010). We must first realize that
competence isn't any one thing. Part of being competent means that you can assess new situations and adapt
your existing knowledge to the new contexts. What it means to be competent will vary depending on your
physical location, your role (personal, professional, etc.), and your life stage, among other things. Sometimes
we will know or be able to figure out what is expected of us in a given situation, but sometimes we may need
to act in unexpected ways to meet the needs of a situation. Competence enables us to better cope with the
unexpected, adapt to the nonroutine, and connect to uncommon frameworks. I have always told my students
that ICC is less about a list of rules and more about a box of tools.

   Three ways to cultivate ICC are to foster attitudes that motivate us, discover knowledge that informs us, and
develop skills that enable us (Bennett, 2009). To foster attitudes that motivate us, we must develop a sense of
wonder about culture. This sense of wonder can lead to feeling overwhelmed, humbled, or awed (Opdal, 2001).
This sense of wonder may correlate to a high tolerance for uncertainty, which can help us turn potentially
frustrating experiences we have into teachable moments. I've had many such moments in my intercultural
encounters at home and abroad. One such moment came the first time I tried to cook a frozen pizza in the
oven in the shared kitchen of my apartment in Sweden. The information on the packaging was written in
Swedish, but like many college students, I had a wealth of experience cooking frozen pizzas to draw from. As
I went to set the oven dial to preheat, I noticed it was strange that the oven didn't go up to my usual 425-450
degrees. Not to be deterred, I cranked the dial up as far as it would go, waited a few minutes, put my pizza
in, and walked down the hall to my room to wait for about fifteen minutes until the pizza was done. The
smell of smoke drew me from my room before the fifteen minutes was up, and I walked into a corridor filled
with smoke and the smell of burnt pizza. I pulled the pizza out and was puzzled for a few minutes while I
tried to figure out why the pizza burned so quickly, when one of my corridor-mates gently pointed out that
the oven temperatures in Sweden are listed in Celsius, not Fahrenheit! Despite almost burning the kitchen
down, I learned a valuable lesson about assuming my map for temperatures and frozen pizzas was the same
as everyone else's.

   Discovering knowledge that informs us is another step that can build on our motivation. One tool involves
learning more about our cognitive style, or how we learn. Our cognitive style consists of our preferred patterns
for "gathering information, constructing meaning, and organizing and applying knowledge" (Bennett, 2009).
As we explore cognitive styles, we discover that there are differences in how people attend to and perceive
the world, explain events, organize the world, and use rules of logic (Nisbett, 2003). Some cultures have
a cognitive style that focuses more on tasks, analytic and objective thinking, details and precision, inner
direction, and independence, while others focus on relationships and people over tasks and things, concrete
and metaphorical thinking, and a group consciousness and harmony.

   Developing ICC is a complex learning process. At the basic level of learning, we accumulate knowledge
and assimilate it into our existing frameworks. But accumulated knowledge doesn't necessarily help us in
situations where we have to apply that knowledge. Transformative learning takes place at the highest levels
and occurs when we encounter situations that challenge our accumulated knowledge and our ability to
accommodate that knowledge to manage a real-world situation. The cognitive dissonance that results in these
situations is often uncomfortable and can lead to a hesitance to repeat such an engagement. One tip for
cultivating ICC that can help manage these challenges is to find a community of like-minded people who

215 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
are also motivated to develop ICC. In my graduate program, I lived in the international dormitory in order
to experience the cultural diversity that I had enjoyed so much studying abroad a few years earlier. I was
surrounded by international students and US American students who were more or less interested in cultural
diversity. This ended up being a tremendous learning experience, and I worked on research about identity and
communication between international and American students.

   Developing skills that enable us is another part of ICC. Some of the skills important to ICC are the ability
to empathize, accumulate cultural information, listen, resolve conflict, and manage anxiety (Bennett, 2009).
Again, you are already developing a foundation for these skills by reading this book, but you can expand
those skills to intercultural settings with the motivation and knowledge already described. Contact alone
does not increase intercultural skills; there must be more deliberate measures taken to fully capitalize on
those encounters. While research now shows that intercultural contact does decrease prejudices, this is not
enough to become interculturally competent. The ability to empathize and manage anxiety enhances prejudice
reduction, and these two skills have been shown to enhance the overall impact of intercultural contact even
more than acquiring cultural knowledge. There is intercultural training available for people who are
interested. If you can't access training, you may choose to research intercultural training on your own, as there
are many books, articles, and manuals written on the subject.

   Reflective practices can also help us process through rewards and challenges associated with developing
ICC. As we open ourselves to new experiences, we are likely to have both positive and negative reactions. It
can be very useful to take note of negative or defensive reactions you have. This can help you identify certain
triggers that may create barriers to effective intercultural interaction. Noting positive experiences can also
help you identify triggers for learning that you could seek out or recreate to enhance the positive (Bednarz,
2010). A more complex method of reflection is called intersectional reflexivity. Intersectional reflexivity is a
reflective practice by which we acknowledge intersecting identities, both privileged and disadvantaged, and
implicate ourselves in social hierarchies and inequalities (Jones Jr., 2010). This method brings in the concepts
of dominant and nondominant groups and the privileges/disadvantages dialectic we discussed earlier.

   While formal intercultural experiences like studying abroad or volunteering for the Special Olympics or
a shelter for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, and queer (GLBTQ) youth can result in learning, informal
experiences are also important. We may be less likely to include informal experiences in our reflection if we
don't see them as legitimate. Reflection should also include "critical incidents" or what I call "a-ha! moments."
Think of reflection as a tool for metacompetence that can be useful in bringing the formal and informal
together (Bednarz, 2010).

                                             References

Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity, 2nd ed. (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2011), 9, 65,
186-87.

   Bednarz, F., "Building Up Intercultural Competences: Challenges and Learning Processes," in Building
Intercultural Competencies: A Handbook for Professionals in Education, Social Work, and Health Care, eds. Maria
Giovanna Onorati and Furio Bednarz (Leuven, Belgium: Acco, 2010), 39.

   Bennett, J. M., "Cultivating Intercultural Competence," in The Sage Handbook of Intercultural Competence, ed.
Darla K. Deardorff (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009), 127-34.

   Jones Jr., R. G., "Putting Privilege into Practice through `Intersectional Reflexivity': Ruminations,
Interventions, and Possibilities," Reflections: Narratives of Professional Helping 16, no. 1 (2010): 122.

   Martin, J. N., and Thomas K. Nakayama, Intercultural Communication in Contexts, 5th ed. (Boston, MA:
McGraw-Hill, 2010), 465.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 216
   Nisbett, R. E., The Geography of Thought: How Asians and Westerners Think Differently...and Why (New York: Free
Press, 2003), 44-45.

   Opdal, P. M., "Curiosity, Wonder, and Education Seen as Perspective," Studies in Philosophy and Education 20
(2001): 331-44.

   Pusch, M. D., "The Interculturally Competent Global Leader," in The Sage Handbook of Intercultural Competence,
ed. Darla K. Deardorff (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2009), 69.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

217 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                6.6 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. How would you adjust your preparation to speak in a public setting with a more diverse audience compared to
     your preparation to speak to your public speaking class?

2. List some of your personal, social, and cultural identities. Are there any that relate? If so, how? For your cultural
     identities, which ones are dominant and which ones are nondominant?

3. Describe a situation in which someone ascribed an identity to you that did not match with your avowed identities.
     Why do you think the person ascribed the identity to you? Were there any stereotypes involved?

                                           Activities

1. Share three interesting facts or ideas about your culture (Section 6:3 Exploring Specific Cultural Identities) that
     would help classmates better understand the culture.

2. Take one to three photographs that illustrate or represent your own culture (attitudes, beliefs, values, behaviors,
     etc.).

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 218
      Chapter 7: Organizing and Outlining

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Select a topic appropriate to the audience and occasion.
     Formulate a specific purpose statement that identifies precisely what you will do in your speech.
     Craft a thesis statement (central idea) that clearly and succinctly summarizes the argument you will make in your speech.
     Identify and arrange the main points of your speech according to one of many organizational styles discussed in this

        chapter.
     Connect the points of your speech to one another.
     Create a preparation and speaking outline for your speech.

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Causal Pattern
     Chronological Pattern
     Coordination
     Division
     Main Points
     Parallelism
     Preparation Outline
     Preview Statement
     Purpose Statement
     SignPost
     Spatial Pattern
     Speaking Outline
     Specific Purpose Statement
     Subordination
     Thesis
     Topical Pattern

219 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Transitional Statements

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 220
  7.1 Why is Organizing and Outlining Important?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1623#audio-1623-1

221 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
"If you don't know what you want to achieve in your presentation, your audience never will."
                                         -Harvey Diamond

                          Introduction to Organizing and Outlining

Meg jaunted to the front of the classroom--her trusty index cards in one hand and her water bottle in the other. It was
the mid-term presentation in her entomology class, a course she enjoyed more than her other classes. The night before,
Meg had spent hours scouring the web for information on the Woody Adelgid, an insect that has ravaged hemlock tree
populations in the United States in recent years. But when she made it to the podium and finished her well-written and
captivating introduction, her speech began to fall apart. Her index cards were a jumble of unorganized information, not
linked together by any unifying theme or purpose. As she stumbled through lists of facts, Meg--along with her peers and
instructor--quickly realized that her presentation had all the necessary parts to be compelling, but that those parts were not
organized into a coherent and convincing speech.

   Giving a speech or presentation can be a daunting task for anyone, especially inexperienced public speakers
or students in introductory speech courses. Speaking to an audience can also be a rewarding experience for
speakers who are willing to put in the extra effort needed to craft rhetorical masterpieces. Indeed, speeches
and presentations must be crafted. Such a design requires that speakers do a great deal of preparatory work,
like selecting a specific topic and deciding on a particular purpose for their speech. Once the topic and purpose
have been decided on, a thesis statement, or central idea, can be prepared. After these things are established,
speakers must select the main points of their speech, which should be organized in a way that illuminates
the speaker's perspective, or approach to their speech. In a nutshell, effective public speeches are focused on
particular topics and contain main points that are relevant to both the topic and the audience. For all of these
components to come together convincingly, organizing and outlining must be done prior to giving a speech.

   This chapter addresses a variety of strategies needed to craft the body of public speeches. The chapter
begins at the initial stages of speechwriting-- selecting an important and relevant topic for your audience.
The more difficult task of formulating a purpose statement is discussed next. A purpose statement drives the
organization of the speech since different purposes (e.g., informative or persuasive) necessitate different types
of evidence and presentation styles. Next, the chapter offers a variety of organizational strategies for the body
of your speech. Not every strategy will be appropriate for every speech, so the strengths and weaknesses of the
organizational styles are also addressed. The chapter then discusses ways to connect your main points and to
draw links between your main points and the purpose you have chosen. In the final section of this chapter,
one of the most important steps in speechwriting, outlining your speech, is discussed. The chapter provides
the correct format for outlines as well as information on how to write a preparation outline and a speaking
outline.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 222
   Pistol Pete found himself preparing for an informative speech about the traditions that define the spirit of
OSU. The speech was an opportunity to share with his audience, composed of students, faculty, and alumni,
the rich history and cherished customs of their beloved university.

   First, he started with his specific purpose statement. Given the nature of his speech, he chose a specific
purpose that was both audience-centered and measurable: "After hearing my speech, the audience will be able
to identify specific OSU traditions that not only strengthen our community but also perpetuate our Orange
Pride."

   Next, he moved on to formulating his thesis. He wanted a statement that encapsulated the essence of
his speech and served as the anchor point for all the information he would present. He decided on the
following: "The traditions at Oklahoma State University, steeped in history and driven by a collective spirit, are
instrumental in fostering a sense of unity, instilling pride, and creating lasting memories for everyone who is
part of the Cowboy family."

   With his specific purpose and thesis defined, Pete moved on to identify the three main points that would form
the structure of his presentation:

    1. Historical Traditions: Here, Pete planned to delve into the history of OSU's longstanding traditions,
         sharing the origin and evolution of customs such as the Homecoming Celebration, America's Greatest
         Homecoming, the waving of the "Waving Song" after victories, and the ringing of the Old Central bell.

223 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    2. Symbolic Traditions: Pete would discuss the symbolic significance of traditions like the Sea of Orange
         Parade and the use of the OSU Spirit Rider to lead the football team onto the field. He wanted his
         audience to appreciate how these traditions encapsulate the spirit of OSU and its community.

    3. Impact of Traditions: Lastly, Pete would address how these traditions enhance the OSU experience,
         foster a sense of belonging, and serve as a bonding factor for students, faculty, alumni, and fans alike.

By laying out this roadmap for his speech, Pistol Pete felt prepared and excited to share the cherished
traditions of Oklahoma State University. He looked forward to not only informing his audience about these
customs but also sparking a sense of pride and unity amongst his fellow Cowboys and Cowgirls.

   What do you think of Pete's planning for his informative speech? Would you do anything different?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 224
 7.2 The Topic, General Purpose, Specific Purpose,
                       and Thesis

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1625#audio-1625-1

Before any work can be done on crafting the body of your speech or presentation, you must first do some
prep work--selecting a topic, formulating a general purpose, a specific purpose statement, and crafting a
central idea, or thesis statement. In doing so, you lay the foundation for your speech by making important
decisions about what you will speak about and for what purpose you will speak. These decisions will influence
and guide the entire speechwriting process, so it is wise to think carefully and critically during these
beginning stages.

225 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                          Selecting a Topic

Generally, speakers focus on one or more interrelated topics--relatively broad concepts, ideas, or problems
that are relevant for particular audiences. The most common way that speakers discover topics is by simply
observing what is happening around them--at their school, in their local government, or around the world.
Student government leaders, for example, speak or write to other students when their campus is facing
tuition or fee increases, or when students have achieved something spectacular, like lobbying campus
administrators for lower student fees and succeeding. In either case, it is the situation that makes their
speeches appropriate and useful for their audience of students and university employees. More importantly,
they speak when there is an opportunity to change a university policy or to alter the way students think or
behave in relation to a particular event on campus.

   But you need not run for president or student government in order to give a meaningful speech. On the
contrary, opportunities abound for those interested in engaging speech as a tool for change. Perhaps the
simplest way to find a topic is to ask yourself a few questions, including:

    What important events are occurring locally, nationally and internationally?
 What do I care about most?
 Is there someone or something I can advocate for?
 What makes me angry/happy?
 What beliefs/attitudes do I want to share?
 Is there some information the audience needs to know?

   Students speak about what is interesting to them and their audiences. What topics do you think are
relevant today? There are other questions you might ask yourself, too, but these should lead you to at least a

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 226
few topical choices. The most important work that these questions do is to locate topics within your pre-
existing sphere of knowledge and interest. David Zarefsky (2010) also identifies brainstorming as a way to
develop speech topics, a strategy that can be helpful if the questions listed above did not yield an appropriate
or interesting topic. Starting with a topic you are already interested in will likely make writing and
presenting your speech a more enjoyable and meaningful experience. It means that your entire
speechwriting process will focus on something you find important and that you can present this information
to people who stand to benefit from your speech.

   Once you have answered these questions and narrowed your responses, you are still not done selecting
your topic. For instance, you might have decided that you really care about breeds of dogs. This is a very
broad topic and could easily lead to a dozen different speeches. To resolve this problem, speakers must also
consider the audience to whom they will speak, the scope of their presentation, and the outcome they wish to
achieve.

                              Formulating the Purpose Statements

By honing in on a very specific topic, you begin the work of formulating your purpose statement. In short, a
purpose statement clearly states what it is you would like to achieve. Purpose statements are especially
helpful for guiding you as you prepare your speech. When deciding which main points, facts, and examples
to include, you should simply ask yourself whether they are relevant not only to the topic you have selected,
but also whether they support the goal you outlined in your purpose statement. The general purpose
statement of a speech may be to inform, to persuade, to celebrate, or to entertain. Thus, it is common to
frame a specific purpose statement around one of these goals. According to O'Hair, Stewart, and Rubenstein,
a specific purpose statement "expresses both the topic and the general speech purpose in action form and in
terms of the specific objectives you hope to achieve" (2004). For instance, the home design enthusiast might
write the following specific purpose statement: At the end of my speech, the audience will learn the pro's and
con's of flipping houses. In short, the general purpose statement lays out the broader goal of the speech while
the specific purpose statement describes precisely what the speech is intended to do. Some of your professors
may ask that you include the general purpose and add the specific purpose.

                                   Writing the Thesis Statement

The specific purpose statement is a tool that you will use as you write your talk, but it is unlikely that it will
appear verbatim in your speech. Instead, you will want to convert the specific purpose statement into a
central idea, or thesis statement that you will share with your audience.

   Depending on your instructor's approach, a thesis statement may be written two different ways. A thesis
statement may encapsulate the main points of a speech in just a sentence or two, and be designed to give
audiences a quick preview of what the entire speech will be about. The thesis statement for a speech, like the
thesis of a research-based essay, should be easily identifiable and ought to very succinctly sum up the main
points you will present. Some instructors prefer that your thesis, or central idea, be a single, declarative
statement providing the audience with an overall statement that provides the essence of the speech, followed
by a separate preview statement.

   If you are a Harry Potter enthusiast, you may write a thesis statement (central idea) the following way
using the above approach: J.K. Rowling is a renowned author of the Harry Potter series with a Cinderella like story
having gone from relatively humble beginnings, through personal struggles, and finally success and fame.

227 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                  Writing the Preview Statement

However, some instructors prefer that you separate your thesis from your preview statement. A preview
statement (or series of statements) is a guide to your speech. This is the part of the speech that literally tells
the audience exactly what main points you will cover. If you were to open your Waze app, it would tell you
exactly how to get there. Best of all, you would know what to look for! So, if we take our J.K Rowling example,
let's rewrite that using this approach separating out the thesis and preview:

   J.K. Rowling is a renowned author of the Harry Potter series with a Cinderella like rags to riches story. First, I will tell
you about J.K. Rowling's humble beginnings. Then, I will describe her personal struggles as a single mom. Finally, I will
explain how she overcame adversity and became one of the richest women in the United Kingdom.

   There is no best way to approach this. This is up to your instructor.

                                 Writing the Body of Your Speech

Once you have finished the important work of deciding what your speech will be about, as well as formulating
the purpose statement and crafting the thesis, you should turn your attention to writing the body of your
speech. All of your main points are contained in the body, and normally this section is prepared well before
you ever write the introduction or conclusion. The body of your speech will consume the largest amount of
time to present; and it is the opportunity for you to elaborate on facts, evidence, examples, and opinions that
support your thesis statement and do the work you have outlined in the specific purpose statement.
Combining these various elements into a cohesive and compelling speech, however, is not without its
difficulties, the first of which is deciding which elements to include and how they ought to be organized to
best suit your purpose.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 228
    7.3 Organizational Patterns of Arrangement

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1627#audio-1627-1

   After deciding which main points and subpoints you must include, you can get to work writing up the
speech. Before you do so, however, it is helpful to consider how you will organize the ideas. There are many
ways you can organize speeches, and these approaches will be different depending on whether you are

229 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
preparing an informative or persuasive speech. These are referred to as organizational patterns for arranging
your main points in a speech. The chronological (or temporal), topical, spatial, or causal patterns may be
better suited to informative speeches, whereas the Problem-Solution, Monroe's Motivated Sequence
(Monroe, 1949), Claim-to-Proof (Mudd & Sillar, 1962), or Refutation pattern would work best for persuasive
speeches. Sample outlines for persuasive speeches can be found in Chapter 17.

                                       Chronological Pattern

When you speak about events that are linked together by time, it is sensible to engage the chronological
organization pattern. In a chronological speech, main points are delivered according to when they happened
and could be traced on a calendar or clock. Some professors use the term temporal to reflect any speech
pattern dealing with taking the audience through time. Arranging main points in chronological order can be
helpful when describing historical events to an audience as well as when the order of events is necessary to
understand what you wish to convey. Informative speeches about a series of events most commonly engage
the chronological style, as do many process speeches (e.g., how to bake a cake or build an airplane). Another
time when the chronological style makes sense is when you tell the story of someone's life or career. For
instance, a speech about Oprah Winfrey might be arranged chronologically. In this case, the main points are
arranged by following Winfrey's life from birth to the present time. Life events (e.g., early life, her early
career, her life after ending the Oprah Winfrey Show) are connected together according to when they
happened and highlight the progression of Winfrey's career. Organizing the speech in this way illustrates the
interconnectedness of life events. Below you will find a way in which you can organize your main points
chronologically:

   Topic: Oprah Winfrey (Chronological Pattern)
   Thesis: Oprah's career can be understood by four key, interconnected life stages.
   Preview: First, let's look at Oprah's early life. Then, we will look at her early career, followed by her years
during the Oprah Winfrey show. Finally, we will explore what she is doing now.

   I. Oprah's childhood was spent in rural Mississippi, where she endured sexual abuse from family members
      II. Oprah's early career was characterized by stints on local radio and television networks in Nashville and Chicago.
      III. Oprah's tenure as host of the Oprah Winfrey Show began in 1986 and lasted until 2011, a period of time marked

   by much success.
      IV. Oprah's most recent media venture is OWN: The Oprah Winfrey Network, which plays host to a variety of

   television shows including Oprah's Next Chapter.

                                           Topical Pattern

When the main points of your speech center on ideas that are more distinct from one another, a topical
organization pattern may be used. In a topical speech, main points are developed according to the different
aspects, subtopics or topics within an overall topic. Although they are all part of the overall topic, the order in
which they are presented really doesn't matter. For example, you are currently attending college. Within your
college, there are various student services that are important for you to use while you are here. You may use
the library, The Learning Center (TLC), Student Development office, ASG Computer Lab, and Financial Aid.
To organize this speech topically, it doesn't matter which area you speak about first, but here is how you could
organize it.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 230
   Topic: Student Services at College of the Canyons
   Thesis and Preview: College of the Canyons has five important student services, which include the library,
TLC, Student Development Office, ASG Computer Lab, and Financial Aid.

I. The library can be accessed five days a week and online and has a multitude of books, periodicals, and other

resources to use.

II. The TLC has subject tutors, computers, and study rooms available to use six days a week.

III. The Student Development Office is a place that assists students with their ID cards, but also provides students

with discount tickets and other student related  needs.

IV. The ASG computer lab is open for students to use for several hours a day, as well as to print up to 15 pages a day

for free.

V. Financial Aid is one of the busiest offices on campus, offering students a multitude of methods by which they

can supplement their personal finances paying for both tuition and books.

                                           Spatial Pattern

Another way to organize the points of a speech is through a spatial speech, which arranges main points
according to their physical and geographic relationships. The spatial style is an especially useful organization
pattern when the main point's importance is derived from its location or directional focus. Things can be
described from top to bottom, inside to outside, left to right, north to south, and so on. Importantly, speakers
using a spatial style should offer commentary about the placement of the main points as they move through
the speech, alerting audience members to the location changes. For instance, a speech about The University
of Georgia might be arranged spatially; in this example, the spatial organization frames the discussion in
terms of the campus layout. The spatial style is fitting since the differences in architecture and uses of space
are related to particular geographic areas, making location a central organizing factor. As such, the spatial
style highlights these location differences.

   Topic: University of Georgia (Spatial Pattern)
   Thesis: The University of Georgia is arranged into four distinct sections, which are characterized
by architectural and disciplinary differences.

   I. In North Campus, one will find the University's oldest building,
        a sprawling treelined quad, and the famous Arches, all of which are nestled against Athens' downtown district.

      II. In West Campus, dozens of dormitories provide housing for the University's large
        undergraduate population and students can regularly be found lounging outside
        or at one of the dining halls.

      III. In East Campus, students delight in newly constructed, modern buildings and
        enjoy the benefits of the University's health center, recreational facilities, and
        science research buildings.

      IV. In South Campus, pharmacy, veterinary, and biomedical science students traverse
        newly constructed parts of campus featuring well-kept landscaping and modern
        architecture.

231 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                           Causal Pattern

A causal speech informs audience members about causes and effects that have already happened with respect
to some condition, event, etc. One approach can be to share what caused something to happen, and what the
effects were. Or, the reverse approach can be taken where a speaker can begin by sharing the effects of
something that occurred, and then share what caused it. For example, in 1994, there was a 6.7 magnitude
earthquake that occurred in the San Fernando Valley in Northridge, California. Let's look at how we can
arrange this speech first by using a cause-effect pattern:

   Topic: Northridge Earthquake
   Thesis: The Northridge earthquake was a devastating event that was caused by an unknown fault
and resulted in the loss of life and billions of dollars of damage.
   I. The Northridge earthquake was caused by a fault that was previously unknown and located nine miles beneath
   Northridge.

      II. The Northridge earthquake resulted in the loss of 57 lives and over 40 billion dollars of damage in Northridge and
   surrounding communities.

Depending on your topic, you may decide it is more impactful to start with the effects, and work back to the
causes (effect-cause pattern). Let's take the same example and flip it around:

   Thesis: The Northridge earthquake was a devastating event that was that resulted in the loss of
life and billions of dollars in damage, and was caused by an unknown fault below Northridge.

   I. The Northridge earthquake resulted in the loss of 57 lives and over 40 billion dollars of damage in Northridge and
   surrounding communities.

      II. The Northridge earthquake was caused by a fault that was previously unknown and located nine miles beneath
   Northridge.

Why might you decide to use an effect-cause approach rather than a cause-effect approach? In this particular
example, the effects of the earthquake were truly horrible. If you heard all of that information first, you would
be much more curious to hear about what caused such devastation. Sometimes natural disasters are not that
exciting, even when they are horrible. Why? Unless they affect us directly, we may not have the same
attachment to the topic. This is one example where an effect-cause approach may be very impactful.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 232
              7.4 Outlining Your Speech

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1629#audio-1629-1

   Most speakers and audience members would agree that an organized speech is both easier to present as
well as more persuasive. Public speaking teachers especially believe in the power of organizing your speech,
which is why they encourage (and often require) that you create an outline for your speech. Outlines, or
textual arrangements of all the various elements of a speech, are a very common way of organizing a speech

233 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
before it is delivered. Most extemporaneous speakers keep their outlines with them during the speech as a
way to ensure that they do not leave out any important elements and to keep them on track. Writing an
outline is also important to the speechwriting process since doing so forces the speakers to think about the
main ideas, known as main points, and subpoints, the examples they wish to include, and the ways in which
these elements correspond to one another. In short, the outline functions both as an organization tool and as
a reference for delivering a speech.

                                            Outline Types

There are two types of outlines, the preparation outline and the speaking outline.

Preparation Outline

The first outline you will write is called the preparation outline. Also called a skeletal, working, practice, or
rough outline, the preparation outline is used to work through the various components of your speech in an
organized format. Stephen E. Lucas (2004) put it simply: "The preparation outline is just what its name
implies--an outline that helps you prepare the speech." When writing the preparation outline, you should
focus on finalizing the specific purpose and thesis statement, logically ordering your main points, deciding
where supporting material should be included, and refining the overall organizational pattern of your
speech. As you write the preparation outline, you may find it necessary to rearrange your points or to add or
subtract supporting material. You may also realize that some of your main points are sufficiently supported
while others are lacking. The final draft of your preparation outline should include full sentences. In most
cases, however, the preparation outline is reserved for planning purposes only and is translated into a
speaking outline before you deliver the speech. Keep in mind though, even a full sentence outline is not an
essay.

Speaking Outline

A speaking outline is the outline you will prepare for use when delivering the speech. The speaking outline is
much more succinct than the preparation outline and includes brief phrases or words that remind the
speakers of the points they need to make, plus supporting material and signposts (Beebe & Beebe, 2003). The
words or phrases used on the speaking outline should briefly encapsulate all of the information needed to
prompt the speaker to accurately deliver the speech. Although some cases call for reading a speech verbatim
from the full-sentence outline, in most cases speakers will simply refer to their speaking outline for quick
reminders and to ensure that they do not omit any important information. Because it uses just words or
short phrases, and not full sentences, the speaking outline can easily be transferred to index cards that can be
referenced during a speech. However, check with your instructor regarding what you will be allowed to use
for your speech.

                                     Components of Outlines

The main components of the outlines are the main points, subordination and coordination, parallelism,
division, and the connection of main points.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 234
Main Points

Main points are the main ideas in the speech. In other words, the main points are what your audience should
remember from your talk, and they are phrased as single, declarative sentences. These are never phrased as a
question, nor can they be a quote or form of citation. Any supporting material you have will be put in your
outline as a subpoint. Since this is a public speaking class, your instructor will decide how long your speeches
will be, but in general, you can assume that no speech will be longer than 10 minutes in length. Given that
alone, we can make one assumption. All speeches will fall between 2 to 5 main points based simply on length.
If you are working on an outline and you have ten main points, something is wrong, and you need to revisit
your ideas to see how you need to reorganize your points.

   All main points are preceded by Roman numerals (I, II, III, etc.). Subpoints are preceded by capital letters
(A, B, C, etc.), then Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3, etc.), lowercase letters (a, b, c, etc.). You can subordinate further
than this. Speak with your instructor regarding his or her specific instructions. Each level of subordination is
also differentiated from its predecessor by indenting a few spaces. Indenting makes it easy to find your main
points, subpoints, and the supporting points and examples below them.

   Let's work on understanding how to take main points and break them into smaller ideas by subordinating
them further and further as we go by using the following outline example:

   Topic: Dog
   Specific Purpose: To inform my audience about characteristics of dogs
   Thesis: There are many types of dogs that individuals can select from before deciding which
would make the best family pet.
   Preview: First, I will describe the characteristics of large breed dogs, and then I will discuss
characteristics of small breed dogs.

   I. First, let's look at the characteristics of large breed dogs
          A. Some large breed dogs need daily activity.
          B. Some large breed dogs are dog friendly.
          C. Some large breed dogs drool.
                   1. If you are particularly neat, you may not want one of these.
                          a. Bloodhounds drool the most.
                                 1) After eating is one of the times drooling is bad.
                                 2) The drooling is horrible after they drink, so beware!
                          b. English bloodhounds drool a lot as well.
                   2. If you live in an apartment, these breeds could pose a problem.

   II. Next, let's look at the characteristics of small breed dogs.
          A. Some small breed dogs need daily activity.
          B. Some small breed dogs are dog friendly.
          C. Some small breed dogs are friendly to strangers.
                   1. Welsh Terriers love strangers.
                          a. They will jump on people.
                          b. They will wag their tails and nuzzle.
                   2. Beagles love strangers.
                   3. Cockapoos also love strangers.

235 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Subordination and Coordination

You should have noticed that as ideas were broken down, or subordinated, there was a hierarchy to the order.
To check your outline for coherence, think of the outline as a staircase. All of the points that are beneath and
on a diagonal to the points above them are subordinate points. So using the above example, points A, B, and C
dealt with characteristics of large breed dogs, and those points are all subordinate to main point I. Similarly,
points 1 and 2 under point C both dealt with drool, so those are subordinate. This is the subordination of
points. If we had discussed food under point C, you would know that something didn't make sense. You will
also see that there is coordination of points. As part of the hierarchy, coordination simply means that all of
the numbers or letters should represent the same idea. In this example, A, B, and C were all characteristics,
so those are all coordinate to each other. Had C been "German Shepherd," then the outline would have been
incorrect because that is a type of dog, not a characteristic.

Parallelism

Another important rule in outlining is known as parallelism. This means that when possible, you begin your
sentences in a similar way, using a similar grammatical structure. For example, in the previous example on
dogs, some of the sentences began "some large breed dogs." This type of structure adds clarity to your
speaking. Students often worry that parallelism will sound boring. It's actually the opposite! It adds clarity.
However, if you had ten sentences in a row, we would never recommend you begin them all the same way.
That is where transitions come into the picture and break up any monotony that could occur.

Division

The principle of division is an important part of outlining. When you have a main point, you will be
explaining it. You should have enough meaningful information that you can divide it into two subpoints A
and B. If subpoint A has enough information that you can explain it, then it, too, should be able to be divided
into two subpoints. So, division means this: If you have an A, then you need a B; if you have a 1, then you need
a 2, and so on. What if you cannot divided the point? In a case like that you would simply incorporate the
information in the point above.

Connecting Your Main Points

One way to connect points is to include transitional statements. Transitional statements are phrases or
sentences that lead from one distinct- but-connected idea to another. They are used to alert the audience to
the fact that you are getting ready to discuss something else. When moving from one point to another, your
transition may just be a word or short phrase, known as a sign post. For instance, you might say "next," "also,"
or "moreover." You can also enumerate your speech points and signal transitions by starting each point with
"First," "Second," "Third," et cetera. You might also incorporate non-verbal transitions, such as brief pauses or
a movement across the stage. Pausing to look at your audience, stepping out from behind a podium, or even
raising or lowering the rate of your voice can signal to audience members that you are transitioning.

   Another way to incorporate transitions into your speech is by offering internal summaries and internal
previews within your speech. Summaries provide a recap of what has already been said, making it more likely
that audiences will remember the points that they hear again. For example, an internal summary may sound
like this:

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 236
   So far, we have seen that the pencil has a long and interesting history. We also looked at the many uses the pencil has
that you may not have known about previously.

   Like the name implies, internal previews lay out what will occur next in your speech. They are longer than
transitional words or signposts.

   Next, let us explore what types of pencils there are to pick from that will be best for your specific project.
   Additionally, summaries can be combined with internal previews to alert audience members that the next
point builds on those that they have already heard.
   Now that I have told you about the history of the pencil, as well as its many uses, let's look at what types of pencils you
can pick from that might be best for your project.
   It is important to understand that if you use an internal summary and internal preview between main
points, you need to state a clear main point following the internal preview. Here's an example integrating all
of the points on the pencil:
   I. First, let me tell you about the history of the pencil.
   So far we have seen that the pencil has a long and interesting history. Now, we can look at how the pencil can be used
(internal summary, signpost, and internal preview).
   II. The pencil has many different uses, ranging from writing to many types of drawing.
   Now that I have told you about the history of the pencil, as well as its many uses, let's look at what types of pencils you
can pick from that might be best for your project (Signpost, internal summary and preview).
   III. There are over fifteen different types of pencils to choose from ranging in hardness and color.

                                             Conclusion

Had Meg, the student mentioned in the opening anecdote, taken some time to work through the
organizational process, it is likely her speech would have gone much more smoothly when she finished her
introduction. It is very common for beginning speakers to spend a great deal of their time preparing catchy
introductions, fancy PowerPoint presentations, and nice conclusions, which are all very important. However,
the body of any speech is where the speaker must make effective arguments, provide helpful information,
entertain, and the like, so it makes sense that speakers should devote a proportionate amount of time to these
areas as well. By following this chapter, as well as studying the other chapters in this text, you should be
prepared to craft interesting, compelling, and organized speeches.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

237 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                7.5 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. Think back to your previous presentations. How did you select topics appropriate to the audience and occasion?
     How would you select a persuasive topic for an audience of senior adults? How would you select a persuasive topic
     for an audience of young adults?

2. How does the thesis statement differ from the specific purpose statement?
3. How does the specific purpose help determine the pattern of organization?
4. Explain how the pattern of organization is significant to a presentation.
5. What are some specific ways we can ensure the audience remembers our main ideas?
6. Why is it important to construct an outline of your presentation?

                                           Activities

1. With your group, write a general purpose, specific purpose, thesis statement, and preview statement for the topic
     you are assigned. Be creative! Share your terrific responses with the class.

2. On a sheet of paper, write down a topic you find interesting. Suppose you are to give an informative presentation
     about this topic. Write three (3) main points for each of the following patterns of organization: chronological,
     topical, spatial, and causal.

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 238
      Chapter 8: Researching Your Speech

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Explain why research is fun and useful.
     Differentiate between primary and secondary research.
     Describe how to establish research needs before beginning research.
     Identify appropriate academic and nonacademic sources.
     Explain the steps for citing sources within a speech.
     Differentiate between direct quotations and paraphrases of information within a speech.
     Describe how to use sources ethically in a speech.
     Explain twelve strategies for avoiding plagiarism.

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Academic Books
     APA style
     Backtracking
     Direct Quotation
     Encyclopedias
     Fact
     Generalizability
     General-Interest Periodicals
     Interlibrary Loan
     MLA style
     Paraphrase
     Primary Research
     Project Life Cycle
     Research
     Research Log

239 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Secondary Research
 Special-Interest Periodicals
 Style
 Textbooks
 Theory

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 240
                 8.1 Library Resources

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1634#audio-1634-1

241 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Research is formalized curiosity. It is poking and prying with a purpose." -Zora Neale Hurston (cited in
                                             Wilson, 2013, p.111).

Whether you are dealing with a librarian at a public library or an academic library, librarians have many tricks
and shortcuts up their sleeves to make hunting for information easier and faster (George, 2008). You may
find it odd that we decided to start a chapter on research discussing librarians, but we strongly believe that
interacting with librarians and using libraries effectively is the first step to good research.

   To help make your interactions with research librarians more fulfilling, we sent out an e-mail to research
librarians who belong to the American Library Association asking them for tips on working with a research
librarian. Thankfully, the research librarians were very willing to help us help you. Listed below are some of
the top tips we received from research librarians (in no particular order)Author Note: We wish to thank the
numerous reference librarians who went out of their way to help us develop our top eighteen tips to working
with reference librarians. We opted to keep their comments anonymous, but we want to thank them here.

   Debra Rollins, Louisiana State University-Alexandria
   William Badke, Trinity Western University
   Ingrid Hendrix, University of New Mexico
   Ward Price, Ivy Tech Community College, Northeast
   Tracy L. Stout, Missouri State University
   Sandra J. Ley, Pima Community College
   Annie Smith, Utah Valley University Library
   Sharlee Jeser-Skaggs, Richland College Library
   Leslie N. Todd, University of the Incarnate Word
   Susan G Ryberg, Mount Olive College
   Kathleen A. Hana, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis University Library
   Red Wassenich, Austin Community College
   Elizabeth Kettell, University of Rochester Medical Center

    1. Research is a process, not an event. Good research takes time and, while there are shortcuts, students
         should still expect to spend some time with a librarian and to sort through the sources they find.

    2. Your librarian is just as knowledgeable about information resources and the research process as your
         professor is about his or her discipline. Collaborate with your librarian so that you can benefit from
         his or her knowledge.

    3. Try to learn from the librarian so that you can increase your research skills. You'll need these skills as
         you advance in your academic coursework, and you'll rely on these skills when you're in the workplace.

    4. The librarian can lead you to the resources, but you have to select the best sources for your particular
         project. This takes time and effort on your part.

    5. Reference librarians are professional searchers who went to graduate school to learn how to do
         research. Reference librarians are here to help no matter how novice a student thinks her or his
         question is.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 242
    6. Students should also know that we ask questions like, "Where have you looked so far?" and "Have you
         had a library workshop before?" for a reason. It may sound like we're deferring the question, but what
         we're trying to do is gauge how much experience the student has with research and to avoid going
         over the same ground twice.

    7. Students should approach a librarian sooner rather than later. If a student isn't finding what they
         need within fifteen minutes or so, they need to come find a librarian. Getting help early will save the
         student a lot of time and energy.

    8. If you don't have a well-defined topic to research, or if you don't know what information resources
         you're hoping to find, come to the reference desk with a copy of your class assignment. The librarian
         will be glad to help you to select a topic that's suitable for your assignment and to help you access the
         resources you need. Having at least a general topic in mind and knowing what the assignment entails
         (peer-reviewed only, three different types of sources, etc.) helps immensely.

    9. Most academic librarians are willing to schedule in-depth research consultations with students. If you
         feel you'll need more time and attention than you might normally receive at the reference desk or if
         you're shy about discussing your research interest in a public area, ask the librarian for an
         appointment.

   10. Students, if they know their topic, should be as specific as possible in what they ask for. Students who
         are struggling with identifying a narrow topic should seek help from either their professors or
         librarians. We can help you find sources if your topic is clear.

   11. Students should know that many questions do not have ready-made or one-stop answers. Students
         are encouraged to understand that an interface with a reference librarian is a dialog and part of a
         recursive, repetitive process. Consider making time for this process and take an active role in the
         exchange.

   12. Be sure to show appreciation to the librarian for their assistance.

243 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 244
   Ready to delve into the rich traditions of Oklahoma State University, Pistol Pete set off towards the Edmon
Low Library, the hub of knowledge and research on campus. As he approached the grand structure, he felt
a sense of excitement, knowing that the resources within its walls held the information he sought for his
upcoming speech.

   Upon entering the library, he headed straight for the help desk, where a friendly librarian welcomed him.
Pistol Pete explained his mission: to gather substantial and credible information about OSU traditions for his
speech. The librarian guided him through the process of using the library's comprehensive digital archives and
databases, showing him how to navigate the vast reservoir of information.

   His first step was to explore the OSU digital collections. Through this, Pete found historical documents,
photographs, and even archived newsletters that offered a glimpse into the traditions of the past. He
meticulously went through these sources, taking notes and saving the documents that offered unique insights
about the traditions.

   Next, he accessed the OSU institutional repository, which stored scholarly works from the university. He
found several academic papers and research articles detailing the history and significance of OSU traditions.
These scholarly sources provided a deeper understanding and a robust academic perspective, reinforcing the
information he had gathered from the digital collections.

   Pete then decided to explore some print resources. The librarian directed him to several books in the library
that dealt with the history and traditions of Oklahoma State University. With each book he flipped through,
Pete discovered more details, anecdotes, and explanations about the cherished customs of OSU.

   Lastly, the librarian suggested a valuable source that Pete had not considered - the university yearbooks.
Stored in the library's special collections, these yearbooks were a treasure trove of information, providing
firsthand accounts of the traditions as they evolved through the years. Pete spent hours poring over these
yearbooks, captivated by the vivid pictures and descriptions they contained.

   With a substantial list of sources, Pistol Pete felt confident and well-equipped to craft his speech. He had
not only gathered valuable information about OSU traditions but also understood their historical context and
significance more deeply. With a sense of accomplishment, Pete thanked the librarian for her assistance and
left the Edmon Low Library, ready to use his newfound knowledge to create a compelling and informative
speech. How important is finding diverse forms of source material for your informative presentation? Will
you visit Edmon Low Library like Pete?

*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                                             References

George, M. W. (2008). The elements of library research: What every student needs to know. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

245 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                 8.2 What Is Research?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1637#audio-1637-1

   Say it with me: "Research is fun!" OK, now we know that some of you just looked at that sentence and totally
disagree, but we're here to tell you that research is fun. Now, this doesn't mean that research is easy. In fact,
research can be quite difficult and time consuming, but it's most definitely fun. Let us explain why. First, when
conducting research you get to ask questions and actually find answers. If you have ever wondered what the

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 246
best strategies are when being interviewed for a job, research will tell you. If you've ever wondered what it
takes to be a NASCAR driver, an astronaut, a marine biologist, or a university professor, once again, research
is one of the easiest ways to find answers to questions you're interested in knowing. Second, research can open
a world you never knew existed. We often find ideas we had never considered and learn facts we never knew
when we go through the research process. Lastly, research can lead you to new ideas and activities. Maybe you
want to learn how to compose music, draw, learn a foreign language, or write a screenplay; research is always
the best step toward learning anything.

   For the purposes of this book, we define research as scholarly investigation into a topic in order to discover,
revise, or report facts, theories, and applications. Now you'll notice that there are three distinct parts of
research: discovering, revising, and reporting. The first type of research is when people conduct some kind of
study and find something completely new. For example, in 1928 Alexander Fleming accidentally discovered the
first antibiotic, penicillin. Before this discovery, there were no antibiotics and simple infections killed people
regularly. In this case, Fleming conducted research and discovered something not known to scientists before
that time.

   The second type of research occurs when people revise existing facts, theories, and applications. The bulk
of the work of modern scientists is not really in discovering new things, but rather trying to improve older
discoveries. For example, to improve upon the work of Fleming's first antibiotic, a group of Croatian
researchers created azithromycin. Today azithromycin is licensed by Pfizer Inc. under the name Zithromax.
In essence, the Croatian scientists built on the work of Fleming and ultimately revised our ability to treat
infectious diseases. Today, azithromycin is one of the most prescribed antibiotics in the world.

   The last part of research is called the reporting function of research. This is the phase when you accumulate
information about a topic and report that information to others. For example, in the previous two paragraphs,
we conducted research on the history of antibiotics and provided you with that information. We did not
discover anything, nor did we revise anything; we are just reporting the research.

   In addition to the three functions of research, there are also three end results that researchers strive toward:
facts, theories, and applications. First, a fact is a truth that is arrived at through the scientific process. For
example, in the world of psychology, it is a fact that the human brain influences human behavior. Centuries
ago, people believed that human behavior was a result of various combinations of black and yellow biles
running through our bodies. However, research failed to find support for this idea, whereas research
increasingly found support for the connection between the brain and behavior. Facts are difficult to attain--it
can take generations of research before a theory gains acceptance as a scientific fact.

   Second, researchers conduct research to understand, contradict, or support theories. A theory is a proposed
explanation for a phenomenon that can be tested scientifically. Scientists work with theories for a very
long time, testing them under a variety of conditions attempting to replicate earlier findings or to identify
conditions under which earlier findings do not hold true. For example, one theory that often surprises people
is the universal theory of gravity. Many people believe that our understanding of gravity is set in stone, and
much of physics relies on the assumption that gravity exists, but gravity is not a fact. The fact that the theory
of gravity explains is that if I hold my keys out and let go, they will fall to the floor. Physicists are still debating
how gravity actually functions and speculating about other explanations for why my keys will fall to the floor.
So from a researcher's perspective, very few things are scientific facts.

   Lastly, researchers often look for new applications for something that already exists. For example, botulism
was at one point a dreaded bacterium that plagued the US food supply and led to many deaths. In the 1980s, an
ophthalmologist named Allan Scott started using a version of botulism to treat muscle spasms in a drug called
onabotulinumtoxinA--better known by the brand name Botox (Williamson, 2011). Richard Clark, a plastic
surgeon, reported in a 1989 article that the drug also had the side effect of decreasing wrinkles (Clark & Berris,

247 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
1989). From deadly bacteria to medical cure to one of the most commonly used cosmetic drugs in the world,
the history of Botox has been a constant stream of new applications.

                     PRIMARY RESEARCH

Research generally falls into one of two categories: primary and secondary. Primary research is carried out
to discover or revise facts, theories, and applications and is reported by the person conducting the research.
Primary research can be considered an active form of research because the researcher is actually conducting
the research for the purpose of creating new knowledge. For the purposes of your speech, you may utilize two
basic categories of primary research: surveys and interviews.

SURVEYS YOU CONDUCT

The first type of primary research you might conduct is a survey. A survey is a collection of facts, figures, or
opinions gathered from participants used to indicate how everyone within a target group may respond. Maybe
you're going to be speaking before a board of education about its plans to build a new library, so you create a
survey and distribute it to all your neighbors seeking their feedback on the project. During your speech, you
could then discuss your survey and the results you found.

   Depending on the amount of time you have and the funding available, there are a number of different
ways you could survey people. The most expensive method of surveying is sending surveys through the postal
system. Unfortunately, most people do not respond to surveys they receive through the mail, so the number of
completed surveys you get back tends to be very low (often under 20 percent).

   To make surveying cheaper, many people prefer to use the Internet or to approach people face-to-face and
ask them to participate. Internet surveying can be very useful and cheap, but you'll still have the same problem
mail surveys do--getting people to fill out your survey. Face-to-face surveying, on the other hand, is time
consuming but generally results in a higher number of completed surveys.

   Ultimately, when determining whether you should conduct a survey, Wrench, Thomas-Maddox, Richmond,
and McCroskey suggest that you ask yourself four basic questions (Wrench et al., 2008). First, "Do you know
what you want to ask?" Surveys, by their very nature, are concrete--once you've handed it to one person, you
need to hand out the same form to every person to be able to compare results. If you're not sure what questions
need to be asked, then a survey is not appropriate. Second, "Do you really need to collect data?" Often you
can find information in textbooks, scholarly articles, magazines, and other places. If the information already

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 248
exists, then why are you duplicating the information? Third, "Do your participants know the information you
want to find out, or if they do know, will they tell you?" One of the biggest mistakes novice survey researchers
make is to ask questions that their participants can't or won't answer. Asking a young child for her or his
parents' gross income doesn't make sense, but then neither does asking an adult how many times they've been
to see a physician in the past ten years. The flip side to this question is, "Will your participants tell you?" If
the information could be potentially damaging, people are more likely to either lie on a survey or leave the
question blank.

   The last question is, "Is your goal generalizable?" Generalizability occurs when we attempt to survey a small
number of people in the hopes of representing a much larger group of people. For example, maybe you want to
find out how people in your community feel about a new swimming pool. The whole community may contain
one thousand families, but it would be impractical to try to survey all those families, so you decide to survey
two hundred families instead. The ultimate question for researchers is whether those two hundred families
can be generalized to the one thousand families. The number may be large enough (as opposed to surveying,
say, twenty families), but if the two hundred families you survey only represent the rich part of town, then your
sample (the two hundred families) is not generalizable to the entire population (one thousand families).

INTERVIEWS YOU CONDUCT

The second type of primary research you might conduct is an interview. An interview is a conversation in
which the interviewer asks a series of questions aimed at learning facts, figures, or opinions from one or more
respondents. As with a survey, an interviewer generally has a list of prepared questions to ask; but unlike a
survey, an interview allows for follow-up questions that can aid in understanding why a respondent gave a
certain answer. Sometimes interviews are conducted on a one-on-one basis, but other times interviews are
conducted with a larger group, which is commonly referred to as a focus group.

   One-on-one interviews enable an interviewer to receive information about a given topic with little or no
interference from others. Focus groups are good for eliciting information, but they are also good for seeing
how groups of people interact and perceive topics. Often information that is elicited in a one-on-one interview
is different from the information gained from a group of people interacting.

   If you're preparing for a speech on implementing project management skills for student organizations, you
may want to interview a handful of student organization leaders for their input. You may also want to get
a group of students who have led successful projects for their student organizations and see what they did
right. You could also get a group of students who have had bad project outcomes and try to understand what
went wrong. Ultimately, you could use all this information not only to help you understand the needs student
organizations have concerning project management but also to provide support for the recommendations you
make during your speech.

249 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                   SECONDARY RESEARCH

Secondary research is carried out to discover or revise facts, theories, and applications--similar to primary
research--but it is reported by someone not involved in conducting the actual research. Most of what we
consider "research" falls into the category of secondary research. If you've ever written a paper for one of your
classes and had to cite sources, then you've conducted secondary research. Secondary research is when you
report the results of someone else's primary research. If you read an academic article about an experiment that
a group of researchers conducted and then tell your audience about that study, you are delivering information
secondhand to your audience. You as the speaker did not conduct the study, so you are reporting what
someone else has written.

   One place where secondary research can get people into trouble is when they attempt to use someone
else's secondary research. In a book titled Unleashing the Power of PR: A Contrarian's Guide to Marketing and
Communication, Mark Weiner cites research conducted by the investment firm Veronis Suhler Stevenson
Partners (Weiner, 2006). It might be tempting to leave out Weiner's book and just cite the Veronis Suhler
Stevenson Partners' research instead. While this may be easier, it's not exactly ethical. Mark Weiner spent
time conducting research and locating primary research; when you steal one of his sources, it's like you're
stealing part of the work he's done. Your secondary research should still be your research. If you haven't laid
eyes on the original study (e.g., Veronis Suhler Stevenson Partners' study), you shouldn't give your audience
the impression that you have. An exception to this rule is if you are citing a translation of something originally
written in a foreign language--and in that case, you still need to mention that you're using a translation and
not the original.

   Aside from the ethics of telling your audience where you got your information, you need to be aware that
published sources sometimes make mistakes when citing information, so you could find yourself incorrectly
providing information based on a mistake in Weiner's book. Think of it like the old game of "Telephone," in
which you tell one person a phrase, that person turns to the next person and repeats the phrase, and by the
time thirty people have completed the process, the final phrase doesn't remotely resemble the original. When
people pass information along without verifying it themselves, there is always an increased likelihood of error.

                                             References

Clark, R. P., & Berris, C. E. (1989, August). Botulinum toxin: A treatment for facial asymmetry caused by facial
nerve paralysis. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, 84(2), 353-355.

   Weiner, M. (2006). Unleashing the power of PR: A contrarian's guide to marketing and communication. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass and the International Association of Business Communicators.

   Williamson, B. (2011, July 12). The wonders and dangers of Botox. Australian Broadcasting Corporation,
Adelaide. Retrieved July 14, 2011, from http://www.abc.net.au/local/stories/2011/07/11/3266766.htm

   Wrench, J. S., Thomas-Maddox, C., Richmond, V. P., & McCroskey, J. C. (2008). Quantitative methods for
communication researchers: A hands on approach. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 250
         8.3 Developing a Research Strategy

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1640#audio-1640-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1640#audio-1640-2

251 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   In the previous section we discussed what research was and the difference between primary and secondary
research. In this section, we are going to explore how to develop a research strategy. Think of a research
strategy as your personal map. The end destination is the actual speech, and along the way, there are various
steps you need to complete to reach your destination: the speech. From the day you receive your speech
assignment, the more clearly you map out the steps you need to take leading up to the date when you will
give the speech, the easier your speech development process will be. In the rest of this section, we are going
to discuss time management, determining your research needs, finding your sources, and evaluating your
sources.

                        ALLOTTING TIME

First and foremost, when starting a new project, no matter how big or small, it is important to seriously
consider how much time that project is going to take. To help us discuss the issue of time with regard to
preparing your speech, we're going to examine what the Project Management Institute refers to as the project
life cycle, or "the phases that connect the beginning of a project to its end" (Project Management Institute,
2004). Often in a public speaking class, the time you have is fairly concrete. You may have two or three weeks
between speeches in a semester course or one to two weeks in a quarter course. In either case, from the

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 252
moment your instructor gives you the assigned speech, the proverbial clock is ticking. With each passing day,
you are losing precious time in your speech preparation process. Now, we realize that as a college student you
probably have many things vying for your time in life: school, family, jobs, friends, or dating partners. For this
reason, you need to really think through how much time it's going to take you to complete your preparation in
terms of both research and speech preparation.

RESEARCH TIME

The first step that takes a good chunk of your time is researching your speech. Whether you are conducting
primary research or relying on secondary research sources, you're going to be spending a significant amount
of time researching.

   As Howard and Taggart point out in their book Research Matters, research is not just a one-and-done task
(Howard & Taggart, 2010). As you develop your speech, you may realize that you want to address a question
or issue that didn't occur to you during your first round of research, or that you're missing a key piece of
information to support one of your points. For these reasons, it's always wise to allow extra time for targeted
research later in your schedule.

   You also need to take into account the possibility of meeting with a research librarian. Although research
librarians have many useful tips and tricks, they have schedules just like anyone else. If you know you are going
to need to speak with a librarian, try to set up an appointment ahead of time for the date when you think you'll
have your questions organized, and be ready to meet.

   A good rule of thumb is to devote no more than one-third of your speech preparation time to research (e.g.,
if you have three weeks before your speech date, your research should be done by the end of the first week).
If you are not careful, you could easily end up spending all your time on research and waiting until the last
minute to actually prepare your speech, which is highly inadvisable.

SPEECH PREPARATION TIME

The second task in speech preparation is to sit down and actually develop your speech. During this time
period, you will use the information you collected during your research to fully flesh out your ideas into a
complete speech. You may be making arguments using the research or creating visual aids. Whatever you need
to complete during this time period, you need to give yourself ample time to actually prepare your speech. One
common rule of thumb is one day of speech preparation per one minute of actual speaking time.

253 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   By allowing yourself enough time to prepare your speech, you're also buffering yourself against a variety of
things that can go wrong both in life and with your speech. Let's face it, life happens. Often events completely
outside our control happen, and these events could negatively impact our ability to prepare a good speech.
When you give yourself a little time buffer, you're already insulated from the possible negative effects on your
speech if something goes wrong.

   The last part of speech preparation is practice. Although some try to say that practice makes perfect, we
realize that perfection is never realistic because no one is perfect. We prefer this mantra: "Practice makes
permanent."

   And by "practice," we mean actual rehearsals in which you deliver your speech out loud. Speakers who only
script out their speeches or only think through them often forget their thoughts when they stand in front
of an audience. Research has shown that when individuals practice, their speech performance in front of
an audience is more closely aligned with their practice than people who just think about their speeches. In
essence, you need to allow yourself to become comfortable not only with the text of the speech but also with
the nonverbal delivery of the speech, so giving yourself plenty of speech preparation time also gives you more
practice time. We will discuss speech development and practice further in other chapters.

                 DETERMINING YOUR NEEDS

When starting your research, you want to start by asking yourself what you think you need. Obviously, you'll
need to have a good idea about what your topic is before just randomly looking at information in a library or
online. Your instructor may provide some very specific guidance for the type of information he or she wants
to see in your speech, so that's a good place to start determining your basic needs.

   Once you have a general idea of your basic needs, you can start to ask yourself a series of simple questions:
    1. What do I, personally, know about my topic?
    2. Do I have any clear gaps in my knowledge of my topic?
    3. Do I need to conduct primary research for my speech?
    4. What type of secondary research do I need?
              1. Do I need research related to facts?
             2. Do I need research related to theories?
             3. Do I need research related to applications?

The clearer you are about the type of research you need at the onset of the research process, the easier it will be
to locate specific information.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 254
                     FINDING RESOURCES

Once you have a general idea about the basic needs you have for your research, it's time to start tracking down
your secondary sources. Thankfully, we live in a world that is swimming with information. Back in the decades
when the authors of this textbook first started researching, we all had to go to a library and search through a
physical card catalog to find books. If you wanted to research a topic in magazine or journal articles, you had
to look up key terms in a giant book, printed annually, known as an index of periodicals. Researchers could
literally spend hours in the library and find just one or two sources that were applicable to their topic.

   Today, on the other hand, information is quite literally at our fingertips. Not only is information generally
more accessible, it is also considerably easier to access. In fact, we have the opposite problem from a couple of
decades ago--we have too much information at our fingertips. In addition, we now have to be more skeptical
about where that information is coming from. In this section we're going to discuss how to find information
in both nonacademic and academic sources.

255 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
NONACADEMIC INFORMATION SOURCES

Nonacademic information sources are sometimes also called popular press information sources; their primary
purpose is to be read by the general public. Most nonacademic information sources are written at a sixth-
to eighth-grade reading level, so they are very accessible. Although the information often contained in these
sources is often quite limited, the advantage of using nonacademic sources is that they appeal to a broad,
general audience.

BOOKS

The first source we have for finding secondary information is books. Now, the authors of your text are
admitted bibliophiles--we love books. Fiction, nonfiction, it doesn't really matter, we just love books. And,
thankfully, we live in a world where books abound and reading has never been easier. Unless your topic is very
cutting-edge, chances are someone has written a book about your topic at some point in history.

   Historically, the original purpose of libraries was to house manuscripts that were copied by hand and stored
in library collections. After Gutenberg created the printing press, we had the ability to mass produce writing,
and the handwritten manuscript gave way to the printed manuscript. In today's modern era, we are seeing
another change where printed manuscript is now giving way, to some extent, to the electronic manuscript.
Amazon.com's Kindle, Barnes & Noble's Nook, Apple's iPad, and Sony's e-Ink-based readers are examples of
the new hardware enabling people to take entire libraries of information with them wherever they go. We now
can carry the amount of information that used to be housed in the greatest historic libraries in the palms of
our hands. When you sit back and really think about it, that's pretty darn cool!

   In today's world, there are three basic types of libraries you should be aware of: physical library, physical/
electronic library, and e-online library. The physical library is a library that exists only in the physical world.
Many small community or county library collections are available only if you physically go into the library
and check out a book. We highly recommend doing this at some point. Libraries today generally model the
US Library of Congress's card catalog system. As such, most library layouts are similar. This familiar layout
makes it much easier to find information if you are using multiple libraries. Furthermore, because the Library
of Congress catalogs information by type, if you find one book that is useful for you, it's very likely that
surrounding books on the same shelf will also be useful. When people don't take the time to physically browse
in a library, they often miss out on some great information.

   The second type of library is the library that has both physical and electronic components. Most college
and university libraries have both the physical stacks (where the books are located) and electronic databases
containing e-books. The two largest e-book databases are ebrary (http://www.ebrary.com) and NetLibrary
(http://www.netlibrary.com). Although these library collections are generally cost-prohibitive for an
individual, more and more academic institutions are subscribing to them. Some libraries are also making
portions of their collections available online for free: Harvard University's Digital Collections
(http://digitalcollections.harvard.edu), New York Public Library's E-book Collection (http://ebooks.nypl.org),

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 256
The British Library's Online Gallery (http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/virtualbooks/index.html#), and the US
Library of Congress (http://www.loc.gov).

   One of the greatest advantages to using libraries for finding books is that you can search not only their
books, but often a wide network of other academic institutions' books as well. Furthermore, in today's world,
we have one of the greatest online card catalogs ever created--and it wasn't created for libraries at all! Retail
bookseller sites like Amazon.com can be a great source for finding books that may be applicable to your topic,
and the best part is, you don't actually need to purchase the book if you use your library, because your library
may actually own a copy of a book you find on a bookseller site. You can pick a topic and then search for that
topic on a bookseller site. If you find a book that you think may be appropriate, plug that book's title into your
school's electronic library catalog. If your library owns the book, you can go to the library and pick it up today.

   If your library doesn't own it, do you still have an option other than buying the book? Yes: interlibrary
loans. An interlibrary loan is a process where librarians are able to search other libraries to locate the book a
researcher is trying to find. If another library has that book, then the library asks to borrow it for a short period
of time. Depending on how easy a book is to find, your library could receive it in a couple of days or a couple
of weeks. Keep in mind that interlibrary loans take time, so do not expect to get a book at the last minute. The
more lead time you provide a librarian to find a book you are looking for, the greater the likelihood that the
book will be sent through the mail to your library on time.

   The final type of library is a relatively new one, the library that exists only online. With the influx of
computer technology, we have started to create vast stores of digitized content from around the world. These
online libraries contain full-text documents free of charge to everyone. Some online libraries we recommend
are Project Gutenberg (http://www.gutenberg.org), Google Books (http://books.google.com), Read Print
(http://www.readprint.com), Open Library (http://openlibrary.org), and Get Free e-Books
(http://www.getfreeebooks.com). This is a short list of just a handful of the libraries that are now offering free
e-content.

GENERAL-INTEREST PERIODICALS

The second category of information you may seek out includes general-interest periodicals. These are
magazines and newsletters published on a fairly systematic basis. Some popular magazines in this category
include The New Yorker, People, Reader's Digest, Parade, Smithsonian, and The Saturday Evening Post. These
magazines are considered "general interest" because most people in the United States could pick up a copy of
these magazines and find them interesting and topical.

257 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SPECIAL-INTEREST PERIODICALS

Special-interest periodicals are magazines and newsletters that are published for a narrower audience. In a
2005 article, Business Wire noted that in the United States there are over ten thousand different magazines
published annually, but only two thousand of those magazines have significant circulation1. Some more widely
known special-interest periodicals are Sports Illustrated, Bloomberg's Business Week, Gentleman's Quarterly, Vogue,
Popular Science, and House and Garden. But for every major magazine, there are a great many other lesser-known
magazines like American Coin Op Magazine, Varmint Hunter, Shark Diver Magazine, Pet Product News International,
Water Garden News, to name just a few.

NEWSPAPERS AND BLOGS

Another major source of nonacademic information is newspapers and blogs. Thankfully, we live in a society
that has a free press. We've opted to include both newspapers and blogs in this category. A few blogs (e.g.,
The Huffington Post, Talkingpoints Memo, News Max, The Daily Beast, Salon) function similarly to traditional
newspapers. Furthermore, in the past few years we've lost many traditional newspapers around the United
States; cities that used to have four or five daily papers may now only have one or two.

   According to newspapers.com, the top ten newspapers in the United States are USA Today, the Wall Street
Journal, the New York Times, the Los Angeles Times, the Washington Post, the New York Daily News, the Chicago
Tribune, the New York Post, Long Island Newsday, and the Houston Chronicle. Most colleges and universities
subscribe to a number of these newspapers in paper form or have access to them electronically. Furthermore,
LexisNexis, a database many colleges and universities subscribe to, has access to full text newspaper articles
from these newspapers and many more around the world.

   In addition to traditional newspapers, blogs are becoming a mainstay of information in today's society. In
fact, since the dawn of the twenty-first century many major news stories have been broken by professional
bloggers rather than traditional newspaper reporters (Ochman, 2007). Although anyone can create a blog,
there are many reputable blog sites that are run by professional journalists. As such, blogs can be a great source
of information. However, as with all information on the Internet, you often have to wade through a lot of junk
to find useful, accurate information.

   We do not personally endorse any blogs, but according to Technorati.com, the top eight most commonly
read blogs in the world (in 2011) are as follows:

    1. The Huffington Post (http://www.huffingtonpost.com)
    2. Gizmodo (http://www.gizmodo.com)
    3. TechCrunch (http://www.techcrunch.com)
    4. Mashable! (http://mashable.com)
    5. Engadget (http://www.engadget.com)

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 258
    6. Boing Boing (http://www.boingboing.net)
    7. The Daily Beast (http://www.thedailybeast.com)
    8. TMZ (http://www.tmz.com)

ENCYCLOPEDIAS

Another type of source that you may encounter is the encyclopedia. Encyclopedias are information sources
that provide short, very general information about a topic. Encyclopedias are available in both print and
electronic formats, and their content can range from eclectic and general (e.g., Encyclopdia Britannica) to the
very specific (e.g., Encyclopedia of 20th Century Architecture, or Encyclopedia of Afterlife Beliefs and Phenomena). It is
important to keep in mind that encyclopedias are designed to give only brief, fairly superficial summaries of a
topic area. Thus they may be useful for finding out what something is if it is referenced in another source, but
they are generally not a useful source for your actual speech. In fact, many instructors do not allow students to
use encyclopedias as sources for their speeches for this very reason.

   One of the most popular online encyclopedic sources is Wikipedia. Like other encyclopedias, it can be useful
for finding out basic information (e.g., what baseball teams did Catfish Hunter play for?) but will not give you
the depth of information you need for a speech. Also keep in mind that Wikipedia, unlike the general and
specialized encyclopedias available through your library, can be edited by anyone and therefore often contains
content errors and biased information. If you are a fan of The Colbert Report, you probably know that host
Stephen Colbert has, on several occasions, asked viewers to change Wikipedia content to reflect his views of
the world. This is just one example of why one should always be careful of information on the web, but this
advice is even more important when considering group-edited sites such as Wikipedia.

WEBSITES

Websites are the last major source of nonacademic information. In the twenty-first century we live in a world
where there is a considerable amount of information readily available at our fingertips. Unfortunately, you
can spend hours and hours searching for information and never quite find what you're looking for if you don't
devise an Internet search strategy. First, you need to select a good search engine to help you find appropriate
information. The graphic below contains a list of common search engines and the types of information they
are useful for finding.

259 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 260
ACADEMIC INFORMATION SOURCES

After nonacademic sources, the second major source for finding information comes from academics. The
main difference between academic or scholarly information and the information you get from the popular
press is oversight. In the nonacademic world, the primary gatekeeper of information is the editor, who may or
may not be a content expert. In academia, we have established a way to perform a series of checks to ensure
that the information is accurate and follows agreed-upon academic standards. For example, this book, or
portions of this book, were read by dozens of academics who provided feedback. Having this extra step in the
writing process is time consuming, but it provides an extra level of confidence in the relevance and accuracy
of the information. In this section, we will discuss scholarly books and articles, computerized databases, and
finding scholarly information on the web.

SCHOLARLY BOOKS

College and university libraries are filled with books written by academics. According to the Text and
Academic Authors Association (http://www.taaonline.net), there are two types of scholarly books: textbooks
and academic books. Textbooks are books that are written about a segment of content within a field of
academic study and are written for undergraduate or graduate student audiences. These books tend to be very
specifically focused. Take this book, for instance. We are not trying to introduce you to the entire world of
human communication, just one small aspect of it: public speaking. Textbooks tend to be written at a fairly
easy reading level and are designed to transfer information in a manner that mirrors classroom teaching to
some extent. Also, textbooks are secondary sources of information. They are designed to survey the research
available in a particular field rather than to present new research.

   Academic books are books that are primarily written for other academics for informational and research
purposes. Generally speaking, when instructors ask for you to find scholarly books, they are referring to
academic books. Thankfully, there are hundreds of thousands of academic books published on almost every
topic you can imagine. In the field of communication, there are a handful of major publishers who publish
academic books: SAGE (http://www.sagepub.com), Routledge (http://www.routledge.com), Jossey-Bass
(http://www.josseybass.com), Pfeiffer (http://www.pfeiffer.com), the American Psychological Association
(http://www.apa.org/pubs/books), and the National Communication Association (http://www.ncastore.com),
among others. In addition to the major publishers who publish academic books, there are also many university
presses who publish academic books: SUNY Press (http://www.sunypress.edu), Oxford University Press
(http://www.oup.com/us), University of South Carolina Press (http://www.sc.edu/uscpress), Baylor University
Press (http://www.baylorpress.com), University of Illinois Press (http://www.press.uillinois.edu), and the
University of Alabama Press (http://www.uapress.ua.edu) are just a few of them.

261 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SCHOLARLY ARTICLES

Because most academic writing comes in the form of scholarly articles or journal articles, that is the best
place for finding academic research on a given topic. Every academic subfield has its own journals, so you
should never have a problem finding the best and most recent research on a topic. However, scholarly articles
are written for a scholarly audience, so reading scholarly articles takes more time than if you were to read a
magazine article in the popular press. It's also helpful to realize that there may be parts of the article you simply
do not have the background knowledge to understand, and there is nothing wrong with that. Many research
studies are conducted by quantitative researchers who rely on statistics to examine phenomena. Unless you
have training in understanding the statistics, it is difficult to interpret the statistical information that appears
in these articles. Instead, focus on the beginning part of the article where the author(s) will discuss previous
research (secondary research), and then focus at the end of the article, where the author(s) explain what was
found in their research (primary research).

COMPUTERIZED DATABASES

Finding academic research is easier today than it ever has been in the past because of large computer
databases containing research. Here's how these databases work. A database company signs contracts with
publishers to gain the right to store the publishers' content electronically. The database companies then create
thematic databases containing publications related to general areas of knowledge (business, communication,
psychology, medicine, etc.). The database companies then sell subscriptions to these databases to libraries.

   The largest of these database companies is a group called EBSCO Publishing, which runs both EBSCO Host
(an e-journal provider) and NetLibrary (a large e-book library) (http://www.ebscohost.com). Some of the more
popular databases that EBSCO provides to colleges and universities are: Academic Search Complete, Business
Source Complete, Communication and Mass Media Complete, Education Research Complete, Humanities
International Complete, Philosopher's Index, Political Science Complete, PsycArticles, and Vocational and
Career Collection. Academic Search Complete is the broadest of all the databases and casts a fairly wide
net across numerous fields. Information that you find using databases can contain both nonacademic and
academic information, so EBSCO Host has built in a number of filtering options to help you limit the types of
information available.

   We strongly recommend checking out your library's website to see what databases they have available and
if they have any online tutorials for finding sources using the databases to which your library subscribes.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 262
SCHOLARLY INFORMATION ON THE WEB

In addition to the subscription databases that exist on the web, there are also a number of great sources for
scholarly information on the web. As mentioned earlier, however, finding scholarly information on the web
poses a problem because anyone can post information on the web. Fortunately, there are a number of great
websites that attempt to help filter this information for us.

Website                             Type of Information
http://www.doaj.org                 The Directory of Open Access Journals is an online database of all freely available
http://scholar.google.com           academic journals online.

http://www.cios.org                 Google Scholar attempts to filter out nonacademic information. Unfortunately, it
http://xxx.lanl.gov                 tends to return a large number of for-pay site results.
http://www.biomedcentral.com
http://www.osti.gov/eprints         Communication Institute for Online Scholarship is a clearinghouse for online
http://www.freemedicaljournals.com  communication scholarship. This site contains full-text journals and books.
http://highwire.stanford.edu
http://www.plosbiology.org          This is an open access site devoted to making physical science research accessible.
https://dp.la/
http://vlib.org                     BioMed Central provides open-access medical research.

                                    The E-print Network provides access to a range of scholarly research that interests
                                    people working for the Department of Energy.

                                    This site provides the public with free access to medical journals.

                                    This is the link to Stanford University's free, full-text science archives.

                                    This is the Public Library of Science's journal for biology.

                                    The Digital Public Library of America brings together the riches of America's
                                    libraries, archives, and museums, and makes them freely available to the world

                                    The WWW Virtual Library provides annotated lists of websites compiled by
                                    scholars in specific areas.

263 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
TIPS FOR FINDING INFORMATION SOURCES

Now that we've given you plenty of different places to start looking for research, we need to help you sort
through the research. In this section, we're going to provide a series of tips that should make this process
easier and help you find appropriate information quickly. And here is our first tip: We cannot recommend
Mary George's book The Elements of Library Research: What Every Student Needs to Know more highly. Honestly,
we wish this book had been around when we were just learning how to research.

CREATE A RESEARCH LOG

Nothing is more disheartening than when you find yourself at 1:00 a.m. asking, "Haven't I already read this?"
We've all learned the tough lessons of research, and this is one that keeps coming back to bite us in the
backside if we're not careful. According to a very useful book called The Elements of Library Research by M.
W. George, a research log is a "step-by-step account of the process of identifying, obtaining, and evaluating
sources for a specific project, similar to a lab note-book in an experimental setting" (George, 2008). In essence,
George believes that keeping a log of what you've done is very helpful because it can help you keep track of
what you've read thus far. You can use a good old-fashioned notebook, or if you carry around your laptop or
netbook with you, you can always keep it digitally. While there are expensive programs like Microsoft Office
OneNote that can be used for note keeping, there are also a number of free tools that could be adapted as well.

START WITH BACKGROUND INFORMATION

It's not unusual for students to try to jump right into the meat of a topic, only to find out that there is a
lot of technical language they just don't understand. For this reason, you may want to start your research
with sources written for the general public. Generally, these lower-level sources are great for background
information on a topic and are helpful when trying to learn the basic vocabulary of a subject area.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 264
SEARCH YOUR LIBRARY'S COMPUTERS

Once you've started getting a general grasp of the broad content area you want to investigate, it's time to sit
down and see what your school's library has to offer. If you do not have much experience in using your library's
website, see if the website contains an online tutorial. Most schools offer online tutorials to show students the
resources that students can access. If your school doesn't have an online tutorial, you may want to call your
library and schedule an appointment with a research librarian to learn how to use the school's computers. Also,
if you tell your librarian that you want to learn how to use the library, he or she may be able to direct you to
online resources that you may have missed.

   Try to search as many different databases as possible. Look for relevant books, e-books, newspaper articles,
magazine articles, journal articles, and media files. Modern college and university libraries have a ton of
sources, and one search may not find everything you are looking for on the first pass. Furthermore, don't
forget to think about synonyms for topics. The more synonyms you can generate for your topic, the better
you'll be at finding information.

LEARN TO SKIM

If you sit down and try to completely read every article or book you find, it will take you a very long time to get
through all the information. Start by reading the introductory paragraphs. Generally, the first few paragraphs
will give you a good idea about the overall topic. If you're reading a research article, start by reading the
abstract. If the first few paragraphs or abstract don't sound like they're applicable, there's a good chance the
source won't be useful for you. Second, look for highlighted, italicized, or bulleted information. Generally,
authors use highlighting, italics, and bullets to separate information to make it jump out for readers. Third,
look for tables, charts, graphs, and figures. All these forms are separated from the text to make the information
more easily understandable for a reader, so seeing if the content is relevant is a way to see if it helps you.
Fourth, look at headings and subheadings. Headings and subheadings show you how an author has grouped
information into meaningful segments. If you read the headings and subheadings and nothing jumps out as
relevant, that's another indication that there may not be anything useful in that source. Lastly, take good notes
while you're skimming. One way to take good notes is to attach a sticky note to each source. If you find relevant
information, write that information on the sticky note along with the page number. If you don't find useful
information in a source, just write "nothing" on the sticky note and move on to the next source. This way when
you need to sort through your information, you'll be able to quickly see what information was useful and locate
the information. Other people prefer to create a series of note cards to help them organize their information.
Whatever works best for you is what you should use.

265 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
READ BIBLIOGRAPHIES/REFERENCE PAGES

After you've finished reading useful sources, see who those sources cited on their bibliographies or reference
pages. We call this method backtracking. Often the sources cited by others can lead us to even better sources
than the ones we found initially.

ASK FOR HELP

Don't be afraid to ask for help. As we said earlier in this chapter, reference librarians are your friends. They
won't do your work for you, but they are more than willing to help if you ask.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 266
                   EVALUATING RESOURCES

The final step in research occurs once you've found resources relevant to your topic: evaluating the quality of
those resources. Below is a list of six questions to ask yourself about the sources you've collected; these are
drawn from the book The Elements of Library Research by M. W. George (Geogrge, 2008).

WHAT IS THE DATE OF PUBLICATION?

The first question you need to ask yourself is the date of the source's publication. Although there may be
classic studies that you want to cite in your speech, generally, the more recent the information, the better your

267 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
presentation will be. As an example, if you want to talk about the current state of women's education in the
United States, relying on information from the 1950s that debated whether "coeds" should attend class along
with male students is clearly not appropriate. Instead you'd want to use information published within the past
five to ten years.

WHO IS THE AUTHOR?

The next question you want to ask yourself is about the author. Who is the author? What are her or his
credentials? Does he or she work for a corporation, college, or university? Is a political or commercial agenda
apparent in the writing? The more information we can learn about an author, the better our understanding
and treatment of that author's work will be. Furthermore, if we know that an author is clearly biased in a
specific manner, ethically we must tell our audience members. If we pretend an author is unbiased when we
know better, we are essentially lying to our audience.

WHO IS THE PUBLISHER?

In addition to knowing who the author is, we also want to know who the publisher is. While there are many
mainstream publishers and academic press publishers, there are also many fringe publishers. For example,
maybe you're reading a research report published by the Cato Institute. While the Cato Institute may sound
like a regular publisher, it is actually a libertarian think tank (http://www.cato.org). As such, you can be sure
that the information in its publications will have a specific political bias. While the person writing the research
report may be an upstanding author with numerous credits, the Cato Institute only publishes reports that
adhere to its political philosophy. Generally, a cursory examination of a publisher's website is a good indication
of the specific political bias. Most websites will have an "About" section or an "FAQ" section that will explain
who the publisher is.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 268
IS IT ACADEMIC OR NONACADEMIC?

The next question you want to ask yourself is whether the information comes from an academic or a
nonacademic source. Because of the enhanced scrutiny academic sources go through, we argue that you can
generally rely more on the information contained in academic sources than nonacademic sources. One very
notorious example of the difference between academic versus nonacademic information can be seen in the
problem of popular-culture author John Gray, author of Men are From Mars, Women are From Venus. Gray, who
received a PhD via a correspondence program from Columbia Pacific University in 1982, has written numerous
books on the topic of men and women. Unfortunately, the academic research on the subject of sex and gender
differences is often very much at odds with Gray's writing. For a great critique of Gray's writings, check out
Julia Wood's article in the Southern Communication Journal (Wood, 2002). Ultimately, we strongly believe that
using academic publications is always in your best interest because they generally contain the most reliable
information.

WHAT IS THE QUALITY OF THE BIBLIOGRAPHY/REFERENCE
PAGE?

Another great indicator of a well-thought-out and researched source is the quality of its bibliography or
reference page. If you look at a source's bibliography or reference page and it has only a couple of citations,
then you can assume that either the information was not properly cited or it was largely made up by someone.
Even popular-press books can contain great bibliographies and reference pages, so checking them out is a
great way to see if an author has done her or his homework prior to writing a text. As noted above, it is also an
excellent way to find additional resources on a topic.

DO PEOPLE CITE THE WORK?

The last question to ask about a source is, "Are other people actively citing the work?" One way to find out
whether a given source is widely accepted is to see if numerous people are citing it. If you find an article that
has been cited by many other authors, then clearly the work has been viewed as credible and useful. If you're
doing research and you keep running across the same source over and over again, that is an indication that it's
an important study that you should probably take a look at. Many colleges and universities also subscribe to

269 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Science Citation Index (SCI), Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI), or the Arts and Humanities Citation Index
(AHCI), which are run through Institute for Scientific Information's Web of Knowledge database service
(http://isiwebofknowledge.com). All these databases help you find out where information has been cited by
other researchers.
1Total number of magazines published in the US is greater than 10,000 but only about 2,000 have significant
circulation. (2005, September 21). Business Wire. Retrieved from http://findarticles.com.

                                             References

George, M. W. (2008). The elements of library research: What every student needs to know. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press, p. 183.

   Howard, R. M., & Taggart, A. R. (2010). Research matters. New York: McGraw-Hill, pp. 102-103.
   Ochman, B. L. (2007, June 29). The top 10 news stories broken by bloggers. TechNewsWorld. [Web log post].
Retrieved July 14, 2011, from http://www.mpdailyfix.com/technewsworld-the-top-10-news-stories-broken-by-
bloggers.
   Project Management Institute. (2004). A guide to the project management body of knowledge: PMBOK guide (3rd
ed.). Newton Square, PA: Author, p. 19.
   Wood, J. T. (2002). A critical response to John Gray's Mars and Venus portrayals of men and women.
Southern Communication Journal, 67, 201-210.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 270
                   8.4 Citing Sources

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1643#audio-1643-1

   By this point you're probably exhausted after looking at countless sources, but there's still a lot of work that
needs to be done. Most public speaking teachers will require you to turn in either a bibliography or a reference
page with your speeches. In this section, we're going to explore how to properly cite your sources for a Modern

271 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Language Association (MLA) list of works cited or an American Psychological Association (APA) reference list.
We're also going to discuss plagiarism and how to avoid it.

                 WHY CITING IS IMPORTANT

Citing is important because it enables readers to see where you found information cited within a speech,
article, or book. Furthermore, not citing information properly is considered plagiarism, so ethically we want
to make sure that we give credit to the authors we use in a speech. While there are numerous citation styles to
choose from, the two most common style choices for public speaking are APA and MLA.

            APA VERSUS MLA SOURCE CITATIONS

Style refers to those components or features of a literary composition or oral presentation that have to do
with the form of expression rather than the content expressed (e.g., language, punctuation, parenthetical
citations, and endnotes). The APA and the MLA have created the two most commonly used style guides in
academia today. Generally speaking, scholars in the various social science fields (e.g., psychology, human
communication, business) are more likely to use APA style, and scholars in the various humanities fields (e.g.,
English, philosophy, rhetoric) are more likely to use MLA style. The two styles are quite different from each
other, so learning them does take time.

APA CITATIONS

The first common reference style your teacher may ask for is APA. As of October 2019, the American
Psychological Association published the seventh edition of the Publication Manual of the American Psychological
Association (http://www.apastyle.org) . The seventh edition provides considerable guidance on working with
and citing Internet sources.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 272
MLA CITATIONS

The second common reference style your teacher may ask for is MLA. In March 2009, the Modern Language
Association published the seventh edition of the MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers (Modern Language
Association, 2009) (http://www.mla.org/style). The seventh edition provides considerable guidance for citing
online sources and new media such as graphic narratives.

                CITING SOURCES IN A SPEECH

Once you have decided what sources best help you explain important terms and ideas in your speech or help
you build your arguments, it's time to place them into your speech. In this section, we're going to quickly
talk about using your research effectively within your speeches. Citing sources within a speech is a three-step
process: set up the citation, give the citation, and explain the citation.

   First, you want to set up your audience for the citation. The setup is one or two sentences that are general
statements that lead to the specific information you are going to discuss from your source. Here's an example:

273 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
"Workplace bullying is becoming an increasing problem for US organizations." Notice that this statement
doesn't provide a specific citation yet, but the statement introduces the basic topic.

   Second, you want to deliver the source; whether it is a direct quotation or a paraphrase of information from
a source doesn't matter at this point. A direct quotation is when you cite the actual words from a source with
no changes. To paraphrase is to take a source's basic idea and condense it using your own words. Here's an
example of both:

Direct      In a 2009 report titled Bullying: Getting Away With It, the Workplace Bullying Institute wrote, "Doing nothing to the bully
Quotation   (ensuring impunity) was the most common employer tactic (54%)."

Paraphrase According to a 2009 study by the Workplace Bullying Institute titled Bullying: Getting Away With It, when employees reported bullying, 54 percent of employers did nothing at all.

You'll notice that in both of these cases, we started by citing the author of the study--in this case, the
Workplace Bullying Institute. We then provided the title of the study. You could also provide the name of
the article, book, podcast, movie, or other source. In the direct quotation example, we took information right
from the report. In the second example, we summarized the same information (Workplace Bullying Institute,
2009).

   Let's look at another example of direct quotations and paraphrases, this time using a person, rather than an
institution, as the author.

Direct      In her book The Elements of Library Research: What Every Student Needs to Know, Mary George, senior reference librarian at
Quotation   Princeton University's library, defines insight as something that "occurs at an unpredictable point in the research
            process and leads to the formulation of a thesis statement and argument. Also called an `Aha' moment or focus."

Paraphrase  In her book The Elements of Library Research: What Every Student Needs to Know, Mary George, senior reference librarian at
            Princeton University's library, tells us that insight is likely to come unexpectedly during the research process; it will be
            an "aha!" moment when we suddenly have a clear vision of the point we want to make.

Notice that the same basic pattern for citing sources was followed in both cases.
   The final step in correct source citation within a speech is the explanation. One of the biggest mistakes of

novice public speakers (and research writers) is that they include a source citation and then do nothing with
the citation at all. Instead, take the time to explain the quotation or paraphrase to put into the context of your
speech. Do not let your audience draw their own conclusions about the quotation or paraphrase. Instead, help
them make the connections you want them to make. Here are two examples using the examples above:

Bullying    Clearly, organizations need to be held accountable for investigating bullying allegations. If organizations will not
Example     voluntarily improve their handling of this problem, the legal system may be required to step in and enforce sanctions for
            bullying, much as it has done with sexual harassment.

Aha!        As many of us know, reaching that "aha!" moment does not always come quickly, but there are definitely some strategies

Example one can take to help speed up this process.

Notice how in both of our explanations we took the source's information and then added to the information to
direct it for our specific purpose. In the case of the bullying citation, we then propose that businesses should
either adopt workplace bullying guidelines or face legal intervention. In the case of the "aha!" example, we turn
the quotation into a section on helping people find their thesis or topic. In both cases, we were able to use the
information to further our speech.

            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 274
                 USING SOURCES ETHICALLY

The last section of this chapter is about using sources in an ethical manner. Whether you are using primary or
secondary research, there are five basic ethical issues you need to consider.

AVOID PLAGIARISM

First, and foremost, if the idea isn't yours, you need to cite where the information came from during your
speech. Having the citation listed on a bibliography or reference page is only half of the correct citation. You
must provide correct citations for all your sources within the speech as well. In a very helpful book called
Avoiding Plagiarism: A Student Guide to Writing Your Own Work, Menager-Beeley and Paulos provide a list of
twelve strategies for avoiding plagiarism (Menager-Beeley & Paulos, 2009):

    1. Do your own work, and use your own words. One of the goals of a public speaking class is to develop skills
         that you'll use in the world outside academia. When you are in the workplace and the "real world,"
         you'll be expected to think for yourself, so you might as well start learning this skill now.

    2. Allow yourself enough time to research the assignment. One of the most commonly cited excuses students
         give for plagiarism is that they didn't have enough time to do the research. In this chapter, we've
         stressed the necessity of giving yourself plenty of time. The more complete your research strategy is
         from the very beginning, the more successful your research endeavors will be in the long run.
         Remember, not having adequate time to prepare is no excuse for plagiarism.

    3. Keep careful track of your sources. A common mistake that people can make is that they forget where
         information came from when they start creating the speech itself. Chances are you're going to look at
         dozens of sources when preparing your speech, and it is very easy to suddenly find yourself believing
         that a piece of information is "common knowledge" and not citing that information within a speech.
         When you keep track of your sources, you're less likely to inadvertently lose sources and not cite them
         correctly.

    4. Take careful notes. However you decide to keep track of the information you collect (old-fashioned pen
         and notebook or a computer software program), the more careful your note-taking is, the less likely
         you'll find yourself inadvertently not citing information or citing the information incorrectly. It
         doesn't matter what method you choose for taking research notes, but whatever you do, you need to
         be systematic to avoid plagiarizing.

    5. Assemble your thoughts, and make it clear who is speaking. When creating your speech, you need to make
         sure that you clearly differentiate your voice in the speech from the voice of specific authors of the
         sources you quote. The easiest way to do this is to set up a direct quotation or a paraphrase, as we've
         described in the preceding sections. Remember, audience members cannot see where the quotation
         marks are located within your speech text, so you need to clearly articulate with words and vocal tone

275 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
     when you are using someone else's ideas within your speech.

 6. If you use an idea, a quotation, paraphrase, or summary, then credit the source. We can't reiterate it enough: if
     it is not your idea, you need to tell your audience where the information came from. Giving credit is
     especially important when your speech includes a statistic, an original theory, or a fact that is not
     common knowledge.

 7. Learn how to cite sources correctly both in the body of your paper and in your List of Works Cited (Reference Page).
     Most public speaking teachers will require that you turn in either a bibliography or reference page on
     the day you deliver a speech. Many students make the mistake of thinking that the bibliography or
     reference page is all they need to cite information, and then they don't cite any of the material within
     the speech itself. A bibliography or reference page enables a reader or listener to find those sources
     after the fact, but you must also correctly cite those sources within the speech itself; otherwise, you are
     plagiarizing.

 8. Quote accurately and sparingly. A public speech should be based on factual information and references,
     but it shouldn't be a string of direct quotations strung together. Experts recommend that no more
     than 10 percent of a paper or speech be direct quotations (Menager-Beeley & Paulos, 2009). When
     selecting direct quotations, always ask yourself if the material could be paraphrased in a manner that
     would make it clearer for your audience. If the author wrote a sentence in a way that is just perfect,
     and you don't want to tamper with it, then by all means directly quote the sentence. But if you're just
     quoting because it's easier than putting the ideas into your own words, this is not a legitimate reason
     for including direct quotations.

 9. Paraphrase carefully. Modifying an author's words in this way is not simply a matter of replacing some
     of the words with synonyms. Instead, as Howard and Taggart explain in Research Matters,
     "paraphrasing force[s] you to understand your sources and to capture their meaning accurately in
     original words and sentences" (Howard & Taggart, 2010). Incorrect paraphrasing is one of the most
     common forms of inadvertent plagiarism by students. First and foremost, paraphrasing is putting the
     author's argument, intent, or ideas into your own words.

10. Do not patchwrite (patchspeak). Menager-Beeley and Paulos define patchwriting as consisting "of
     mixing several references together and arranging paraphrases and quotations to constitute much of
     the paper. In essence, the student has assembled others' work with a bit of embroidery here and there
     but with little original thinking or expression" (Menager-Beeley & Paulos, 2009). Just as students can
     patchwrite, they can also engage in patchspeaking. In patchspeaking, students rely completely on
     taking quotations and paraphrases and weaving them together in a manner that is devoid of the
     student's original thinking.

11. Summarize, don't auto-summarize. Some students have learned that most word processing features have
     an auto-summary function. The auto-summary function will take a ten-page document and
     summarize the information into a short paragraph. When someone uses the auto-summary function,
     the words that remain in the summary are still those of the original author, so this is not an ethical
     form of paraphrasing.

12. Do not rework another student's paper (speech) or buy paper mill papers (speech mill speeches). In today's
     Internet environment, there are a number of storehouses of student speeches on the Internet. Some
     of these speeches are freely available, while other websites charge money for getting access to one of
     their canned speeches. Whether you use a speech that is freely available or pay money for a speech,
     you are engaging in plagiarism. This is also true if the main substance of your speech was copied from

                                                     THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 276
         a web page. Any time you try to present someone else's ideas as your own during a speech, you are
         plagiarizing.

AVOID ACADEMIC FRAUD

While there are numerous websites where you can download free speeches for your class, this is tantamount
to fraud. If you didn't do the research and write your own speech, then you are fraudulently trying to pass
off someone else's work as your own. In addition to being unethical, many institutions have student codes
that forbid such activity. Penalties for academic fraud can be as severe as suspension or expulsion from your
institution.

DON'T MISLEAD YOUR AUDIENCE

If you know a source is clearly biased, and you don't spell this out for your audience, then you are purposefully
trying to mislead or manipulate your audience. Instead, if the information may be biased, tell your audience
that the information may be biased and allow your audience to decide whether to accept or disregard the
information.

GIVE AUTHOR CREDENTIALS

You should always provide the author's credentials. In a world where anyone can say anything and have it
published on the Internet or even publish it in a book, we have to be skeptical of the information we see and
hear. For this reason, it's very important to provide your audience with background about the credentials of
the authors you cite.

277 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
USE PRIMARY RESEARCH ETHICALLY

Lastly, if you are using primary research within your speech, you need to use it ethically as well. For example,
if you tell your survey participants that the research is anonymous or confidential, then you need to make
sure that you maintain their anonymity or confidentiality when you present those results. Furthermore, you
also need to be respectful if someone says something is "off the record" during an interview. We must always
maintain the privacy and confidentiality of participants during primary research, unless we have their express
permission to reveal their names or other identifying information.

   Having gathered a wealth of information from various sources for his speech on Oklahoma State
University's traditions, Pistol Pete realized he needed to correctly orally cite these sources during his
presentation. While he was familiar with written citations, he was unsure about the best way to acknowledge
these sources out loud without disrupting the flow of his speech.

   Pete decided to consult with his public speaking professor, an expert in the art of oral communication.
His professor explained that the key to orally citing sources was to seamlessly integrate the citations into
the narrative of the speech. She advised Pete to briefly mention the author or source while presenting the
information, making sure it felt natural and didn't distract from the overall message.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 278
   With this advice in mind, Pete practiced his speech, making sure to give due credit to his sources. For
instance, when discussing the history of OSU traditions, Pete might say, "As noted in Dr. Johnson's
comprehensive history of Oklahoma State University found in the podcast "Just Poking Around" in July of
2022..." or "According to an article from the university archives from the Oklahoma State official website in
2002..."

   Pete also learned the importance of giving context for the cited information. When citing a yearbook or an
archived newsletter, he could say something like, "As described in the 1960 OSU yearbook..." or "As an issue of
the OSU newsletter from the 1980s recounts..."

   With careful practice, Pistol Pete found he was able to cite his sources naturally and effectively, maintaining
the narrative flow of his speech. He felt more confident, knowing he was respecting the work of his sources
while also providing his audience with well-researched and accurate information about OSU's beloved
traditions. Armed with his well-prepared speech, Pete was ready to inspire his fellow Cowboys and Cowgirls
with the rich heritage of their university. What are some transitional phrases, like "According to..." that you
can use to seamlessly incorporate your source citations?

                                             References

American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.).
Washington, DC: Author. See also American Psychological Association. (2010). Concise rules of APA Style: The
official pocket style guide from the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). Washington, DC: Author.

   Howard, R. M., & Taggart, A. R. (2010). Research matters. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill, p. 131.
   Menager-Beeley, R., & Paulos, L. (2009). Understanding plagiarism: A student guide to writing your own work.
Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, pp. 5-8.
   Modern Language Association. (2009). MLA handbook for writers of research papers (7th ed.). New York, NY:
Modern Language Association.
   Workplace Bullying Institute. (2009). Bullying: Getting away with it WBI Labor Day Study--September,
2009. Retrieved July 14, 2011, from http://www.workplacebullying.org/res/WBI2009-B-Survey.html

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

279 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                  8.5 Enrichment

                                       Discussion Questions

     1. How do academic sources convey more credibility? What is the value of nonacademic sources?
     2. When are primary sources more suitable than secondary sources? When are secondary sources more beneficial?
     3. If a book is published by a major publishing company, is it an academic source? Why or why not?
     4. What are the consequences of plagiarism here at OSU?

                                               Activities

     1. With a partner, find a politically-oriented website and analyze the material using George's (2008) six questions for
          evaluating sources found in section 8.3. What does your analysis say about the material on the website? Discuss.

     2. With a group of classmates, discuss which of Menager-Beeley and Paulos (2009) twelve strategies in section 8.4
          for avoiding plagiarism you think might be most useful during speech writing? What can you do to overcome and
          avoid plagiarism?

     3. With a partner, find an academic and a nonacademic source about the same topic. Discuss the differences in the
          writing style. How useful is the content in each source? Which source has more authority? Why?

                                             Case Study

With a group of classmates, read the following scenario below and respond to the questions. Jonathan sat staring at his
computer screen. The previous two days had been the most disastrous weekend of his entire life. First, his girlfriend broke
up with him on Friday and informed him that she was dating his best friend behind his back. Then he got a phone call from

                                                  THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 280
      his mother informing him that his childhood dog had been hit by a car. And if that was not enough, his car died on the way
      to work, and since it was his third unexcused absence from work, he was fired.
      In the midst of all these crises, Jonathan was supposed to be preparing his persuasive speech for his public speaking class.
      Admittedly, Jonathan had two weeks to work on the speech, but he had not made time to get around to it and thought he
      could pull it together over the weekend. Now at 1:00 a.m. on Monday morning, he finally got a chance to sit down at his
      computer to prepare the speech he was giving in nine and a half hours.
      His topic was prison reform. He searched through a number of websites and finally found one that seemed really relevant.
      As he read through the first paragraph, he thought to himself, this is exactly what I want to say. After two paragraphs the
      information just stopped, and the website asked him to pay $29.95 for the rest of the speech. Without even realizing it,
      Jonathan had found a speech mill website. Jonathan found himself reaching for his wallet thinking, well it says what I want
      it to say, so why not?

           If you were a student in Jonathan's class and he confided in you that he had used a speech mill for his speech, how would you react?
           If you were Jonathan, what ethical choices could you have made?
           Is it ever ethical to use a speech written by a speech mill?

281 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Chapter 9: Supporting Ideas and Building
                    Arguments

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Define the term "support" and describe three reasons we use support in speeches.
 Explain four criteria used to evaluate support options.
 Describe how speakers can use statistics to support their speeches.
 Differentiate among the five types of definitions and among the four types of supportive examples.
 Explain how narratives can be used to support informative, persuasive, and entertaining speeches.
 Differentiate between the two forms of testimony and between the two types of analogies that can be used for support.
 Explain how to distinguish between useful and nonuseful forms of support.
 Describe the five ways support is used within a speech.
 Describe the purpose of a reverse outline.
 Explain why it is important to use support for every claim made within a speech.
 Evaluate the three-step process for using support within a speech.

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Analysis
 Argument
 Best Example
 Bias
 Conclusion
 Direct Quotation
 Entertaining Narratives
 Execution
 Expertise
 Expert Testimony

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 282
     Eyewitness Testimony
     Fact
     Figurative Analogies
     Informative Narratives
     Lexical Definition
     Literal Analogies
     Narratives
     Negative Example
     Nonexample
     Numerical Support
     Paraphrase
     Persuasive Definitions
     Persuasive Narratives
     Pictographic Support
     Positive Example
     Premise
     Reverse Outline
     Setup
     Statistics
     Stipulative Definition
     Summary of Support
     Support
     Support-Manipulation
     Theoretical Definitions
     Vividness

283 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            9.1 Crafting Supporting Ideas

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1648#audio-1648-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 284
"Learn, compare, collect the facts! Always have the courage to say to yourself `I am ignorant.'"
                                       -Ivan Petrovich Pavlov

Every day, all around the country, people give speeches that contain generalities and vagueness. Students on
your campus might claim that local policies are biased against students, but may not explain why. Politicians
may make claims in their speeches about "family values" without defining what those values are or throw
out statistics without giving credit to where they found those numbers. Indeed, the nonpartisan websites
FactCheck.org and Politifact.com are dedicated to investigating and dispelling the claims that politicians
make in their speeches.

   In this chapter, we explore the nature of supporting ideas in public speaking and why support is essential to
effective presentations. We will then discuss how to use support to build stronger arguments within a speech.

   Pistol Pete sat in his room, surrounded by the piles of information he had gathered from the Edmon Low
Library. He had a variety of sources, each one offering a different perspective on the traditions of Oklahoma
State University. But with such a wealth of information, Pete faced a new challenge - sorting through the
research and deciding what forms of support to incorporate into his presentation.

   First, Pete decided to go through each source and highlight the most compelling information, keeping his

285 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
audience and the objectives of his speech in mind. He knew he wanted to provide an informative and engaging
narrative, and for that, he needed to balance different types of support in his presentation.

   Definitions and explanations were important to give context to the audience, especially for traditions
that might not be well-known or understood. For instance, he decided to provide a clear explanation of the
significance behind the Sea of Orange Parade, detailing its history and purpose.

   Facts and statistics were essential for credibility and demonstrating the impact of the traditions. From
historical documents and scholarly papers, he extracted data on how many years specific traditions have been
held, how many people participate, and how these customs have evolved over time.

   Testimonies, particularly from the yearbooks, brought a personal touch to his speech. They allowed him to
share firsthand accounts of the traditions, making the narrative more relatable and engaging for his audience.

   Pete recognized the power of stories, and so narratives were an integral part of his speech. He decided
to weave in stories from alumni and students that highlighted their experiences with the traditions and the
meaning these events held for them.

   Finally, considering the visual appeal of his presentation, Pete decided to use visual aids. He had discovered
some fascinating photographs in the university's digital collections that showcased the traditions vividly. He
knew that including these pictures in his presentation would help bring the traditions to life.

   Pistol Pete spent hours reviewing, selecting, and organizing the information, mindful of creating a balanced
and engaging narrative. Through careful consideration and a keen understanding of his audience, Pete was
able to determine the best forms of support to use in his speech, ensuring a well-rounded and compelling
presentation about the traditions at Oklahoma State University.

   What forms of support do you think will best suit your informative presentation?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 286
            9.2 Using Research as Support

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1651#audio-1651-1

   In public speaking, the word "support" refers to a range of strategies that are used to develop the central
idea and specific purpose by providing corroborating evidence. Whether you are speaking to inform,
persuade, or entertain, using support helps you create a more substantive and polished speech. We sometimes
use the words "support" or "evidence" synonymously or interchangeably because both are designed to help

287 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
ground a speech's specific purpose. However, "evidence" tends to be associated specifically with persuasive
speeches, so we opt to use the more general term "support" for most of this chapter. In this section, we are
going to explore why speakers use support.

                    WHY WE USE SUPPORT

Speakers use support to help provide a foundation for their message. You can think of support as the legs on a
table. Without the legs, the table becomes a slab of wood or glass lying on the ground; as such, it cannot fully
serve the purpose of a table. In the same way, without support, a speech is nothing more than fluff. Audience
members may ignore the speech's message, dismissing it as just so much hot air. In addition to being the
foundation that a speech stands on, support also helps us clarify content, increase speaker credibility, and
make the speech more vivid.

TO CLARIFY CONTENT

The first reason to use support in a speech is to clarify content. Speakers often choose a piece of support
because a previous writer or speaker has phrased something in a way that evokes a clear mental picture of the
point they want to make. For example, suppose you're preparing a speech about hazing in college fraternities.
You may read your school's code of student conduct to find out how your campus defines hazing. You could
use this definition to make sure your audience understands what hazing is and what types of behaviors your
campus identifies as hazing.

TO ADD CREDIBILITY

Another important reason to use support is because it adds to your credibility as a speaker. The less an

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 288
audience perceives you as an expert on a given topic, the more important it is to use a range of support. By
doing so, you let your audience know that you've done your homework on the topic.

   At the same time, you could hurt your credibility if you use inadequate support or support from
questionable sources. Your credibility will also suffer if you distort the intent of a source to try to force it to
support a point that the previous author did not address. For example, the famous 1798 publication by Thomas
Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population, has been used as support for various arguments far beyond
what Malthus could have intended. Malthus's thesis was that as the human population increases at a greater
rate than food production, societies will go to war over scarce food resources (Malthus, 1798). Some modern
writers have suggested that, according to the Malthusian line of thinking, almost anything that leads to a food
shortage could lead to nuclear war. For example, better health care leads to longer life spans, which leads to an
increased need for food, leading to food shortages, which lead to nuclear war. Clearly, this argument makes
some giant leaps of logic that would be hard for an audience to accept.

   For this reason, it is important to evaluate your support to ensure that it will not detract from your
credibility as a speaker. Here are four characteristics to evaluate when looking at support options: accuracy,
authority, currency, and objectivity.

ACCURACY

One of the quickest ways to lose credibility in the eyes of your audience is to use support that is inaccurate or
even questionably accurate. Admittedly, determining the accuracy of support can be difficult if you are not an
expert in a given area, but here are some questions to ask yourself to help assess a source's accuracy:

   Does the information within one piece of supporting evidence completely contradict other supporting
      evidence you've seen?

   If the support is using a statistic, does the supporting evidence explain where that statistic came from
      and how it was determined?

   Does the logic behind the support make sense?
One of this book's authors recently observed a speech in which a student said, "The amount of pollution
produced by using paper towels instead of hand dryers is equivalent to driving a car from the east coast to
St. Louis." The other students in the class, as well as the instructor, recognized that this information sounded
wrong and asked questions about the information source, the amount of time it would take to produce this
much pollution, and the number of hand dryers used. The audience demonstrated strong listening skills by
questioning the information, but the speaker lost credibility by being unable to answer their questions.

289 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
AUTHORITY

The second way to use support in building your credibility is to cite authoritative sources--those who are
experts on the topic. In today's world, there are all kinds of people who call themselves "experts" on a range
of topics. There are even books that tell you how to get people to regard you as an expert in a given industry
(Lizotte, 2007). Today there are "experts" on every street corner or website spouting off information that some
listeners will view as legitimate.

   So what truly makes someone an expert? Bruce D. Weinstein, a professor at West Virginia University's
Center for Health Ethics and Law, defined expertise as having two senses. In his definition, the first sense of
expertise is "knowledge in or about a particular field, and statements about it generally take the form, `S is an
expert in or about D.'... The second sense of expertise refers to domains of demonstrable skills, and statements
about it generally take the form, `S is an expert at skill D (Weinstein, 1993).'" Thus, to be an expert, someone
needs to have considerable knowledge on a topic or considerable skill in accomplishing something.

   As a novice researcher, how can you determine whether an individual is truly an expert? Unfortunately,
there is no clear-cut way to wade through the masses of "experts" and determine each one's legitimacy quickly.
However, Table 9.1 "Who Is an Expert?" presents a list of questions based on the research of Marie-Line
Germain that you can ask yourself to help determine whether someone is an expert (Germain, 2006).

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 290
291 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 292
   You don't have to answer "yes" to all the preceding questions to conclude that a source is credible, but a
string of "no" answers should be a warning signal. In a Columbia Journalism Review article, Allisa Quart raised
the question of expert credibility regarding the sensitive subject of autism. Specifically, Quart questioned
whether the celebrity spokesperson and autism advocate Jennifer McCarthy
(http://www.generationrescue.org/) qualifies as an expert. Quart notes that McCarthy "insists that vaccines
caused her son's neurological disorder, a claim that has near-zero support in scientific literature" (Quart,
2010). Providing an opposing view is a widely read blog called Respectful Insolence (http://scienceblogs.com/
insolence/), whose author is allegedly a surgeon/scientist who often speaks out about autism and
"antivaccination lunacy." Respectful Insolence received the 2008 Best Weblog Award from MedGagdet: The
Internet Journal of Emerging Medical Technologies. We used the word "allegedly" when referring to the author of
Respectful Insolence because as the website explains that the author's name, Orac, is the "nom de blog of a (not
so) humble pseudonymous surgeon/scientist with an ego just big enough to delude himself that someone,
somewhere might actually give a rodent's posterior about his miscellaneous verbal meanderings, but just
barely small enough to admit to himself that few will" (ScienceBlogs LLC).

   When comparing the celebrity Jenny McCarthy to the blogger Orac, who do you think is the better expert?
Were you able to answer "yes" to the questions in the graphic above for both "experts"? If not, why not?
Overall, determining the authority of support is clearly a complicated task, and one that you should spend time
thinking about as you prepare the support for your speech.

CURRENCY

The third consideration in using support to build your credibility is how current the information is. Some
ideas stay fairly consistent over time, like the date of the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor or the mathematical
formula for finding the area of a circle, but other ideas change wildly in a short period of time, including ideas
about technology, health treatments, and laws.

   Although we never want to discount classic supporting information that has withstood the test of time, as a
general rule for most topics, we recommend that information be less than five years old. Obviously, this is just
a general guideline and can change depending on the topic. If you're giving a speech on the history of mining
in West Virginia, then you may use support from sources that are much older. However, if you're discussing
a medical topic, then your support information should probably be from the past five years or less. Some
industries change even faster, so the best support may come from the past month. For example, if are speaking
about advances in word processing, using information about Microsoft Word from 2003 would be woefully
out-of-date because two upgrades have been released since 2003 (2007 and 2010). As a credible speaker, it is
your responsibility to give your audience up-to-date information.

293 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
OBJECTIVITY

The last question you should ask yourself when examining support is whether the person or organization
behind the information is objective or biased. Bias refers to a predisposition or preconception of a topic that
prevents impartiality. Although there is a certain logic to the view that every one of us is innately biased, as
a credible speaker, you want to avoid just passing along someone's unfounded bias in your speech. Ideally
you would use support that is unbiased; the graphic below provides some questions to ask yourself when
evaluating a potential piece of support to detect bias.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 294
295 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   As with the questions in the graphic covering "Who is an Expert?" about expertise, you don't have to have
all "no" or "yes" responses to decide on bias. However, being aware of the possibility of bias and where your
audience might see bias will help you to select the best possible support to include in your speech.

TO ADD VIVIDNESS

In addition to clarifying content and enhancing credibility, support helps make a speech more vivid. Vividness
refers to a speaker's ability to present information in a striking, exciting manner. The goal of vividness is
to make your speech more memorable. One of the authors still remembers a vivid example from a student
speech given several years ago. The student was speaking about the importance of wearing seat belts and
stated that the impact from hitting a windshield at just twenty miles per hour without a seat belt would be
equivalent to falling out of the window of their second-floor classroom and landing face-first on the pavement
below. Because they were in that classroom several times each week, students were easily able to visualize the
speaker's analogy and it was successful at creating an image that is remembered years later. Support helps
make your speech more interesting and memorable to an audience member.

                                             References

Germain, M. L. (2006). Development and preliminary validation of a psychometric measure of expertise: The generalized
expertise measure (GEM). (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Barry University, Florida.

   Lizotte, K. (2007). The expert's edge: Become the go-to authority people turn to every time. New York, NY: McGraw-
Hill.

   Malthus, T. R. (1798). An essay on the principle of population as it affects the future improvement of society, with
remarks on the speculations of Mr. Godwin, M. Condorcet, and other writers. London, England: J. Johnson, in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

   Quart, A. (2010, July/August). The trouble with experts: The web allows us to question authority in new ways.
Columbia Journalism Review. Retrieved from http://www.cjr.org.

   ScienceBlogs LLC (n.d.). Who (or what) is Orac? [Web log post]. Retrieved from http://scienceblogs.com/
insolence/; see also http://scienceblogs.com/insolence/medicine/autism

   Weinstein, B. D. (1993). What is an expert? Theoretical Medicine, 14, 57-93.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 296
            9.3 Exploring Types of Support

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1654#audio-1654-1

   Now that we've explained why support is important, let's examine the various types of support that speakers
often use within a speech: facts and statistics, definitions, examples, narratives, testimony, and analogies.

297 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                    FACTS AND STATISTICS

A fact is a truth that is arrived at through the scientific process. Speakers often support a point or specific
purpose by citing facts that their audience may not know. A typical way to introduce a fact orally is "Did you
know that...?"

   Many of the facts that speakers cite are based on statistics. Statistics is the mathematical subfield that
gathers, analyzes, and makes inferences about collected data. Data can come in a wide range of forms--the
number of people who buy a certain magazine, the average number of telephone calls made in a month, the
incidence of a certain disease. Though few people realize it, much of our daily lives are governed by statistics.
Everything from seat-belt laws, to the food we eat, to the amount of money public schools receive, to the
medications you are prescribed are based on the collection and interpretation of numerical data.

   It is important to realize that a public speaking textbook cannot begin to cover statistics in depth. If you
plan to do statistical research yourself, or gain an understanding of the intricacies of such research, we
strongly recommend taking a basic class in statistics or quantitative research methods. These courses will
better prepare you to understand the various statistics you will encounter.

   However, even without a background in statistics, finding useful statistical information related to your
topic is quite easy. The table below provides a list of some websites where you can find a range of statistical
information that may be useful for your speeches.

Website                    Type of Information

http://www.bls.gov/bls/    Bureau of Labor Statistics provides links to a range of websites for labor issues related to a vast
other.htm                  range of countries.

http://bjs.gov             Bureau of Justice Statistics provides information on crime statistics in the United States.

http://www.census.gov      US Census Bureau provides a wide range of information about people living in the United States.

https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/  National Center for Health Statistics is a program conducted by the US Centers for Disease Control
                           and Prevention. It provides information on a range of health issues in the United States.

http://www.stats.org       STATS is a nonprofit organization that helps people understand quantitative data. It also provides a
                           range of data on its website.

http://ropercenter.cornell.edu/ Roper Center for Public Opinion provides data related to a range of issues in the United States.

http://www.nielsen.com     Nielsen provides data on consumer use of various media forms.

http://www.gallup.com      Gallup provides public opinion data on a range of social and political issues in the United States and
                           around the world.

http://www.adherents.com   Adherents provides both domestic and international data related to religious affiliation.

http://people-press.org    Pew Research Center provides public opinion data on a range of social and political issues in the
                           United States and around the world.

Statistics are probably the most used--and misused--form of support in any type of speaking. People like
numbers. People are impressed by numbers. However, most people do not know how to correctly interpret
numbers. Unfortunately, there are many speakers who do not know how to interpret them either or who

                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 298
intentionally manipulate them to mislead their listeners. As the saying popularized by Mark Twain goes,
"There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics" (Twain, 1924).

   To avoid misusing statistics when you speak in public, do three things. First, be honest with yourself and
your audience. If you are distorting a statistic or leaving out other statistics that contradict your point, you are
not living up to the level of honesty your audience is entitled to expect. Second, run a few basic calculations to
see if a statistic is believable. Sometimes a source may contain a mistake--for example, a decimal point may
be in the wrong place or a verbal expression like "increased by 50 percent" may conflict with data showing an
increase of 100 percent. Third, evaluate sources (even those in the table above which are generally reputable)
according to the criteria discussed earlier in the chapter: accuracy, authority, currency, and objectivity.

                          DEFINITIONS

Imagine that you gave a speech about the use of presidential veto and your audience did not know the meaning
of the word "veto." In order for your speech to be effective, you would need to define what a veto is and what it
does. Making sure everyone is "on the same page" is a fundamental task of any communication. As speakers,
we often need to clearly define what we are talking about to make sure that our audience understands our
meaning. The goal of a definition is to help speakers communicate a word or idea in a manner that makes
it understandable for their audiences. For the purposes of public speaking, there are four different types of
definitions that may be used as support: lexical, persuasive, stipulative, and theoretical.

LEXICAL DEFINITIONS

A lexical definition is one that specifically states how a word is used within a specific language. For example,
if you go to Dictionary.com and type in the word "speech," here is the lexical definition you will receive:

   Speech
   -noun

      the faculty or power of speaking; oral communication; ability to express one's thoughts and emotions by speech
   sounds and gesture: Losing her speech made her feel isolated from humanity.

      the act of speaking: He expresses himself better in speech than in writing.

299 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
      something that is spoken; an utterance, remark, or declaration: We waited for some speech that would indicate her true
   feelings.

      a form of communication in spoken language, made by a speaker before an audience for a given purpose: a fiery
   speech.
   any single utterance of an actor in the course of a play, motion picture, etc.
   the form of utterance characteristic of a particular people or region; a language or dialect.
   manner of speaking, as of a person: Your slovenly speech is holding back your career.

      a field of study devoted to the theory and practice of oral communication.

Lexical definitions are useful when a word may be unfamiliar to an audience and you want to ensure that the
audience has a basic understanding of the word. However, our ability to understand lexical definitions often
hinges on our knowledge of other words that are used in the definition, so it is usually a good idea to follow a
lexical definition with a clear explanation of what it means in your own words.

PERSUASIVE DEFINITIONS

Persuasive definitions are designed to motivate an audience to think in a specific manner about the word
or term. Political figures are often very good at defining terms in a way that are persuasive. Frank Luntz,
a linguist and political strategist, is widely regarded as one of the most effective creators of persuasive
definitions (Luntz, 2007). Luntz has the ability to take terms that people don't like and repackage them into
persuasive definitions that give the original term a much more positive feel. Here are some of Luntz's more
famous persuasive definitions:

   Oil drilling  energy exploration
   Estate tax  death tax
   School vouchers  opportunity scholarships
   Eavesdropping  electronic intercepts
   Global warming  climate change
Luntz has essentially defined the terms in a new way that has a clear political bent and that may make the
term more acceptable to some audiences, especially those who do not question the lexical meaning of the new
term. For example, "oil drilling" may have negative connotations among citizens who are concerned about the
environmental impact of drilling, whereas "energy exploration" may have much more positive connotations
among the same group.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 300
STIPULATIVE DEFINITIONS

A stipulative definition is a definition assigned to a word or term by the person who coins that word or term
for the first time. In 1969, Laurence Peter and Raymond Hull wrote a book called The Peter Principle: Why Things
Always Go Wrong. In this book, they defined the "Peter Principle" as "In a Hierarchy Every Employee Tends to
Rise to His [sic] Level of Incompetence" (Peter & Hull, 1969). Because Peter and Hull coined the term "Peter
Principle," it was up to them to define the term as they saw fit. You cannot argue with this definition; it simply
is the definition that was stipulated.

THEORETICAL DEFINITIONS

Theoretical definitions are used to describe all parts related to a particular type of idea or object. Admittedly,
these definitions are frequently ambiguous and difficult to fully comprehend. For example, if you attempted
to define the word "peace" in a manner that could be used to describe all aspects of peace, then you would be
using a theoretical definition. These definitions are considered theoretical because the definitions attempt to
create an all-encompassing theory of the word itself.

   In an interpersonal communication course, one of our coauthors asked a group of random people online to
define the term "falling in love." Here are some of the theoretical definitions they provided:

   I think falling in love would be the act of feeling attracted to a person, with mutual respect given to each other, a strong
   desire to be close and near a person,...and more.

      Being content with the person you are with and missing them every minute they are gone.
      Um...falling in love is finding a guy with lots of credit cards and no balances owing.
      Falling in love is when you take away the feeling, the passion, and the romance in a relationship and find out you still
   care for that person.
      Meeting someone who makes your heart sing.
      Skydiving for someone's lips.

Definitions are important to provide clarity for your audience. Effective speakers strike a balance between
using definitions where they are needed to increase audience understanding and leaving out definitions of
terms that the audience is likely to know. For example, you may need to define what a "claw hammer" is
when speaking to a group of Cub Scouts learning about basic tools, but you would appear foolish--or even
condescending--if you defined it in a speech to a group of carpenters who use claw hammers every day. On
the other hand, just assuming that others know the terms you are using can lead to ineffective communication
as well. Medical doctors are often criticized for using technical terms while talking to their patients without
taking time to define those terms. Patients may then walk away not really understanding what their health
situation is or what needs to be done about it.

301 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                           EXAMPLES

Another often-used type of support is examples. An example is a specific situation, problem, or story designed
to help illustrate a principle, method, or phenomenon. Examples are useful because they can help make an
abstract idea more concrete for an audience by providing a specific case. Let's examine four common types of
examples used as support: positive, negative, nonexamples, and best examples.

POSITIVE EXAMPLES

A positive example is used to clarify or clearly illustrate a principle, method, or phenomenon. A speaker

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 302
discussing crisis management could talk about how a local politician handled herself when a local newspaper
reported that her husband was having an affair or give an example of a professional baseball player who
immediately came clean about steroid use. These examples would provide a positive model for how a
corporation in the first instance, and an individual in the second instance, should behave in crisis
management. The purpose of a positive example is to show a desirable solution, decision, or course of action.

NEGATIVE EXAMPLES

Negative examples, by contrast, are used to illustrate what not to do. On the same theme of crisis
management, a speaker could discuss the lack of communication from Union Carbide during the 1984 tragedy
in Bhopal, India, or the many problems with how the US government responded to Hurricane Katrina in 2005.
The purpose of a negative example is to show an undesirable solution, decision, or course of action.

NONEXAMPLES

A nonexample is used to explain what something is not. On the subject of crisis management, you might
mention a press release for a new Adobe Acrobat software upgrade as an example of corporate communication
that is not crisis management. The press release nonexample helps the audience differentiate between crisis
management and other forms of corporate communication.

BEST EXAMPLES

The final type of example is called the best example because it is held up as the "best" way someone should
behave within a specific context. On the crisis management theme, a speaker could show a clip of an effective
CEO speaking during a press conference to show how one should behave both verbally and nonverbally during

303 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
a crisis. While positive examples show appropriate ways to behave, best examples illustrate the best way to
behave in a specific context.

   Although examples can be very effective at helping an audience to understand abstract or unfamiliar
concepts, they do have one major drawback: some audience members may dismiss them as unusual cases that
do not represent what happens most of the time. For example, some opponents of wearing seat belts claim
that not wearing your seat belt can help you be thrown from a car and save you from fire or other hazards in
the wrecked automobile. Even if a speaker has a specific example of an accident where this was true, many
audience members would see this example as a rare case and thus not view it as strong support.

   Simply finding an example to use, then, is not enough. An effective speaker needs to consider how the
audience will respond to the example and how the example fits with what else the audience knows, as
discussed under the heading of accuracy earlier in this chapter.

                          NARRATIVES

A fourth form of support are narratives, or stories that help an audience understand the speaker's message.
Narratives are similar to examples except that narratives are generally longer and take on the form of a

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 304
story with a clear arc (beginning, middle, and end). People like stories. In fact, narratives are so important
that communication scholar Walter Fisher believes humans are innately storytelling animals, so appealing to
people through stories is a great way to support one's speech (Fisher, 1987).

   However, you have an ethical responsibility as a speaker to clearly identify whether the narrative you are
sharing is real or hypothetical. In 1981, Washington Post reporter Janet Cooke was awarded a Pulitzer Prize
for her story of an eight-year-old heroin addict (Cooke, 1980). After acknowledging that her story was a fake,
she lost her job and the prize was rescinded (Green, 1981). In 2009, Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal gave a
nationally televised speech where he recounted a story of his interaction with a local sheriff in getting help for
Hurricane Katrina victims. His story was later found to be false; Jindal admitted that he had heard the sheriff
tell the story after it happened but he had not really been present at the time (Finch, 2009).

   Obviously, we are advocating that you select narratives that are truthful when you use this form of support
in a speech. Clella Jaffe explains that narratives are a fundamental part of public speaking and that narratives
can be used for support in all three general purposes of speaking: informative, persuasive, and entertaining
(Jaffe, 2010).

INFORMATIVE NARRATIVES

Jaffe defines informative narratives as those that provide information or explanations about a speaker's
topic (Jaffe, 2010). Informative narratives can help audiences understand nature and natural phenomena,
for example. Often the most complicated science and mathematical issues in our world can be understood
through the use of story. While many people may not know all the mathematics behind gravity, most of us have
grown up with the story of how Sir Isaac Newton was hit on the head by an apple and developed the theory of
gravity. Even if the story is not precisely accurate, it serves as a way to help people grasp the basic concept of
gravity.

PERSUASIVE NARRATIVES

Persuasive narratives are stories used to persuade people to accept or reject a specific attitude, value, belief,
or behavior. Religious texts are filled with persuasive narratives designed to teach followers various attitudes,
values, beliefs, and behaviors. Parables or fables are designed to teach people basic lessons about life. For
example, read the following fable from Aesop (http://www.aesopfables.com): "One winter a farmer found a
snake stiff and frozen with cold. He had compassion on it, and taking it up, placed it in his bosom. The Snake

305 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
was quickly revived by the warmth, and resuming its natural instincts, bit its benefactor, inflicting on him a
mortal wound. `Oh,' cried the Farmer with his last breath, `I am rightly served for pitying a scoundrel.'" This
persuasive narrative is designed to warn people that just because you help someone in need doesn't mean the
other person will respond in kind.

ENTERTAINING NARRATIVES

Entertaining narratives are stories designed purely to delight an audience and transport them from their
daily concerns. Some professional speakers make a very good career by telling their own stories of success or
how they overcame life's adversities. Comedians such as Jeff Foxworthy tell stories that are ostensibly about
their own lives in a manner designed to make the audience laugh. While entertaining narratives may be a lot
of fun, people should use them sparingly as support for a more serious topic or for a traditional informative or
persuasive speech.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 306
                          TESTIMONY

Another form of support you may employ during a speech is testimony. When we use the word "testimony" in
this text, we are specifically referring to expert opinion or direct accounts of witnesses to provide support for
your speech. Notice that within this definition, we refer to both expert and eyewitness testimony.

EXPERT TESTIMONY

Expert testimony accompanies the discussion we had earlier in this chapter related to what qualifies someone
as an expert. In essence, expert testimony expresses the attitudes, values, beliefs, or behaviors recommended

307 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
by someone who is an acknowledged expert on a topic. For example, imagine that you're going to give a
speech on why physical education should be mandatory for all grades K-12 in public schools. During the
course of your research, you come across The Surgeon General's Vision for a Fit and Healthy Nation
(http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/obesityvision/obesityvision2010.pdf). You might decide to cite
information from within the report written by US Surgeon General Dr. Regina Benjamin about her strategies
for combating the problem of childhood obesity within the United States. If so, you are using the words from
Dr. Benjamin, as a noted expert on the subject, to support your speech's basic premise. Her expertise is being
used to give credibility to your claims.

EYEWITNESS TESTIMONY

Eyewitness testimony, on the other hand, is given by someone who has direct contact with the phenomenon
of your speech topic. Imagine that you are giving a speech on the effects of the 2010 "Deepwater Horizon"
disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. Perhaps one of your friends happened to be on a flight that passed over the Gulf
of Mexico and the pilot pointed out where the platform was. You could tell your listeners about your friend's
testimony of what she saw as she was flying over the spill.

   However, using eyewitness testimony as support can be a little tricky because you are relying on someone's
firsthand account, and firsthand accounts may not always be reliable. As such, you evaluate the credibility of
your witness and the recency of the testimony.

   To evaluate your witness's credibility, you should first consider how you received the testimony. Did you ask
the person for the testimony, or did he or she give you the information without being asked? Second, consider
whether your witness has anything to gain from his or her testimony. Basically, you want to know that your
witness isn't biased.

   Second, consider whether your witness' account was recent or something that happened some time ago.
With a situation like the BP oil spill, the date when the spill was seen from the air makes a big difference. If the
witness saw the oil spill when the oil was still localized, he or she could not have seen the eventual scope of the
disaster.

   Overall, the more detail you can give about the witness and when the witness made his or her observation,
the more useful that witness testimony will be when attempting to create a solid argument. However, never
rely completely on eyewitness testimony because this form of support is not always the most reliable and may
still be perceived as biased by a segment of your audience.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 308
                           ANALOGIES

An analogy is a figure of speech that compares two ideas or objects, showing how they are similar in some way.
Analogies, for public speaking purposes, can also be based in logic. The logical notion of analogies starts with
the idea that two ideas or objects are similar, and because of this similarity, the two ideas or objects must be
similar in other ways as well. There are two different types of analogies that speakers can employ: figurative
and literal.

309 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
FIGURATIVE ANALOGIES

Figurative analogies compare two ideas or objects from two different classes. For the purposes of
understanding analogies, a "class" refers to a group that has common attributes, characteristics, qualities, or
traits. For example, you can compare a new airplane to an eagle. In this case, airplanes and eagles clearly are
not the same type of objects. While both may have the ability to fly, airplanes are made by humans and eagles
exist in nature.

   Alternatively, you could attempt to compare ideas such as the struggle of The Church of Reality
(http://www.churchofreality.org/wisdom/welcome_home/, a group that sees the use of marijuana as a
religious sacrament) to the struggle of the civil rights movement. Is a church's attempt to get marijuana
legalized truly the same as the 1960s civil rights movement? Probably not, in most people's view, as fighting for
human rights is not typically seen as equivalent to being able to use a controlled substance.

   Figurative analogies are innately problematic because people often hear them and immediately dismiss
them as far-fetched. While figurative analogies may be very vivid and help a listener create a mental picture,
they do not really help a listener determine the validity of the information being presented. Furthermore,
speakers often overly rely on figurative analogies when they really don't have any other solid evidence. Overall,
while figurative analogies may be useful, we recommend solidifying them with other, more tangible support.

LITERAL ANALOGIES

Literal analogies, on the other hand, compare two objects or ideas that clearly belong to the same class. The
goal of the literal analogy is to demonstrate that the two objects or ideas are similar; therefore, they should
have further similarities that support your argument. For example, maybe you're giving a speech on a new
fast-food brand that you think will be a great investment. You could easily compare that new fast-food brand
to preexisting brands like McDonald's, Subway, or Taco Bell. If you can show that the new start-up brand
functions similarly to other brands, you can use that logic to suggest that the new brand will also have the same
kind of success as the existing brands.

   When using literal analogies related to ideas, make sure that the ideas are closely related and can be viewed
as similar. For example, take the Church of Reality discussed above. You could compare the Church of Reality's
use of marijuana to the Native American Church's legal exemption to use peyote in its religious practices. In
this instance, comparing two different religious groups' use of illegal drugs and demonstrating that one has
legal exemption supports the idea that the other should have an exemption, too.

   As with figurative analogies, make sure that the audience can see a reasonable connection between the
two ideas or objects being compared. If your audience sees your new fast-food brand as very different from
McDonald's or Subway, then they will not accept your analogy. You are basically asking your audience to
confirm the logic of your comparison, so if they don't see the comparison as valid, it won't help to support your
message.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 310
                                             References

Cooke, J. (1980, September 28). Jimmy's world. The Washington Post, p. A1.
   Finch, S. (2009, Feb 27). Bobby Jindal's fishy Katrina story. Daily Kos. Retrieved from

http://www.dailykos.com/story/2009/02/27/702671/-Bobby-Jindals-Fishy-Katrina-Story
   Fisher, W. R. (1987). Human communication as narration: Toward a philosophy of reason, value, and action.

Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
   Green, B. (1981, April 19). The confession: At the end, there were the questions, then the tears. The Washington

Post, p. A14.
   Jaffe, C. (2010). Public speaking: Concepts and skills for a diverse society (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Cengage.
   Luntz, F. (2007). Words that work: It's not what you say, it's what people hear. New York, NY: Hyperion.
   Peter, L. J., & Hull, R. (1969). The Peter principle: Why things always go wrong. New York, NY: William Morrow &

Company, p. 15.
   Twain, M. (1924). Autobiography (Vol. 1). New York, NY: Harper & Bros., p. 538.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

311 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    9.4 Using Support and Creating Arguments

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1657#audio-1657-1

   Supporting one's ideas with a range of facts and statistics, definitions, examples, narratives, testimony, and
analogies can make the difference between a boring speech your audience will soon forget and one that has a
lasting effect on their lives.

   Although the research process is designed to help you find effective support, you still need to think through

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 312
how you will use the support you have accumulated. In this section, we will examine how to use support
effectively in one's speech, first by examining the types of support one needs in a speech and then by seeing
how support can be used to enhance one's argument.

               UNDERSTANDING ARGUMENTS

You may associate the word "argument" with a situation in which two people are having some kind of conflict.
But in this context we are using a definition for the word argument that goes back to the ancient Greeks,
who saw arguments as a set of logical premises leading to a clear conclusion. While we lack the time for an
entire treatise on the nature and study of arguments, we do want to highlight some of the basic principles in
argumentation.

   First, all arguments are based on a series of statements that are divided into two basic categories: premises
and conclusions. A premise is a statement that is designed to provide support or evidence, whereas the
conclusion is a statement that can be clearly drawn from the provided premises. Let's look at an example and
then explain this in more detail:

   Premise 1: Eating fast food has been linked to childhood obesity.
      Premise 2: Childhood obesity is clearly linked to early onset type 2 diabetes, which can have many negative health

   ramifications.
      Conclusion: Therefore, for children to avoid developing early onset type 2 diabetes, they must have their fast-food

   intake limited.

In this example, the first two statements are premises linking fast food to childhood obesity to diabetes.
Once we've made this logical connection, we can then provide a logical conclusion that one important way
of preventing type 2 diabetes is to limit, if not eliminate, fast food from children's diets. While this may not
necessary be a popular notion for many people, the argument itself is logically sound.

   How, then, does this ultimately matter for you and your future public speaking endeavors? Well, a great
deal of persuasive speaking is built on creating arguments that your listeners can understand and that will
eventually influence their ideas or behaviors. In essence, creating strong arguments is a fundamental part of
public speaking.

   Now, in the example above, we are clearly missing one important part of the argument process--support
or evidence. So far we have presented two premises that many people may believe, but we need support or
evidence for those premises if we are going to persuade people who do not already believe those statements. As
such, when creating logical arguments (unless you are a noted expert on a subject), you must provide support
to ensure that your arguments will be seen as credible. And that is what we will discuss next.

313 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
             SIFTING THROUGH YOUR SUPPORT

When researching a topic, you're going to find a range of different types of supporting evidence. You may
find examples of all six types of support: facts and statistics, definitions, examples, narratives, testimony, and
analogies. Sooner or later, you are going to have to make some decisions as to which pieces of support you will
use and which you won't. While there is no one way to select your support, here are some helpful suggestions.

USE A VARIETY OF SUPPORT TYPES

One of the most important parts of using support is variety. Nothing will kill a speech faster than if you use

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 314
the same type of support over and over again. Try to use as much support as needed to make your point
without going overboard. You might decide to begin with a couple of definitions and rely on a gripping piece
of eyewitness testimony as your other major support. Or you might use a combination of facts, examples, and
narratives. In another case, statistics and examples might be most effective. Audience members are likely to
have different preferences for support; some may like statistics while others really find narratives compelling.
By using a variety of forms of support, you are likely to appeal to a broader range of audience members and
thus effectively adapt to your audience. Even if your audience members prefer a specific form of support,
providing multiple types of support is important to keep them interested. To use an analogy, even people who
love ice cream would get tired of it if they ate only ice cream every day for a week, so variety is important.

CHOOSE APPROPRIATE FORMS OF SUPPORT

Depending on the type of speech you are giving, your speech's context, and your audience, different types of
evidence may or may not be appropriate. While speeches using precise lexical definitions may be useful for
the courtroom, they may not be useful in an after-dinner speech to entertain. At the same time, entertaining
narratives may be great for a speech whose general purpose is to entertain, but may decrease a speaker's
credibility when attempting to persuade an audience about a serious topic.

CHECK FOR RELEVANCE

Another consideration about potential support is whether or not it is relevant. Each piece of supporting
material you select needs to support the specific purpose of your speech. You may find the coolest quotation,
but if that quotation doesn't really help your core argument in your speech, you need to leave it out. If you start
using too many irrelevant support sources, your audience will quickly catch on and your credibility will drop
through the floor.

   Your support materials should be relevant not only to your topic but also to your audience. If you are giving
a speech to an audience of sixty-year-olds, you may be able to begin with "Think back to where you were when
you heard that President Kennedy had been shot," but this would be meaningless with an audience of twenty-
five-year-olds. Similarly, references to music download sites or the latest popular band may not be effective
with audiences who are not interested in music.

315 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
DON'T GO OVERBOARD

In addition to being relevant, supporting materials need to help you support your speech's specific purpose
without interfering with your speech. You may find three different sources that support your speech's purpose
in the same way. If that happens, you shouldn't include all three forms of support. Instead, pick the form of
support that is the most beneficial for your speech. Remember, the goal is to support your speech, not to have
the support become your speech.

DON'T MANIPULATE YOUR SUPPORT

The last factor related to shifting through your support involves a very important ethical area called support-
manipulation. Often speakers will attempt to find support that says exactly what they want it to say despite
the fact that the overwhelming majority of evidence says the exact opposite. When you go out of your way to
pull the wool over your audience's eyes, you are being unethical and not treating your audience with respect.
Here are some very important guidelines to consider to avoiding support-manipulation:

   Do not overlook significant factors or individuals related to your topic.
   Do not ignore evidence that does not support your speech's specific purpose.
   Do not jump to conclusions that are simply not justified based on the supporting evidence you have.
   Do not use evidence to support faulty logic.
   Do not use out-of-date evidence that is no longer supported.
   Do not use evidence out of its original context.
   Do not knowingly use evidence from a source that is clearly biased.
   Make sure you clearly cite all your supporting evidence within your speech.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 316
          USING SUPPORT WITHIN YOUR SPEECH

Now that we've described ways to sift through your evidence, it's important to discuss how to use your
evidence within your speech. In the previous sections of this chapter, we've talked about the various types of
support you can use (facts and statistics, definitions, examples, narratives, testimonies, and analogies). In this
section, we're going to examine how these types of evidence are actually used within a speech. Then we will
discuss ways to think through the support you need for a speech and also how to actually use support while
speaking.

317 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
FORMS OF SPEECH SUPPORT

Let's begin by examining the forms that support can take in a speech: quotations, paraphrases, summaries,
numerical support, and pictographic support.

QUOTATIONS

The first common form of support utilized in a speech is direct quotation. Direct quotations occur when
Speaker A uses the exact wording by another speaker or writer within his or her new speech. Quotations are
very helpful and can definitely provide you a tool for supporting your speech's specific purpose. Here are five
tips for using quotations within a speech:

    1. Use a direct quotation if the original author's words are witty, engaging, distinct, or particularly vivid.
    2. Use a direct quotation if you want to highlight a specific expert and his or her expertise within your

         speech.
    3. Use a direct quotation if you are going to specifically analyze something that is said within the

         quotation. If your analysis depends on the exact wording of the quotation, then it is important to use
         the quotation.
    4. Keep quotations to a minimum. One of the biggest mistakes some speakers make is just stringing
         together a series of quotations and calling it a speech. Remember, a speech is your unique insight into
         a topic, not just a series of quotations.
    5. Keep quotations short. Long quotations can lose an audience, and the connection between your
         support and your argument can get lost.

PARAPHRASES

The second form support takes on during a speech is paraphrasing. Paraphrasing involves taking the general
idea or theme from another speaker or author and condensing the idea or theme in your own words. A mistake
that some speakers make is dropping a couple of words or rearranging some words within a direct quotation
and thinking that is a paraphrase. When paraphrasing you need to understand the other speaker or author's

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 318
ideas well enough to relate them without looking back at the original. Here are four tips for using paraphrases
in your speeches:

    1. Paraphrase when you can say it more concisely than the original speaker or author.
    2. Paraphrase when the exact wording from the original speaker or author won't improve your

         audience's understanding of the support.
    3. Paraphrase when you want to adapt an example, analogy, or narrative by another speaker or author to

         make its relevance more evident.
    4. Paraphrase information that is not likely to be questioned by your audience. If you think your

         audience may question your support, then relying on a direct quotation may be more effective.

SUMMARIES

Whereas quotations and paraphrases are taking a whole text and singling out a couple of lines or a section, a
summary involves condensing or encapsulating the entire text as a form of support. Summaries are helpful
when you want to clearly spell out the intent behind a speaker's or author's text. Here are three suggestions for
using summaries within your speech.

    1. Summarize when you need another speaker or author's complete argument to understand the
         argument within your speech.

    2. Summarize when explaining possible counterarguments to the one posed within your speech.
    3. Summarize when you need to cite a number of different sources effectively and efficiently to support

         a specific argument.

NUMERICAL SUPPORT

Speakers often have a need to use numerical support, or citing data and numbers within a speech. The most
common reason for using numerical support comes when a speaker needs to cite statistics. When using data
to support your speech, you need to make sure that your audience can accurately interpret the numbers in the
same way you are doing. Here are three tips for using numerical support:

319 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    1. Clearly state the numbers used and where they came from.
    2. Make sure you explain what the numbers mean and how you think they should be interpreted.
    3. If the numbers are overly complicated or if you use a variety of numbers within a speech, consider

         turning this support into a visual aid to enhance your audience's understanding of the numerical
         support.

PICTOGRAPHIC SUPPORT

The last form of support commonly used in speeches we label pictographic support, but it is more commonly
referred to as visual aids. Pictographic support is any drawn or visual representation of an object or process.
For the purposes of this chapter, we call visual aids pictographic support in order to stress that we are using
images as a form of support taken from a source. For example, if you're giving a speech on how to swing a golf
club, you could bring in a golf club and demonstrate exactly how to use the golf club. While the golf club in
this instance is a visual aid, it is not pictographic support. If you showed a diagram illustrating the steps for
an effective golf swing, the diagram is an example of pictographic support. So while all forms of pictographic
support are visual aids, not all visual aids are pictographic support. Here are five suggestions for effectively
using pictographic support in your speech:

    1. Use pictographic support when it would be easier and shorter than orally explaining an object or
         process.

    2. Use pictographic support when you really want to emphasize the importance of the support.
         Audiences recall information more readily when they both see and hear it than if they see or hear the
         information.

    3. Make sure that pictographic support is aesthetically pleasing.
    4. Pictographic support should be easy to understand, and it should take less time to use than words

         alone.
    5. Make sure everyone in your audience can easily see your pictographic support. If listeners cannot see

         it, then it will not help them understand how it is supposed to help your speech's specific purpose.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 320
                IS YOUR SUPPORT ADEQUATE?

Now that we've examined the ways to use support in your speech, how do you know if you have enough
support?

USE A REVERSE OUTLINE

One recommendation we have for selecting the appropriate support for your speech is what we call a reverse
outline. A reverse outline is a tool you can use to determine the adequacy of your speech's support by starting
with your conclusion and logically working backward through your speech to determine if the support you

321 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
provided is appropriate and comprehensive. In essence, we recommend that you think of your speech in terms
of the conclusion first and then work your way backward showing how you get to the conclusion. By forcing
yourself to think about logic in reverse, you're more likely to find missteps along the way. This technique is not
only helpful for analyzing the overall flow of your speech, but it can also let you see if different sections of your
speech are not completely supported individually.

SUPPORT YOUR CLAIMS

When selecting the different types of support for your speech, you need to make sure that every claim you
make within the speech can be supported within the speech. For example, if you state, "The majority of
Americans want immigration reform," you need to make sure that you have a source that actually says this. As
noted at the beginning of this chapter, too often people make claims within a speech that they have no support
for whatsoever. When you go through your speech, you need to make sure that each and every claim that you
make is adequately supported by the evidence you have selected to use within the speech.

ORAL PRESENTATION

Finally, after you have selected and evaluated your forms of support, it is time to plan how you will present
your support orally within your speech. How will you present the information to make it effective? To help you
think about using support, we recommend a three-step process: setup, execution, and analysis.

SETUP

The first step in using support within a speech is what we call the setup. The setup is a sentence or phrase in
which you explain to your audience where the information you are using came from. Note that if you found the
information on a website, it is not sufficient to merely give your audience the URL. Depending on the source of

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 322
your support, all the following information could be useful: name of source, location of source, date of source,
name of author, and identification of author. First, you need to tell your audience the name of your source.
Whether you are using a song or an article from a magazine, you need to tell your audience the name of the
person who wrote it and its title. Second, if your source comes from a larger work, you need to include the
location of the source. For example, a single article (name of source) may come from a magazine (the location).
Third, you need to specify the date of the source. Depending on the type of source you are using, you may need
to provide just a year or the day and month as well. You should provide as much information on the date as is
provided on the copyright information page of the source.

   Thus far we've talked only about the information you need to provide specifically about the source; let's now
switch gears and talk about the author. When discussing the author, you need to clearly explain not only who
the author is but also why the author is an expert (if appropriate). Some sources are written by authors who
are not experts, so you really don't need to explain their expertise. In other cases, your audience will already
know why the source is an expert, so there is less need to explain why the source is an expert. For example, if
giving a speech on current politics in the United States, you probably do not need to explain the expertise of
Barack Obama or John Boehner. However, when you don't provide information on an author's expertise and
your audience does not already know why the source is an expert, your audience will question the validity of
your support.

   Now that we've explained the basic information necessary for using support within a speech, here are two
different examples:

   According to Melanie Smithfield in an article titled "Do It Right, or Do It Now," published in the June 18, 2009, issue of
   Time Magazine...

      According to Roland Smith, a legendary civil rights activist and former chair of the Civil Rights Defense League, in his
   2001 book The Path of Peace...

In the first example we have an author who wrote an article in a magazine, and in the second one we have
an author of a book. In both cases, we provided the information that was necessary to understand where
the source was located. The more information we can provide our audiences about our support, the more
information our audiences have to evaluate the strength of our arguments.

EXECUTION

Once we have set up the support, the second part of using support is what we call execution. The execution
of support involves actually reading a quotation, paraphrasing a speaker or author's words, summarizing a
speaker or author's ideas, providing numerical support, or showing pictographic support. Effective execution
should be seamless and flow easily within the context of your speech. While you want your evidence to make an
impact, you also don't want it to seem overly disjointed. One mistake that some novice public speakers make is

323 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
that when they start providing evidence, their whole performance changes and the use of evidence looks and
sounds awkward. Make sure you practice the execution of your evidence when you rehearse your speech.

ANALYSIS

The final stage of using support effectively is the one which many speakers forget: analysis of the support. Too
often speakers use support without ever explaining to an audience how they should interpret it. While we don't
want to "talk down" to our listeners, audiences often need to be shown the connection between the support
provided and the argument made. Here are three basic steps you can take to ensure your audience will make
the connection between your support and your argument:

    1. Summarize the support in your own words (unless you started with a summary).
    2. Specifically tell your audience how the support relates to the argument.
    3. Draw a sensible conclusion based on your support. We cannot leave an audience hanging, so drawing

         a conclusion helps complete the support package.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 324
                    9.5 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. What are the ethical implications of using evidence from biased sources? Is this form of support manipulation?
            2. During a 2014 TED Talk, Zak Ebrahim begins his talk with a powerful narrative, the revelation that his father

                 helped plan the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. His audience is gripped from the beginning, as he begins to
                 recount the events of his childhood and the path he took after his father's conviction. Is it an effective strategy to
                 begin your narrative in the peak of the action, before starting at the beginning to explain how you got there?
            3. Discuss a time that a narrative made an impact on you during a presentation.

                                                   Activities

            1. Search, choose and analyze a speech from the top one hundred speeches given during the twentieth century.
                 Write about how this speaker goes through the three-step process for using support.

            2. You have been asked to give a speech on child labor laws within the United States. Provide a list of possible
                 examples you could use in your speech. You should have one from each of the four categories: positive, negative,
                 non, and best.

            3. Find and analyze a newspaper opposition editorial piece or letter to the editor that takes a position on an issue.
                 Next find an article on the same issue from a general news source. Which types of support does each writer use?
                 How effective and convincing do you think the use of support is for each article? Why?

325 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                               Case Study

 While preparing a speech on the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Aban runs across a website that has a lot of
 useful information. The website has numerous articles and links that all discuss the importance of the different functions of
 the DHS. Being a good speaker, Aban delves into the website to determine the credibility of the information being provided.
 Aban quickly realizes that the group sponsoring the website is a fringe-militia group that believes no immigrants should be
 allowed into the United States. While the information Aban is interested in has nothing to do with immigration, he wonders
 if all the information provided on the website has been distorted to support the organization's basic cause.
 With a group of classmates, discuss the following:
 Should Aban use the useful information about DHS even though the other information on the website is from an extremist

   group?
 Are all sources on the extremist group's website automatically suspect because of the group's stated anti-immigration stance?
 Is it ethical for Aban to use any of the information from this website?
 If Aban was a friend of yours and he showed you the website, how would you tell him to proceed?

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 326
Chapter 10: Introductions and Conclusions

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Identify key elements of an effective introduction.
 List methods of grabbing the audience's attention.
 Identify key elements of an effective conclusion.

                    Learning Objectives

 Attention-Getter
 Brakelight
 Character
 Competence
 Credibility
 Note of Finality
 Preview
 Summary
 Thesis

327 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                   10.1 Introductions

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1661#audio-1661-1

     "Never lose the first impression which has moved you." -Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 328
The very first words out of your mouth when you start a speech create a first impression for the audience that
either encourages them to listen or tune out. While this is usually a short part of your presentation, it is
important to take your time developing the introduction because you are creating a first impression of

yourself and the topic. There are four important tasks that must be accomplished during
the first few minutes of a speech. You must:

    1. Capture the audience's attention.
    2. Self introduce and establish your credibility/ethos.
    3. Reveal the topic of the speech through a clear thesis and relate it to the audience.
    4. Preview the body of the speech by specifically outlining the main points you will cover.

                                Capture the Audience's Attention.

Audience members do not attend a presentation with the intention of losing interest or being bored to tears.
Truth be told, audience members do not give a speaker a terribly long time to win them over either. You may
only have several sentences and, possibly, a chance to actually introduce the topic of the speech before the
audience mentally votes "Yes, I want to listen further " or "No, I'm tuning out and thinking about lunch. " This
opening statement is known as an attention getter.

   Depending on the overall time limit of a presentation, an ideal introduction should last no more than
around one or two minutes -and this includes your thesis and preview of your main points. This seems like a
long time, but in truth, it is not. Hence, you have a short, yet precious window, to lure your audience and hope
to keep them there. Here are top attention-gaining strategies to try in your upcoming speeches:

329 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Ask a Question

Ask insightful, meaningful questions. Better yet, ask a series of questions designed to draw the audience
further and further into your speech.

   When you ask your audience a question, they have to think. In the process of thinking, they are paying
attention. Even if your question does not call for an oral reply, they will be thinking what they would answer if
called upon.

   "How many of you would categorize yourselves as `givers'? How many of you search for the perfect Christmas or birthday
gift each year for your best friend or perhaps your Mom? You go all out, right? Then, how many of you have signed up to be
an organ donor? Isn't that the ultimate gift? The gift of life?

   "How many of you have ever had a couple of glasses of wine while dining with friends, then driven yourself home? Did
you ever consider that you might not be "okay " to make it home? " Is it possible that you were over the legal limit?

Find a Quotation

It could be a historical quote, a humorous one, even a song lyric. Ensure you credit the originator of the quote.
Ensure the quote is relevant to your topic. A word of caution here is to be careful to avoid reading to your
audience. If you use a quote, it should be impactful and cause your audience to want to hear more. When used
effectively, the quote is relatively short and memorized by the speaker.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 330
   "Make sure you have finished speaking before your audience has finished listening. "
      - Dorothy Sarnoff
      "Courage is being scared to death- but saddling up anyway. "
      - John Wayne

Shock the Audience

Use a startling statistic or a shocking statement. Share a personal revelation.
   "During the five minutes of my speech, seven individuals will die of AIDS or HIV-related complications in the world. "
      "Statistics show that one in every four women will be assaulted in her lifetime. "
      "Today, I want to talk to you about a recent loss I've had. I lost my best friend, my consoler, my buddy who could always be counted
   on to party all night. I lost all of that when I finally accepted that I am an alcoholic. Six months ago, I gave up alcohol. "

Find a Direct Connection to the Audience

Reference a local event, place, or activity. Use a recent news story, tragedy, or occurrence that your audience
would be sure to recall.

   "I'm sure all of you will recall the news story a few months back in which a car went over the Buckman Bridge, sideswiped by a drunk
   driver. Today, I want to discuss how you can be a defensive driver -and hopefully -save yourself from becoming the next headline. "

Tell a Story

Engage us, draw us in, and make the details of the story vivid and real to us.
   "When I was four years old, I became separated from my parents while visiting the zoo. One minute they were there; the next, they
   were gone. While you might imagine that I was frightened, I wasn't. I continued to look at the snakes in each display, fascinated. I
   tagged along with other visitors following the same path, staring in awe at each new exhibit. I certainly didn't realize then what we
   all know now. How dangerous the world can be for a child alone. "

If you ever listened to a scary story told by a camp counselor at night when all were sitting near a camp fire,
you know the power of a good story. Religious leaders know the power of a good story also. That is why they
often include Bible stories in their sermons. Plan to tell your audience a story, and you will have them listening
as attentively to you as campers listen to a counselor's scary story. Use vivid details; paint a mental picture
in the minds of your listeners. You want them to relate -to smell the cookies baking, to see the tears in your
Grandmother's eyes, to feel the softness of a baby in your arms.

Find a Compelling Visual Aid

   Poignant, shocking, funny. A picture IS worth a thousand words.

331 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   A photo of a homeless child
   A picture of a crystal clear lake and mountain range
   A cartoon depicting a political news story

                          Self Introduce and Establish Your Credibility.

An audience may or may not have a preconceived notion about you when you stand before them, but you can
bet that your audience will make up its mind about you quickly. Humans are notoriously quick to judge and
often form a first impression about a date, a stranger, or a speaker within the first 30 seconds. It becomes
imperative, then, for you to introduce yourself and establish your credibility after you have grabbed the
audience's attention. While some in your audience will form a first impression of you based upon your outfit or
your smile, most will judge your credibility based upon two crucial factors: your perceived competence and
character .

   Competence ensures your audience that you know your subject well. You have a strong knowledge base, and
you are well prepared to share the topic with your listeners. Reveal your expertise in the introduction, so your
audience knows from the beginning that you can be trusted. If you have a special relationship to the topic,
either personal or professional or by association, the beginning of your presentation is the time to share that.
If you do not have in-depth knowledge of the topic, it's time to hit the books, access the Internet, or talk with
the experts. You have the ability to become a minor expert on most any topic by doing some research. Then
ensure that your audience knows of your research; they want to know that your information is valid.

   A second component of credibility comes from the audience's assessment of your character . Can you be

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 332
trusted? Do you have their best interests at heart? Will the information you provide be useful and relevant to
their lives or do you have your own agenda? This aspect of credibility is often referred to as "ethos " -simply
the Greek word for character. A great example is the stereotype of a used car salesman. You need a car, but
you are not sure which one is right for you and which one you can really afford. The salesman knows all the
necessary information -gas consumption, mileage, and accessories. But you just do not trust that s/he has your
best interest at heart. Is s/he trying to get rid of a particular car or make more commission? Is the car you are
being shown best for you or best for the salesman? While you feel confident of the salesperson's competence,
you are doubtful of his/her character. It is important that you show your audience that you are credible in both
areas (Banks).

   Reveal the Topic of the Speech Through a Thesis Statement & Preview the Body of the
                                               Speech.

After you grab your audience's attention and before you reach the actual body of the speech, you will reveal
your thesis statement. Remember, a thesis statement is a singular thought that tells the audience what the
speech is about. It should be a strong, single, declarative sentence that captures the main point of your
presentation. For example, if you are giving an informative speech on how to properly use a fire extinguisher,
your thesis may be:

   "Knowing how to operate a fire extinguisher by following four simple steps can be beneficial and potentially life saving."
      or
      " Using a fire extinguisher can be accomplished by following four simple steps."

A preview statement is also an important component of your introduction. While many people attempt to
combine the thesis and preview statement, it is more thorough to include them as separate distinct items. The
preview statement is usually the last sentence of the introduction. The preview is like giving your audience a
map for a car trip: They will have an overview of where you will be taking them. It will be easier for them to pay
attention as you present your information and it will help them retain the main points of your presentation.

   Using the same topic as used above, a preview statement might sound like:

   "Today we will cover four specific steps that you should follow when using a fire extinguisher, specifically, pull, aim, squeeze, and
   sweep, easily remembered by the acronym, PASS."

Or perhaps it will be spoken this way:

   "In our time today, we will discuss how you should pull the pin, aim the nozzle, squeeze the trigger and use a sweeping motion when
   using a fire extinguisher in an emergency situation."

Notice that in each case, the speaker laid out the roadmap for what was going to be presented during the
presentation. The audience had a framework to fill in when the supporting material was presented.

   To prepare yourself, review the main points you intend to cover and write one sentence that previews each
of those points, separated by commas. You can also write three shorter sentences and use periods. Beware

333 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
of going into the details reserved for the main body of the speech while previewing your topic. This will confuse the
audience, and they will wonder what else you plan to discuss.

   Pistol Pete found himself nestled in a quiet corner of the Edmon Low Library, a notepad in front of him
filled with facts, stories, and quotes about Oklahoma State University's traditions. Now that he had done his
research, it was time for Pete to craft a compelling speech. He knew he needed to start with an attention-getter
-- a memorable opening that would capture the audience's interest right from the start.

   As he racked his brain for ideas, he thought about what defines OSU -- the Cowboy spirit, the community,
and of course, the traditions. Suddenly, an idea came to him. One of the most loved traditions at OSU was the
singing of the alma mater song, with its captivating melody and heartfelt lyrics that captured the spirit of the
university.

   For his attention-getter, Pete envisioned starting his speech with the powerful strains of the alma mater
song playing softly in the background. As the audience recognized the familiar tune, they would be
immediately engaged, their attention piqued.

   Then, Pete would step onto the stage, and with the music still playing, he would recite the first few lines of
the song: "Proud and immortal, Bright shines your name, Oklahoma State, we herald your fame." As he spoke,
the music would fade, leaving the audience with the resonating words and the emotions they stirred.

   With this, Pete would have not only caught the attention of his audience but also connected with them on

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 334
a deeper, emotional level. And most importantly, he would have set the stage for his speech, immersing his
audience in the spirit of OSU traditions right from the start.

   Feeling a rush of excitement at his idea, Pete jotted it down on his notepad, eager to shape the rest of his
speech. He knew that with this attention-getting opener, his audience would be hooked, ready to join him on
the journey through OSU's cherished traditions. What do you think of Pete's attention getter?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

335 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                   10.2 Conclusions

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1663#audio-1663-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 336
  "The end of a melody is not its goal: but nonetheless, had the melody not reached its end it
                  would not have reached its goal either. " -Friedrich Nietzsche

You have riveted your audience with an engaging introduction. Your introduction led to a compellingly
written and logically organized speech. Now, it is time to wrap up the entire experience, but how? Do not
make the mistake of thinking, "Well, my speech is just about over at this point, so it doesn't matter how I end
it. " You need a conclusion just as dynamic and memorable as your speech opener. How do you feel when a
movie has a disappointing ending that does not wrap up the story or, worse, simply leaves you hanging? You
feel frustrated, quite possibly like you wasted your money and time. Your audience will feel the same way if
your closing remarks do not provide effective closure for your speech. Too many speakers do not realize that
when a speech fizzles out, the audience is left with a negative impression. Your speech introduction and body
may have included the most profound words known to man, but it could be said that a speaker is only as
strong as her/his last sentence. You want your final sentences to be ones that are remembered and valued.

                            What a Speech Conclusion Is Meant to Do

The speech conclusion has four basic missions:

    1. Wraps things up- This portion is often referred to as a "Brakelight". Much like brake lights on a car
         warn us the car will be stopping, this "brakelight" or transitional statement warns the audience that
         the speech is coming to a close.

    2. Summarizes- A solid conclusion briefly restates the preview statement in past tense to remind the
         audience of the main points that were covered in the presentation.

    3. Tells the audience where to go from here- Depending on the purpose of your presentation, this
         component may play different roles. If your goal was to inform the audience, this is where you might
         tell them of a rich source they can go to for more information if their curiosity was piqued. If your
         goal is to persuade, this spot serves as a great opportunity to challenge the audience to take action
         based on the goals of your speech. Tell them what you want them to do now that they heard your
         speech.

    4. Closes the speech- The note of finality, clincher, closing statement or whatever you want to call it is an
         important element that leaves the audience reflecting on the topic.

Wrapping things up: It says, "We are nearing the end!"

Hopefully, your audience will want you to speak for an hour, rather than just five or eight minutes. However,
when you transition into your conclusion and use appropriate signposting, your audience realizes that the
speech will come full-circle. Usually the first transitional phrase is a "brakelight" of sorts. It lets the audience
know that you are starting to wrap up your presentation. You may use a transitional statement to illustrate
this such as, "In conclusion...", "In summary..." or "To wrap things up...".

The Summary: It tells the audience, "Here's what I told you. "

Just as you used a mapping statement to preview your main points, now you will summarize your points
within your conclusion. Often simply rewording -or even restating -your original thesis statement or preview

337 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
statement in the past tense will effectively summarize your speech. While this will feel very repetitive to you as
a speaker, it is useful in helping the audience understand and retain the information you covered. While you
may be tempted to revisit all the details of your speech, this element is best served by a clear concise declarative
sentence that restates the main points you addressed.

Where to go from here: It says, "Here's What To Do Now! "

The conclusion is the last chance you have to speak to the audience about this topic. Depending on your
general purpose, this portion of the speech will vary. Informative speaking often creates an interest in the
audience to learn more about your topic. It's best to give the audience a good resource to check out if they want
to learn more information. Avoid telling the audience "to google it". We all know how to do that. Since you've
done the research, tell us the best one you found. An example is, "If you'd like to learn more about the history
of Stillwater, I recommend visiting The Sheerar Museum at 702 South Duncan here in Stillwater." Persuasive
presentation conclusions want to utilize the last opportunity to challenge the listeners to action. This portion
gives you a specific opportunity to tell them what you hope they do as a result of hearing your speech. You may
say something like, "As you leave here today, I challenge you to pick up five pieces of trash as you walk back to
your dorm or car."

Note of finality: It let's the audience know, "The speech is over."

Your speech conclusion is a mental takeaway for the audience, and you will want a strong note of finality.
Your conclusion should contain enough memorable words and phrases that will help the audience positively
recall the experience - and even recollect certain points that you made. Do not forget to include that "ta-da "
moment. The last statement of your presentation should be thoroughly planned to let the audience know you
are done. Many speakers, who do not come up with a strong closing statement, will end their presentation
with, "Thank you." While it is polite to thank the audience, it doesn't really serve as the best closing statement.
You want your final statement to leave a strong lasting impact. It should leave the audience reflecting on your
topic and your information. Some speech writers like to reference the attention getter as a nice way to bring
the speech full circle by revisiting a story, question, or video clip they used originally to grab the audience's
attention. After your closing statement and applause from the audience, you are, of course, welcome to thank
them for their attention and/or attendance.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 338
   After hours of diligent research and meticulous preparation, Pistol Pete had managed to weave together
a compelling narrative for his speech about the traditions of Oklahoma State University. However, he
understood that a strong speech needed an equally powerful conclusion to leave a lasting impression on his
audience. So, he sat down once again, this time to brainstorm ideas for a closing statement that would bring
his speech full circle.

   Pete thought about the essence of his speech - the shared history, pride, and sense of community that OSU's
traditions inspired. His goal was to leave his audience not only better informed about these traditions but also
feeling more connected to the Cowboy spirit and to each other.

   An idea gradually began to take shape in his mind. Pete remembered a phrase from the OSU Alma Mater
that had always resonated with him, "Ever you'll find us, loyal and true." This line, he felt, perfectly
encapsulated the enduring spirit of loyalty and pride in the OSU community, tying back to the traditions he
had highlighted in his speech.

   For his closing statement, Pete decided to weave this phrase into his narrative since it lined up well with his
attention getter. He would conclude by saying, "As we delve into our traditions, as we sing our songs and wear
our colors with pride, we embody these words - `Ever you'll find us, loyal and true.' This is the essence of our
traditions, the heart of our Cowboy spirit. And as we carry these traditions forward, we ensure that the spirit

339 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
of Oklahoma State University - its unity, its pride, and its enduring legacy - continues to shine bright, now
and for generations to come."

   Satisfied with his idea, Pete felt a sense of accomplishment. He had a strong closing statement that not
only tied back to his attention-getter but also underscored the core message of his speech. With his closing
statement in place, Pete was confident that he would leave his audience inspired and more deeply connected
to the traditions and spirit of Oklahoma State University. Does Pete's final words of his presentation leave an
impression on you? Why?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 340
                    10.3 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. There are many ways to capture the audience's attention. Imagine you are giving a speech informing your
                 audience about sea turtles. Give examples of two options for an attention getter.

            2. Credibility is built from two components: competence and character. Give an example for how to establish each of
                 these components.

            3. Discuss the differences between a thesis statement and a preview statement.
            4. A note of finality is an important aspect to the ending of a speech. What are two distinctive, gripping ways you

                 could provide a powerful note of finality?

                                                   Activities

            1. Think of your favorite color. You will have one minute to convince a partner your favorite color is the best. The
                 goal here is to establish your credibility so they believe you. Include language that enhances your competence and
                 character.

            2. Elvis is alive! With a partner, come up with the most effective attention getter you could use for this speech.
                 Remember to be creative and engaging. Share with the class and discuss.

341 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
  Chapter 11: The Importance of Listening

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Describe the differences between listening and hearing.
 Explain the benefits of listening.
 Discern between the different listening styles.
 Identify the types of noise that can affect a listener's ability to attend to a message.
 Describe how a listener's attention span can limit the listener's ability to attend to a speaker's message.
 Analyze how a listener's personal biases can influence her or his ability to attend to a message.
 Define receiver apprehension and the impact it can have on a listener's ability to attend to a message.
 List and explain the different stages of listening.
 Understand the two types of feedback listeners give to speakers.
 Define and explain critical listening and its importance in the public speaking context.
 Understand six distinct ways to improve your ability to critically listen to speeches.
 Evaluate what it means to be an ethical listener.

                                                         Key Terms

 Action-Oriented Listeners
 Assumptions
 Content-Oriented Listeners
 Critical Listening
 Ethical Listening
 Evaluating
 Hearing
 Listening
 Listening or Receiver Apprehension
 Noise
 People-Oriented Listeners

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 342
     Physical Noise
     Physiological Noise
     Psychological Noise
     Receiver Biases
     Receiving
     Remembering
     Responding
     Semantic Noise
     Time-Oriented Listeners
     Understanding

343 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
             11.1 Importance of Listening

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1668#audio-1668-1

 "Most people don't listen with the intent to understand; they listen with the intent to reply." -Steven
                                               R. Covey

"Are you listening to me?" This question is often asked because the speaker thinks the listener is nodding off

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 344
or daydreaming. We sometimes think that listening means we only have to sit back, stay barely awake, and
let a speaker's words wash over us. While many Americans look upon being active as something to admire,
to engage in, and to excel at, listening is often understood as a "passive" activity. More recently, O, the Oprah
Magazine featured a cover article with the title, "How to Talk So People Really Listen: Four Ways to Make
Yourself Heard." This title leads us to expect a list of ways to leave the listening to others and insist that they do
so, but the article contains a surprise ending. The final piece of advice is this: "You can't go wrong by showing
interest in what other people say and making them feel important. In other words, the better you listen, the
more you'll be listened to" (Jarvis, 2009).

   You may have heard the adage, "We have two ears but only one mouth"--an easy way to remember that
listening can be twice as important as talking. As a student, you most likely spend many hours in a classroom
doing a large amount of focused listening, yet sometimes it is difficult to apply those efforts to communication
in other areas of your life. As a result, your listening skills may not be all they could be. In this chapter, we
will examine listening versus hearing, listening styles, listening difficulties, listening stages, and listening
critically.

   Even though Pistol Pete had always been more comfortable in the spotlight, cheering on the crowds at

345 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Oklahoma State University, he found himself in a different role in his public speaking class. Rather than being
the center of attention, Pete was often in the audience, listening to his peers present their speeches.

   While some speeches were riveting and engaging, others didn't quite pique his interest. Regardless, Pete
understood the importance of being a good listener and a supportive audience member. He remembered his
own nervousness when delivering speeches and knew how much it mattered to have an attentive audience.

   Pete decided to practice effective listening skills, focusing his attention entirely on the speaker, no matter
the topic. He made a conscious effort to maintain eye contact, giving the speaker non-verbal feedback and
showing his engagement. He understood that eye contact was a simple yet effective way to show respect and
encourage the speaker.

   Additionally, Pete worked on keeping his mind from wandering, a common challenge when the speech
wasn't particularly interesting. He found that taking notes helped him stay focused. He jotted down key
points, interesting ideas, or questions that came to his mind, keeping his brain active and engaged throughout
the speech.

   He also made sure to provide positive feedback after each presentation, appreciating the speaker's effort
and highlighting parts of the speech that stood out to him. Even if the topic wasn't of personal interest, he
knew that every speaker had put in effort and deserved recognition.

   Moreover, Pete refrained from any disruptive behavior, such as talking, using his phone, or doing other
tasks during speeches. He realized that being respectful was not just about paying attention but also about
creating a supportive environment that allowed the speaker to deliver their speech without unnecessary
distractions.

   Through these conscious efforts, Pistol Pete became a model audience member in his speech class. Despite
the content of the speeches, he managed to stay engaged and supportive, understanding that being a good
listener was as crucial as being a good speaker. His actions set a positive example for his classmates, fostering
a respectful and encouraging atmosphere for everyone in the class. Are you an effective listener in class? Are
you a supportive listener when peers are presenting? How can you improve your listening skills to be more like
Pete?

*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                                             References

Jarvis, T. (2009, November). How to talk so people really listen: Four ways to make yourself heard. O, the
Oprah Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.oprah.com/relationships/Communication-Skills-How-to-Make-
Yourself-Heard

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 346
               11.2 Listening vs. Hearing

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1672#audio-1672-1

Hearing is an accidental and automatic brain response to sound that requires no
effort. We are surrounded by sounds most of the time. For example, we are
accustomed to the sounds of airplanes, lawn mowers, furnace blowers, the rattling
of pots and pans, and so on. We hear those incidental sounds and, unless we have
a reason to do otherwise, we train ourselves to ignore them. We learn to filter out

347 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
sounds that mean little to us, just as we choose to hear our ringing cell phones and
other sounds that are more important to us.

Listening, on the other hand, is purposeful and focused rather than accidental. As
a result, it requires motivation and effort. Listening, at its best, is active, focused,
concentrated attention for the purpose of understanding the meanings expressed by
a speaker. We do not always listen at our best, however, and later in this chapter we
will examine some of the reasons why and some strategies for becoming more active
critical listeners.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 348
                   BENEFITS OF LISTENING

Listening should not be taken for granted. Before the invention of writing, people conveyed virtually all
knowledge through some combination of showing and telling. Elders recited tribal histories to attentive
audiences. Listeners received religious teachings enthusiastically. Myths, legends, folktales, and stories for
entertainment survived only because audiences were eager to listen. Nowadays, however, you can gain
information and entertainment through reading and electronic recordings rather than through real-time
listening. If you become distracted and let your attention wander, you can go back and replay a recording.
Despite that fact, you can still gain at least four compelling benefits by becoming more active and competent
at real-time listening.

349 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
YOU BECOME A BETTER STUDENT

   When you focus on the material presented in a classroom, you will be able to identify not only the words
used in a lecture but their emphasis and their more complex meanings. You will take better notes, and you
will more accurately remember the instructor's claims, information, and conclusions. Many times, instructors
give verbal cues about what information is important, specific expectations about assignments, and even what
material is likely to be on an exam, so careful listening can be beneficial.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 350
YOU BECOME A BETTER FRIEND

   When you give your best attention to people expressing thoughts and experiences that are important to
them, those individuals are likely to see you as someone who cares about their well-being. This fact is especially
true when you give your attention only and refrain from interjecting opinions, judgments, and advice.

351 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
PEOPLE WILL PERCEIVE YOU AS INTELLIGENT AND
PERCEPTIVE

   When you listen well to others, you reveal yourself as being curious and interested in people and events. In
addition, your ability to understand the meanings of what you hear will make you a more knowledgeable and
thoughtful person.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 352
GOOD LISTENING CAN HELP YOUR PUBLIC SPEAKING

   When you listen well to others, you start to pick up more on the stylistic components related to how people
form arguments and present information. As a result, you have the ability to analyze what you think works
and doesn't work in others' speeches, which can help you transform your speeches in the process. For example,
really paying attention to how others cite sources orally during their speeches may give you ideas about how
to more effectively cite sources in your presentation.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

353 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                  11.3 Listening Styles

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1675#audio-1675-1

  If listening were easy, and if all people went about it in the same way, the task for a
public speaker would be much easier. Even Aristotle, as long ago as 325 BC, recognized
that listeners in his audience were varied in listening style. He differentiated them as
follows:

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 354
   Rhetoric falls into three divisions, determined by the three classes of listeners to speeches. For of the three elements in
   speech-making--speaker, subject, and person addressed--it is the last one, the hearer, that determines the speech's
   end and object. The hearer must be either a judge, with a decision to make about things past or future, or an observer. A
   member of the assembly decides about future events, a juryman about past events: while those who merely decide on
   the orator's skill are observers (Aristotle, c. 350 BCE).
Thus Aristotle classified listeners into those who would be using the speech to make decisions about past
events, those who would make decisions affecting the future, and those who would evaluate the speaker's
skills. This is all the more remarkable when we consider that Aristotle's audiences were composed exclusively
of male citizens of one city-state, all prosperous property owners.
   Our audiences today are likely to be much more heterogeneous. Think about the classroom audience that
will listen to your speeches in this course. Your classmates come from many religious and ethnic backgrounds.
Some of them may speak English as a second language. Some might be survivors of war-torn parts of the world
such as Bosnia, Darfur, or northwest China. Being mindful of such differences will help you prepare a speech
in which you minimize the potential for misunderstanding.
   Part of the potential for misunderstanding is the difference in listening styles. In an article in the
International Journal of Listening, Watson, Barker, and Weaver (Watson, et al., 1995) identified four listening
styles: people, action, content, and time.

355 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                             PEOPLE

   The people-oriented listener is interested in the speaker. People-oriented listeners listen to the message
in order to learn how the speaker thinks and how they feel about their message. For instance, when people-
oriented listeners listen to an interview with a famous rap artist, they are likely to be more curious about
the artist as an individual than about music, even though the people-oriented listener might also appreciate
the artist's work. If you are a people-oriented listener, you might have certain questions you hope will be
answered, such as: Does the artist feel successful? What's it like to be famous? What kind of educational
background does he or she have? In the same way, if we're listening to a doctor who responded to the
earthquake crisis in Haiti, we might be more interested in the doctor as a person than in the state of affairs
for Haitians. Why did he or she go to Haiti? How did he or she get away from his or her normal practice and
patients? How many lives did he or she save? We might be less interested in the equally important and urgent
needs for food, shelter, and sanitation following the earthquake.

   The people-oriented listener is likely to be more attentive to the speaker than to the message. If you tend to
be such a listener, understand that the message is about what is important to the speaker.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 356
                             ACTION

   Action-oriented listeners are primarily interested in finding out what the speaker wants. Does the speaker
want votes, donations, volunteers, or something else? It's sometimes difficult for an action-oriented speaker
to listen through the descriptions, evidence, and explanations with which a speaker builds his or her case.

   Action-oriented listening is sometimes called task-oriented listening. In it, the listener seeks a clear
message about what needs to be done, and might have less patience for listening to the reasons behind the
task. This can be especially true if the reasons are complicated. For example, when you're a passenger on an
airplane waiting to push back from the gate, a flight attendant delivers a brief speech called the preflight safety
briefing. The flight attendant does not read the findings of a safety study or the regulations about seat belts.
The flight attendant doesn't explain that the content of his or her speech is actually mandated by the Federal
Aviation Administration. Instead, the attendant says only to buckle up so we can leave. An action-oriented
listener finds "buckling up" a more compelling message than a message about the underlying reasons.

357 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                            CONTENT

   Content-oriented listeners are interested in the message itself, whether it makes sense, what it means, and
whether it's accurate. When you give a speech, many members of your classroom audience will be content-
oriented listeners who will be interested in learning from you. You therefore have an obligation to represent
the truth in the fullest way you can. You can emphasize an idea, but if you exaggerate, you could lose credibility
in the minds of your content-oriented audience. You can advocate ideas that are important to you, but if
you omit important limitations, you are withholding part of the truth and could leave your audience with an
inaccurate view.

   Imagine you're delivering a speech on the plight of orphans in Africa. If you just talk about the fact that there
are over forty-five million orphans in Africa but don't explain why, you'll sound like an infomercial. In such
an instance, your audience's response is likely to be less enthusiastic than you might want. Instead, content-
oriented listeners want to listen to well-developed information with solid explanations.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 358
                              TIME

   People using a time-oriented listening style prefer a message that gets to the point quickly. Time-oriented
listeners can become impatient with slow delivery or lengthy explanations. This kind of listener may be
receptive for only a brief amount of time and may become rude or even hostile if the speaker expects a longer
focus of attention. Time-oriented listeners convey their impatience through eye rolling, shifting about in their
seats, checking their cell phones, and other inappropriate behaviors. If you've been asked to speak to a group
of middle-school students, you need to realize that their attention spans are simply not as long as those of
college students. This is an important reason speeches to young audiences must be shorter, or broken up by
more variety than speeches to adults.

   In your professional future, some of your audience members will have real time constraints, not merely
perceived ones. Imagine that you've been asked to deliver a speech on a new project to the board of directors
of a local corporation. Chances are the people on the board of directors are all pressed for time. If your speech
is long and filled with overly detailed information, time-oriented listeners will simply start to tune you out as
you're speaking. Obviously, if time-oriented listeners start tuning you out, they will not be listening to your
message. This is not the same thing as being a time-oriented listener who might be less interested in the
message content than in its length.

                                             References

Aristotle. (c. 350 BCE). Rhetoric (W. Rhys Roberts, Trans.). Book I, Part 3, para. 1. Retrieved from
http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/rhetoric.1.i.html.

   Watson, K. W., Barker, L. L., & Weaver, J. B., III. (1995). The listening styles profile (LSP-16): Development
and validation of an instrument to assess four listening styles. International Journal of Listening, 9, 1-13.

359 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                               THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 360
            11.4 Why Listening Is Difficult

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1679#audio-1679-1

   At times, everyone has difficulty staying completely focused during a lengthy presentation. We can
sometimes have difficulty listening to even relatively brief messages. Some of the factors that interfere with
good listening might exist beyond our control, but others are manageable. It's helpful to be aware of these
factors so that they interfere as little as possible with understanding the message.

361 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                              NOISE

Noise is one of the biggest factors to interfere with listening; it can be defined as anything that interferes with
your ability to attend to and understand a message. There are many kinds of noise, but we will focus on only
the four you are most likely to encounter in public speaking situations: physical noise, psychological noise,
physiological noise, and semantic noise.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 362
PHYSICAL NOISE

   Physical noise consists of various sounds in an environment that interfere with a source's ability to hear.
Construction noises right outside a window, planes flying directly overhead, or loud music in the next room
can make it difficult to hear the message being presented by a speaker even if a microphone is being used. It
is sometimes possible to manage the context to reduce the noise. Closing a window might be helpful. Asking
the people in the next room to turn their music down might be possible. Changing to a new location is more
difficult, as it involves finding a new location and having everyone get there.

363 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
PSYCHOLOGICAL NOISE

   Psychological noise consists of distractions to a speaker's message caused by a receiver's internal thoughts.
For example, if you are preoccupied with personal problems, it is difficult to give your full attention to
understanding the meanings of a message. The presence of another person to whom you feel attracted, or
perhaps a person you dislike intensely, can also be psychosocial noise that draws your attention away from the
message.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 364
PHYSIOLOGICAL NOISE

365 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Physiological noise consists of distractions to a speaker's message caused by a listener's own body. Maybe
you're listening to a speech in class around noon and you haven't eaten anything. Your stomach may be
growling and you are worried your classmates may be able to hear it. Maybe the room is cold and you're
thinking more about how to keep warm than about what the speaker is saying. Maybe your head begins to ache
and you feel the need to lay down and rest. In any of these cases, your body can distract you from attending to
the information being presented.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 366
SEMANTIC NOISE

367 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 368
   Semantic noise occurs when a receiver experiences confusion over the meaning of a source's word choice.
While you are attempting to understand a particular word or phrase, the speaker continues to present the
message. While you are struggling with a word interpretation, you are distracted from listening to the rest of
the message. One of the authors was listening to a speaker who mentioned using a sweeper to clean carpeting.
The author was confused, as she did not see how a broom would be effective in cleaning carpeting. Later,
the author found out that the speaker was using the word "sweeper" to refer to a vacuum cleaner; however,
in the meantime, her listening was hurt by her inability to understand what the speaker meant. Another
example of semantic noise is euphemism. Euphemism is diplomatic language used for delivering unpleasant
information. For instance, if someone is said to be "flexible with the truth," it might take us a moment to
understand that the speaker means this person sometimes lies.

Many distractions are the fault of neither the listener nor the speaker. However, when you are the speaker,
being aware of these sources of noise can help you reduce some of the noise that interferes with your
audience's ability to understand you.

                       ATTENTION SPAN

A person can only maintain focused attention for a finite length of time. In his 1985 book Amusing Ourselves
to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show Business, New York University's Steinhardt School of Education
professor Neil Postman argued that modern audiences have lost the ability to sustain attention to a message
(Postman, 1985). More recently, researchers have engaged in an ongoing debate over whether Internet use is
detrimental to attention span (Carr, 2010). Whether or not these concerns are well founded, you have probably
noticed that even when your attention is "glued" to something in which you are deeply interested, every now
and then you pause to do something else, such as getting a drink of water, stretching, or looking out the
window.

   The limits of the human attention span can interfere with listening, but listeners and speakers can use
strategies to prevent this interference. As many classroom instructors know, listeners will readily renew their
attention when the presentation includes frequent breaks in pacing (Middendorf & Kalish, 1996). For example,
a fifty- to seventy-five-minute class session might include some lecture material alternated with questions for
class discussion, video clips, handouts, and demonstrations. Instructors who are adept at holding listeners'
attention also move about the front of the room, writing on the board, drawing diagrams, and intermittently
using slide transparencies or PowerPoint slides.

   If you have instructors who do a good job of keeping your attention, they are positive role models showing
strategies you can use to accommodate the limitations of your audience's attention span.

369 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                       RECEIVER BIASES

Good listening involves keeping an open mind and withholding judgment until the speaker has completed the
message. Conversely, biased listening is characterized by jumping to conclusions; the biased listener believes,
"I don't need to listen because I already know what I think." Receiver biases can refer to two things: biases
with reference to the speaker and preconceived ideas and opinions about the topic or message. Both can be
considered noise. Everyone has biases, but good listeners have learned to hold them in check while listening.

   The first type of bias listeners can have is related to the speaker. Often a speaker stands up and an audience
member simply doesn't like the speaker, so the audience member may not listen to the speaker's message.
Maybe you have a classmate who just gets under your skin for some reason, or maybe you question a
classmate's competence on a given topic. When we have preconceived notions about a speaker, those biases
can interfere with our ability to listen accurately and competently to the speaker's message.

   The second type of bias listeners can have is related to the topic or content of the speech. Maybe the speech
topic is one you've heard a thousand times, so you just tune out the speech. Or maybe the speaker is presenting
a topic or position you fundamentally disagree with. When listeners have strong preexisting opinions about
a topic, such as the death penalty, religious issues, affirmative action, abortion, or global warming, their
biases may make it difficult for them to even consider new information about the topic, especially if the
new information is inconsistent with what they already believe to be true. As listeners, we have difficulty
identifying our biases, especially when they seem to make sense. However, it is worth recognizing that our
lives would be very difficult if no one ever considered new points of view or new information. We live in a
world where everyone can benefit from clear thinking and open-minded listening.

         LISTENING OR RECEIVER APPREHENSION

Listening or receiver apprehension is the fear that you might be unable to understand the message or
process the information correctly or be able to adapt your thinking to include the new information coherently
(Wheeless, 1975). In some situations, you might worry that the information presented will be "over your
head"--too complex, technical, or advanced for you to understand adequately.

   Many students will actually avoid registering for courses in which they feel certain they will do poorly. In
other cases, students will choose to take a challenging course only if it's a requirement. This avoidance might
be understandable but is not a good strategy for success. To become educated people, students should take a
few courses that can shed light on areas where their knowledge is limited.

   As a speaker, you can reduce listener apprehension by defining terms clearly and using simple visual aids
to hold the audience's attention. You don't want to underestimate or overestimate your audience's knowledge
on a subject, so good audience analysis is always important. If you know your audience doesn't have special
knowledge on a given topic, you should start by defining important terms. Research has shown us that when
listeners do not feel they understand a speaker's message, their apprehension about receiving the message
escalates. Imagine that you are listening to a speech about chemistry and the speaker begins talking about

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 370
"colligative properties." You may start questioning whether you're even in the right place. When this happens,
apprehension clearly interferes with a listener's ability to accurately and competently understand a speaker's
message. As a speaker, you can lessen the listener's apprehension by explaining that colligative properties
focus on how much is dissolved in a solution, not on what is dissolved in a solution. You could also give an
example that they might readily understand, such as saying that it doesn't matter what kind of salt you use in
the winter to melt ice on your driveway, what is important is how much salt you use.

                                             References

Carr, N. (2010, May 24). The Web shatters focus, rewires brains. Wired Magazine. Retrieved from
http://www.wired.com/magazine/2010/05/ff_nicholas_carr/all/1.

   Middendorf, J., & Kalish, A. (1996). The "change-up" in lectures. The National Teaching and Learning Forum,
5(2).

   Postman, N. (1985). Amusing ourselves to death: Public discourse in the age of show business. New York: Viking
Press.

   Wheeless, L. R. (1975). An investigation of receiver apprehension and social context dimensions of
communication apprehension. Speech Teacher, 24, 261-268.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

371 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                11.5 Stages of Listening

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1682#audio-1682-1

   As you read earlier, there are many factors that can interfere with listening, so you need to be able to
manage a number of mental tasks at the same time in order to be a successful listener. Author Joseph DeVito

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 372
has divided the listening process into five stages: receiving, understanding, remembering, evaluating, and
responding (DeVito, 2000).

                           RECEIVING

Receiving is the intentional focus on hearing a speaker's message, which happens when we filter out other
sources so that we can isolate the message and avoid the confusing mixture of incoming stimuli. At this stage,
we are still only hearing the message. Notice in Figure 11.3 "Stages of Listening" that this stage is represented
by the ear because it is the primary tool involved with this stage of the listening process.

   One of the authors of this book recalls attending a political rally for a presidential candidate at which
about five thousand people were crowded into an outdoor amphitheater. When the candidate finally started
speaking, the cheering and yelling was so loud that the candidate couldn't be heard easily despite using a
speaker system. In this example, our coauthor had difficulty receiving the message because of the external
noise. This is only one example of the ways that hearing alone can require sincere effort, but you must hear the
message before you can continue the process of listening.

373 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                       UNDERSTANDING

In the understanding stage, we attempt to learn the meaning of the message, which is not always easy. For
one thing, if a speaker does not enunciate clearly, it may be difficult to tell what the message was--did your
friend say, "I think she'll be late for class," or "my teacher delayed the class"? Notice in Figure 11.3 "Stages of
Listening" that stages two, three, and four are represented by the brain because it is the primary tool involved
with these stages of the listening process.

   Even when we have understood the words in a message, because of the differences in our backgrounds
and experience, we sometimes make the mistake of attaching our own meanings to the words of others. For
example, say you have made plans with your friends to meet at a certain movie theater, but you arrive and
nobody else shows up. Eventually you find out that your friends are at a different theater all the way across
town where the same movie is playing. Everyone else understood that the meeting place was the "west side"
location, but you wrongly understood it as the "east side" location and therefore missed out on part of the fun.

   The consequences of ineffective listening in a classroom can be much worse. When your professor advises
students to get an "early start" on your speech, he or she probably hopes that you will begin your research right
away and move on to developing a thesis statement and outlining the speech as soon as possible. However,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 374
students in your class might misunderstand the instructor's meaning in several ways. One student might
interpret the advice to mean that as long as she gets started, the rest of the assignment will have time to
develop itself. Another student might instead think that to start early is to start on the Friday before the
Monday due date instead of Sunday night.

   So much of the way we understand others is influenced by our own perceptions and experiences. Therefore,
at the understanding stage of listening we should be on the lookout for places where our perceptions might
differ from those of the speaker.

                        REMEMBERING

Remembering begins with listening; if you can't remember something that was said, you might not have been
listening effectively. Wolvin and Coakley note that the most common reason for not remembering a message
after the fact is because it wasn't really learned in the first place (Wolvin & Coakley, 1996). However, even when
you are listening attentively, some messages are more difficult than others to understand and remember.
Highly complex messages that are filled with detail call for highly developed listening skills. Moreover, if

375 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
something distracts your attention even for a moment, you could miss out on information that explains other
new concepts you hear when you begin to listen fully again.

   It's also important to know that you can improve your memory of a message by processing it
meaningfully--that is, by applying it in ways that are meaningful to you (Gluck, et al., 2008). Instead of simply
repeating a new acquaintance's name over and over, for example, you might remember it by associating it with
something in your own life. "Emily," you might say, "reminds me of the Emily I knew in middle school," or "Mr.
Impiari's name reminds me of the Impala my father drives."

   Finally, if understanding has been inaccurate, recollection of the message will be inaccurate too.

                          EVALUATING

The fourth stage in the listening process is evaluating, or judging the value of the message. We might
be thinking, "This makes sense" or, conversely, "This is very odd." Because everyone embodies biases and
perspectives learned from widely diverse sets of life experiences, evaluations of the same message can vary
widely from one listener to another. Even the most open-minded listeners will have opinions of a speaker,
and those opinions will influence how the message is evaluated. People are more likely to evaluate a message
positively if the speaker speaks clearly, presents ideas logically, and gives reasons to support the points made.

   Unfortunately, personal opinions sometimes result in prejudiced evaluations. Imagine you're listening to

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 376
a speech given by someone from another country and this person has an accent that is hard to understand.
You may have a hard time simply making out the speaker's message. Some people find a foreign accent to be
interesting or even exotic, while others find it annoying or even take it as a sign of ignorance. If a listener
has a strong bias against foreign accents, the listener may not even attempt to attend to the message. If you
mistrust a speaker because of an accent, you could be rejecting important or personally enriching information.
Good listeners have learned to refrain from making these judgments and instead to focus on the speaker's
meanings.

377 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 378
                         RESPONDING

Responding--sometimes referred to as feedback--is the fifth and final stage of the listening process. It's the
stage at which you indicate your involvement. Almost anything you do at this stage can be interpreted as
feedback. For example, you are giving positive feedback to your instructor if at the end of class you stay behind
to finish a sentence in your notes or approach the instructor to ask for clarification. The opposite kind of
feedback is given by students who gather their belongings and rush out the door as soon as class is over. Notice
in Figure 11.3 "Stages of Listening" that this stage is represented by the lips because we often give feedback in
the form of verbal feedback; however, you can just as easily respond nonverbally.

FORMATIVE FEEDBACK

   Not all response occurs at the end of the message. Formative feedback is a natural part of the ongoing
transaction between a speaker and a listener. As the speaker delivers the message, a listener signals his or her
involvement with focused attention, note-taking, nodding, and other behaviors that indicate understanding
or failure to understand the message. These signals are important to the speaker, who is interested in whether
the message is clear and accepted or whether the content of the message is meeting the resistance of
preconceived ideas. Speakers can use this feedback to decide whether additional examples, support materials,
or explanation is needed.

379 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SUMMATIVE FEEDBACK

   Summative feedback is given at the end of the communication. When you attend a political rally, a
presentation given by a speaker you admire, or even a class, there are verbal and nonverbal ways of indicating
your appreciation for or your disagreement with the messages or the speakers at the end of the message.
Maybe you'll stand up and applaud a speaker you agreed with or just sit staring in silence after listening to a
speaker you didn't like. In other cases, a speaker may be attempting to persuade you to donate to a charity,
so if the speaker passes a bucket and you make a donation, you are providing feedback on the speaker's
effectiveness. At the same time, we do not always listen most carefully to the messages of speakers we admire.
Sometimes we simply enjoy being in their presence, and our summative feedback is not about the message
but about our attitudes about the speaker. If your feedback is limited to something like, "I just love your voice,"
you might be indicating that you did not listen carefully to the content of the message.

   There is little doubt that by now, you are beginning to understand the complexity of listening and the great
potential for errors. By becoming aware of what is involved with active listening and where difficulties might
lie, you can prepare yourself both as a listener and as a speaker to minimize listening errors with your own
public speeches.

                                             References

DeVito, J. A. (2000). The elements of public speaking (7th ed.). New York, NY: Longman.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 380
   Gluck, M. A., Mercado, E., & Myers, C. E. (2008). Learning and memory: From brain to behavior. New York:
Worth Publishers, pp. 172-173.

   Wolvin, A., & Coakley, C. G. (1996). Listening (5th ed.). Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

381 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                11.6 Listening Critically

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1686#audio-1686-1

   As a student, you are exposed to many kinds of messages. You receive messages conveying academic
information, institutional rules, instructions, and warnings; you also receive messages through political
discourse, advertisements, gossip, jokes, song lyrics, text messages, invitations, web links, and all other

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 382
manner of communication. You know it's not all the same, but it isn't always clear how to separate the truth
from the messages that are misleading or even blatantly false. Nor is it always clear which messages are
intended to help the listener and which ones are merely self-serving for the speaker. Part of being a good
listener is to learn when to use caution in evaluating the messages we hear.

   Critical listening in this context means using careful, systematic thinking and reasoning to see whether
a message makes sense in light of factual evidence. Critical listening can be learned with practice but is not
necessarily easy to do. Some people never learn this skill; instead, they take every message at face value even
when those messages are in conflict with their knowledge. Problems occur when messages are repeated to
others who have not yet developed the skills to discern the difference between a valid message and a mistaken
one. Critical listening can be particularly difficult when the message is complex. Unfortunately, some speakers
may make their messages intentionally complex to avoid critical scrutiny. For example, a city treasurer giving
a budget presentation might use very large words and technical jargon, which make it difficult for listeners to
understand the proposed budget and ask probing questions.

     SIX WAYS TO IMPROVE YOUR CRITICAL LISTENING

Critical listening is first and foremost a skill that can be learned and improved. In this section, we are going to
explore six different techniques you can use to become a more critical listener.

383 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
RECOGNIZING THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN FACTS AND
OPINIONS

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan is credited with saying, "Everyone is entitled to their own opinions, but they
are not entitled to their own facts" (Wikiquote). Part of critical listening is learning to separate opinions from
facts, and this works two ways: critical listeners are aware of whether a speaker is delivering a factual message
or a message based on opinion, and they are also aware of the interplay between their own opinions and facts
as they listen to messages.

   In American politics, the issue of health care reform is heavily laden with both opinions and facts, and it is
extremely difficult to sort some of them out. A clash of fact versus opinion happened on September 9, 2010,
during President Obama's nationally televised speech to a joint session of Congress outlining his health care
reform plan. In this speech, President Obama responded to several rumors about the plan, including the claim
"that our reform effort will insure illegal immigrants. This, too, is false--the reforms I'm proposing would
not apply to those who are here illegally." At this point, one congressman yelled out, "You lie!" Clearly, this
congressman did not have a very high opinion of either the health care reform plan or the president. However,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 384
when the nonpartisan watch group Factcheck.org examined the language of the proposed bill, they found that
it had a section titled "No Federal Payment for Undocumented Aliens" (Factcheck.org, 2009).

   Often when people have a negative opinion about a topic, they are unwilling to accept facts. Instead, they
question all aspects of the speech and have a negative predisposition toward both the speech and the speaker.

   This is not to say that speakers should not express their opinions. Many of the greatest speeches in history
include personal opinions. Consider, for example, Martin Luther King Jr.'s famous "I Have a Dream" speech,
in which he expressed his personal wish for the future of American society. Critical listeners may agree or
disagree with a speaker's opinions, but the point is that they know when a message they are hearing is based
on opinion and when it is factual.

UNCOVERING ASSUMPTIONS

If something is factual, supporting evidence exists. However, we still need to be careful about what evidence
does and does not mean. Assumptions are gaps in a logical sequence that listeners passively fill with their own
ideas and opinions and may or may not be accurate. When listening to a public speech, you may find yourself
being asked to assume something is a fact when in reality many people question that fact. For example,
suppose you're listening to a speech on weight loss. The speaker talks about how people who are overweight
are simply not motivated or lack the self-discipline to lose weight. The speaker has built the speech on the
assumption that motivation and self-discipline are the only reasons why people can't lose weight. You may
think to yourself, what about genetics? By listening critically, you will be more likely to notice unwarranted
assumptions in a speech, which may prompt you to question the speaker if questions are taken or to do further
research to examine the validity of the speaker's assumptions. If, however, you sit passively by and let the
speaker's assumptions go unchallenged, you may find yourself persuaded by information that is not factual.

   When you listen critically to a speech, you might hear information that appears unsupported by evidence.
You shouldn't accept that information unconditionally. You would accept it under the condition that the
speaker offers credible evidence that directly supports it.

385 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Be Open to New Ideas

Sometimes people are so fully invested in their perceptions of the world that they are unable to listen
receptively to messages that make sense and would be of great benefit to them. Human progress has been
possible, sometimes against great odds, because of the mental curiosity and discernment of a few people. In
the late 1700s when the technique of vaccination to prevent smallpox was introduced, it was opposed by both
medical professionals and everyday citizens who staged public protests (Edward Jenner Museum). More than
two centuries later, vaccinations against smallpox, diphtheria, polio, and other infectious diseases have saved
countless lives, yet popular opposition continues.

   In the world of public speaking, we must be open to new ideas. Let's face it, people have a tendency to
filter out information they disagree with and to filter in information that supports what they already believe.
Nicolaus Copernicus was a sixteenth-century astronomer who dared to publish a treatise explaining that the
earth revolves around the sun, which was a violation of Catholic doctrine. Copernicus's astronomical findings
were labeled heretical and his treatise banned because a group of people at the time were not open to new
ideas. In May of 2010, almost five hundred years after his death, the Roman Catholic Church admitted its error
and reburied his remains with the full rites of Catholic burial (Owen, 2010).

   While the Copernicus case is a fairly dramatic reversal, listeners should always be open to new ideas. We are
not suggesting that you have to agree with every idea that you are faced with in life; rather, we are suggesting
that you at least listen to the message and then evaluate the message.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 386
RELY ON REASON AND COMMON SENSE

If you are listening to a speech and your common sense tells you that the message is illogical, you very well
might be right. You should be thinking about whether the speech seems credible and coherent. In this way,
your use of common sense can act as a warning system for you.

   One of our coauthors once heard a speech on the environmental hazards of fireworks. The speaker argued
that fireworks (the public kind, not the personal kind people buy and set off in their backyards) were
environmentally hazardous because of litter. Although there is certainly some paper that makes it to the
ground before burning up, the amount of litter created by fireworks displays is relatively small compared to
other sources of litter, including trash left behind by all the spectators watching fireworks at public parks and
other venues. It just does not make sense to identify a few bits of charred paper as a major environmental
hazard.

   If the message is inconsistent with things you already know, if the argument is illogical, or if the language is
exaggerated, you should investigate the issues before accepting or rejecting the message. Often, you will not be
able to take this step during the presentation of the message; it may take longer to collect enough knowledge
to make that decision for yourself.

   However, when you are the speaker, you should not substitute common sense for evidence. That's why
during a speech it's necessary to cite the authority of scholars whose research is irrefutable, or at least highly
credible. It is all too easy to make a mistake in reasoning, sometimes called fallacy, in stating your case. One of
the most common fallacies is post hoc, ergo propter hoc, a "common sense" form of logic that translates roughly
as "after the fact, therefore because of the fact." The argument says that if A happened first, followed by B, then
A caused B. We know the outcome cannot occur earlier than the cause, but we also know that the two events
might be related indirectly or that causality works in a different direction. For instance, imagine a speaker
arguing that because the sun rises after a rooster's crow, the rooster caused the sun to rise. This argument is
clearly illogical because roosters crow many times each day, and the sun's rising and setting do not change
according to crowing or lack thereof. But the two events are related in a different way. Roosters tend to wake
up and begin crowing at first light, about forty-five minutes before sunrise. Thus it is the impending sunrise
that causes the predawn crowing.

   What is "common sense" for people of one generation or culture may be quite the opposite for people of a
different generation or culture. Thus it is important not to assume that your audience shares the beliefs that
are, for you, common sense. Likewise, if the message of your speech is complex or controversial, you should
consider the needs of your audience and do your best to explain its complexities factually and logically, not
intuitively.

RELATE NEW IDEAS TO OLD ONES

As both a speaker and a listener, one of the most important things you can do to understand a message is
to relate new ideas to previously held ideas. Imagine you're giving a speech about biological systems and you

387 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
need to use the term "homeostasis," which refers to the ability of an organism to maintain stability by making
constant adjustments. To help your audience understand homeostasis, you could show how homeostasis is
similar to adjustments made by the thermostats that keep our homes at a more or less even temperature. If
you set your thermostat for seventy degrees and it gets hotter, the central cooling will kick in and cool your
house down. If your house gets below seventy degrees, your heater will kick in and heat your house up. Notice
that in both cases your thermostat is making constant adjustments to stay at seventy degrees. Explaining that
the body's homeostasis works in a similar way will make it more relevant to your listeners and will likely help
them both understand and remember the idea because it links to something they have already experienced.

   If you can make effective comparisons while you are listening, it can deepen your understanding of the
message. If you can provide those comparisons for your listeners, you make it easier for them to give
consideration to your ideas.

TAKE NOTES

Note-taking is a skill that improves with practice. You already know that it's nearly impossible to write down
everything a speaker says. In fact, in your attempt to record everything, you might fall behind and wish you
had divided your attention differently between writing and listening.

   Careful, selective note-taking is important because we want an accurate record that reflects the meanings
of the message. However much you might concentrate on the notes, you could inadvertently leave out an
important word, such as not, and undermine the reliability of your otherwise carefully written notes. Instead,
if you give the same care and attention to listening, you are less likely to make that kind of a mistake.

   It's important to find a balance between listening well and taking good notes. Many people struggle with
this balance for a long time. For example, if you try to write down only key phrases instead of full sentences,
you might find that you can't remember how two ideas were related. In that case, too few notes were taken. At
the opposite end, extensive note-taking can result in a loss of emphasis on the most important ideas.

   To increase your critical listening skills, continue developing your ability to identify the central issues in
messages so that you can take accurate notes that represent the meanings intended by the speaker.

                    LISTENING ETHICALLY

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 388
   Ethical listening rests heavily on honest intentions. We should extend to speakers the same respect we want
to receive when it's our turn to speak. We should be facing the speaker with our eyes open. We should not be
checking our cell phones. We should avoid any behavior that belittles the speaker or the message.

   Scholars Stephanie Coopman and James Lull emphasize the creation of a climate of caring and mutual
understanding, observing that "respecting others' perspectives is one hallmark of the effective listener"
(Coopman & Lull, 2008). Respect, or unconditional positive regard for others, means that you treat others
with consideration and decency whether you agree with them or not. Professors Sprague, Stuart, and Bodary
(Sprague, et al., 2010). also urge us to treat the speaker with respect even when we disagree, don't understand
the message, or find the speech boring.

   Doug Lippman (1998) (Lippman, 1998), a storytelling coach, wrote powerfully and sensitively about listening
in his book:

   Like so many of us, I used to take listening for granted, glossing over this step as I rushed into the more active, visible ways
   of being helpful. Now, I am convinced that listening is the single most important element of any helping relationship.

      Listening has great power. It draws thoughts and feelings out of people as nothing else can. When someone listens
   to you well, you become aware of feelings you may not have realized that you felt. You have ideas you may have never
   thought before. You become more eloquent, more insightful....

      As a helpful listener, I do not interrupt you. I do not give advice. I do not do something else while listening to you. I do
   not convey distraction through nervous mannerisms. I do not finish your sentences for you. In spite of all my attempts
   to understand you, I do not assume I know what you mean.

389 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
      I do not convey disapproval, impatience, or condescension. If I am confused, I show a desire for clarification, not
   dislike for your obtuseness. I do not act vindicated when you misspeak or correct yourself.

      I do not sit impassively, withholding participation.
      Instead, I project affection, approval, interest, and enthusiasm. I am your partner in communication. I am eager for
   your imminent success, fascinated by your struggles, forgiving of your mistakes, always expecting the best. I am your
   delighted listener (Lippman, 1998).

This excerpt expresses the decency with which people should treat each other. It doesn't mean we must accept
everything we hear, but ethically, we should refrain from trivializing each other's concerns. We have all had
the painful experience of being ignored or misunderstood. This is how we know that one of the greatest gifts
one human can give to another is listening.

                                             References

Coopman, S. J., & Lull, J. (2008). Public speaking: The evolving art. Cengage Learning, p. 60.
   Edward Jenner Museum. (n.d.). Vaccination. Retrieved from http://www.jennermuseum.com/Jenner/

vaccination.html
   Factcheck.org, a Project of the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania. (2009,

September 10). Obama's health care speech. Retrieved from http://www.factcheck.org/2009/09/obamas-
health-care-speech

   Lippman, D. (1998). The storytelling coach: How to listen, praise, and bring out people's best. Little Rock, AR: August
House.

   Owen, R. (2010, May 23). Catholic church reburies "heretic" Nicolaus Copernicus with honour. Times Online.
Retrieved from http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/world/europe/article7134341.ece

   Sprague, J., Stuart, D., & Bodary, D. (2010). The speaker's handbook (9th ed.). Boston, MA: Wadsworth
Cengage.

   Wikiquote. (n.d.). Daniel Patrick Moynihan. Retrieved from http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/
Daniel_Patrick_Moynihan

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 390
                    11.7 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. With a partner, discuss how you find out when you have not been listening carefully. What are some of the
                 consequences of poor listening?

            2. This chapter discusses different types of listening styles. Under most circumstances, which style best describes
                 you and why?

            3. What are the main types of noise that influence your listening in the following areas: home, classroom, work, with
                 friends? How can you begin working to overcome noise in these areas?

                                                   Activities

            1. In a group, discuss what distracts you most from listening attentively to a speaker. Have you found ways to filter
                 out or manage the distraction? Share with the class to create a list of ways to manage these distractions.

            2. Form five groups. Each group is given a different stage in the listening process. Together, create an infographic
                 that describes that stage and the most important concepts in that stage. Each group presents their infographic to
                 the class.

            3. Sit back to back with a partner. One is given a simple image (i.e. heart, house, flower, tree, fish, cat, dog, etc.) and
                 the other is given a blank sheet of paper and a pen/pencil. The student with the image must describe it without
                 naming it for the other student to draw. After every pair has finished, share the image and the drawing and
                 discuss the following questions:
                     How did the drawing turn out versus the image?
                     For the listener, what were the most useful things the speaker did to help you get an idea of what you were drawing?
                     For the speaker, what tactics did you use to try to help the listener draw the correct image?
                     What types of noise interfered in this process? How did you overcome that?
                     What kinds of listening styles do you think were most used in this activity? How did that help/hurt the process?

391 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 How can you use this experience to improve your listening in the future?
                                     THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 392
               Chapter 12: Language

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Explain how language is used for power.
     Describe how languages choices affect the effectiveness of public speaking.
     Explain the standard of clarity.
     Choose clear language that is appropriate for audiences.
     Determine your own language ability in speaking.

                                                              Key Terms

     Abstract Language
     Alliteration
     Anaphora
     Antithesis
     Appropriateness
     Assonance
     Cliches
     Connotative
     Denotative
     Ethnic Identity
     Euphemisms
     Figurative Language
     Hyperbole
     Imagery
     Irony
     Jargon

393 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Language
 Literal Language
 Metaphors
 Parallelism
 Similes
 Slang

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 394
           12.1 What Language Is and Does

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1690#audio-1690-1

  "Words are sacred. They deserve respect. If you get the right ones in the right order you can
                             nudge the world a little." -Tom Stoppard

The Ancient Romans who studied and taught rhetoric divided its study and process into five "canons:"
invention, disposition, style, memory, and delivery. The term "style" does not refer to clothing styles but
language choices. Should a public speaker use very basic language because the audience is unfamiliar with
his topic? Or more technical language with many acronyms, abbreviations, and jargon because the audience
has expertise in the topic? Or academic language with abstract vocabulary, or flowery, poetic language with
lots of metaphors? Perhaps you have never thought about those questions, but they are ones that influence
both the clarity of the message as well as the credibility a speaker will gain during the presentation.

   However, we would be wrong if we treated language as an "add-on" to the ideas and structure of the speech.

395 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Language is a far too complex and foundational aspect of our lives for us to consider it as an afterthought for
a speech. In this chapter we will look at how language functions in communication, what standards language
choices should meet in public speaking, and how you can become more proficient in using language in public
speaking.

   Language is any formal system of gestures, signs, sounds, and symbols used or conceived as a means of
communicating thought, either through written, enacted, or spoken means. Linguists believe there are far
more than 6,900 languages and distinct dialects spoken in the world today (Anderson, 2012). The language
spoken by the greatest number of people on the planet is Mandarin (a dialect of Chinese). Other widely spoken
languages are English, Spanish, and Arabic. English is spoken widely on every content (thanks to the British
Empire) but Mandarin is spoken by the most people. While we tend to think of language in its print form, for
most of history and for most of the world, language has been or is spoken, or oral. More than half of spoken
languages have not even been put into written form yet (https://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/langhotspots/
fastfacts.html).

   We have already seen in earlier chapters that public speakers have to make adjustments to language for
audiences. For example, spoken language is more wordy and repetitive than written language needs to be
or should be. It is accompanied by gestures, vocal emphasis, and facial expressions. Additionally, spoken
language includes more personal pronouns and more expressive, emotional, colloquial, slang, and
nonstandard words.

   The study of language is, believe it or not, controversial. If you are an education, social sciences, pre-law,
or English major, you will somewhere in your college career come up against this truth. While we use words
everyday and don't think about it, scholars in different fields concern themselves with how we choose words,
why we choose words, what effect words have on us, and how the powerful people of the world use words. One
theory of language, general semantics, says that meaning resides in the person using the word, not in the word
("Basic Understandings," 2015). It is helpful for the public speaker to keep this mind, especially in regard to
denotative and connotative meaning. Wrench, Goding, Johnson, and Attias (2011) use this example to explain
the difference:

   When we hear or use the word "blue," we may be referring to a portion of the visual spectrum dominated by energy with
   a wavelength of roughly 440-490 nano-meters. You could also say that the color in question is an equal mixture of both
   red and green light. While both of these are technically correct ways to interpret the word "blue," we're pretty sure that
   neither of these definitions is how you thought about the word. When hearing the word "blue," you may have thought of
   your favorite color, the color of the sky on a spring day, or the color of a really ugly car you saw in the parking lot. When
   people think about language, there are two different types of meanings that people must be aware of: denotative and
   connotative. (p. 407)

Denotative meaning is the specific meaning associated with a word. We sometimes refer to denotative
meanings as dictionary definitions. The [scientific] definitions provided in the first two sentences of the
quotation above are examples of definitions that might be found in a dictionary. Connotative meaning is the
idea suggested by or associated with a word at a cultural or personal level. In addition to the examples above,
the word "blue" can evoke many other ideas:

   State of depression (feeling blue)

   Indication of winning (a blue ribbon)

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 396
   Side during the Civil War (blues vs. grays)

   Sudden event (out of the blue).

   States that lean toward the Democratic Party in their voting

   A slang expression for obscenity (blue comedy)

   In plural form, a genre of music (the blues)

Language is not just something we use; it is part of who we are and how we think. When we talk about
language, we have to use words to do so, and language is also hard to separate from who we are. Each of us has
our own way of expressing ourselves. Even more, it is almost impossible to separate language from thinking.
Many people think the federal government should enact a law that only English is spoken in the United States
(in government offices, schools, etc.). This is opposed by some groups because it seems discriminatory to
immigrants, based on the belief that everyone's language is part of their identity and self-definition.

   Not only is language about who we are; it is about power or at least is used by powerful people. In fact,
some educational and political theorists believe that language is all about power. For instance, euphemisms

are often used to make something unpleasant sound more tolerable. In one of the more

well-known examples of the use of euphemisms, the government commonly tries to use language to "soften"
what many would see as bad. During the Vietnam War, "air support" was invented to cover the real meaning:
"bombing." When you hear air support, you probably think "planes bringing supplies in," not "bombing."

   Even today, terms like "revenue enhancement" are used instead of "tax increases." The word euphemism
has at its core "eu," (which is a prefix from Greek meaning "good" or "pleasant") and "phem" (a root word for
speaking). Just as blasphemy is speaking evil about sacred things, "euphemism" is "pleasant speaking about
unpleasant things." We use euphemisms every day, but we have to be careful not to obscure meaning or use
them deceptively.

   There's an old saying in debate, "He who defines the terms wins the debate." In the 1988 election, George
H.W. Bush was running against Michael Dukakis, who was the governor of Massachusetts. Vice President
Bush was able to stick a label on Dukakis and it stuck, that of "liberal." He not only labeled Governor Dukakis,
but he also defined what "liberal" meant. The word was in disuse after that, and you don't hear it as much now.
The word in use now is "progressive." Unfortunately, this incident in 1988 politics obscured the fact that the
U.S. has always been a "liberal" democratic republic. The word "liberal" has shifted meaning, another trait of
language, since meaning exists in the minds of users, not in some protected, never-changing space or form. In
the majority of Americans' minds, "liberal" has become associated with specific political positions rather than
a form of government in general.

   This example brings up another issue with language: words change meaning over time, or more specifically,
the meaning we attached to them changes. "Pretty" used to mean "clever" 250 years ago. "Prevent" meant to
"precede," not to keep from happening. Language is simply not static, as much as we might like it to be. One of
the main reasons we find Shakespeare daunting is that so many of the Elizabethan words are either no longer
used or they have changed meanings.

   With regard to the use of language for power, even unknowingly, feminists in the 1970s argued that the
common way we use English language was biased against women. King-sized means "big and powerful,"
but "queensized" means "for overweight women." "Master" was not equivalent to "mistress." "Madame" has
taken on a negative connotation, even though it should have been equivalent to "sir." Many words referring
to women had to add a suffix that was often "less than," such as "-ess" or "-ette" or "co-ed." In the last thirty
years we have gotten away from that, so that you often hear a female actor referred to as "actor" rather than
"actress," but old habits die hard.

397 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   We see another example of power in language in the abortion debate. Prior to 1973, abortions could be
obtained legally, to some extent, in three states: California, New York, and Hawaii. After the Roe v. Wade
decision in January of 1973, they could, at least theoretically, be obtained in all fifty states. Roe v. Wade did not
make abortions legal so much as it made anti-abortion laws illegal or unconstitutional. Practically, the effect
was basically the same, but we are often imprecise about language. The people who were against abortion
were now on the defensive, and they had to start fighting. It's generally better to be "pro-"something rather
than "anti-"something, so they became "pro-life." Those favoring abortion rights then automatically became
"pro-death." One side had defined the terms of the debate, and the other had to come up with something
comparable. "Pro-choice" takes advantage of the American belief in personal freedoms.

   Can you think of how advertisers choose words in a way that is meant to affect your thinking and see an
object in different ways? Realtors sell "homes," not houses. McDonald's sells "Happy Meals" even though it
is essentially the same food they sell that are not "Happy Meals." As you progress as a public speaker, you
will become more aware of the power certain words have over audiences. An ethical communicator will use
language in a way that encourages respect for others, freedom of thought, and informed decision making.
First, however, a speaker should seek to meet the standards of clarity, effectiveness, appropriateness, and
elegance in language, which are discussed in the next section.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 398
   As the official mascot of Oklahoma State University, Pistol Pete was a cherished figure, always ready to
rally the crowd with his infectious Cowboy spirit and colloquial cowboy lingo. However, during one particular
international student orientation, Pete found that his cowboy language didn't always translate as he intended.

   Eager to welcome the new students, Pete greeted them with a hearty, "Howdy, partners! Y'all ready to saddle
up and ride into the sunset of a great academic journey at OSU?" The crowd responded with a mixture of polite
nods and puzzled looks, but there was a palpable sense of confusion among some of the international students
unfamiliar with Pete's cowboy vernacular.

   Realizing that his message might not have come across as he intended, Pete decided to take a different
approach. He remembered that effective communication was about making sure the message was understood,
not just about delivering it.

   With a friendly smile, he addressed the crowd again, this time opting for more universal language.
"Welcome, everyone! Are you excited to begin your amazing academic journey at OSU?" This time, the crowd
responded enthusiastically, their faces lighting up with understanding and appreciation.

   However, Pete didn't want to completely abandon his unique cowboy lingo, as it was a significant part of

399 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
his identity and the Oklahoma State spirit. So, he decided to incorporate it in a way that would educate and
entertain his listeners.

   He explained, "In cowboy speak, when we say `saddle up,' we mean get ready, and `ride into the sunset'
means to embark on an exciting journey. I know it might sound confusing at first, but don't worry, you'll get
the hang of it in no time!" The students laughed and nodded, appreciating Pete's effort to include them in the
Cowboy culture.

   From that day forward, Pistol Pete made sure to balance his cowboy lingo with clear, universal language,
especially when addressing diverse crowds. This experience taught him the importance of adjusting his
communication to his audience, ensuring that his messages were not just delivered, but also understood
and appreciated. Have you ever used colloquialisms or regional expressions that caused confusion or
miscommunication? Why is it important to recognize how our language influences the audience's
understanding?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 400
        12.2 Standards for Language in Public

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1694#audio-1694-1

   Clear language is powerful language. Clarity is the first concern of a public speaker when it comes to
choosing how to phrase the ideas of his or her speech. If you are not clear, specific, precise, detailed, and
sensory with your language, you won't have to worry about being emotional or persuasive, because you won't
be understood. There are many aspects of clarity in language, listed below.

401 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                          Achieving Clarity

The first aspect of clarity is concreteness. We usually think of concreteness as the opposite of abstraction.
Language that evokes many different visual images in the minds of your audience is abstract language.
Unfortunately, when abstract language is used, the images evoked might not be the ones you really want
to evoke. A word such as "creature" is very abstract; it brings up a range of mental pictures or associations:
monster, animal, forests, swamps, etc. When asked to identify what an abstract term like "creature" means,
twenty people will have twenty different ideas.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 402
The Ladder of Abstraction starts with vague, abstract language and moves towards more concrete, specific language.

403 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 404
   In order to show how language should be more specific, the "ladder of abstraction" (Hayakawa, 1939) was
developed. The ladder of abstraction helps us see how our language can range from abstract (general and
sometimes vague) to very precise and specific (such as an actual thing that everyone in your audience will
know or be able to identify). Instead of saying, "he was a large man," it might provide more clarity if you
were specific with your language by saying, "He's 6 foot, four inches tall and weighs about three hundred and
fifty pounds." Or to reference our image above, if you were to tell your audience you have a living creature in
your home, it would sound quite mysterious, but it would create more clarity and understanding if they knew
you were referencing your three year old, obese, orange tabby who is constantly sleeping or eating. The more
specific we can be with our language, the better we can create a mental image for the audience. A picture is
worth a thousand words, right?

  Related to the issue of specific vs. abstract is the use of the right word. Mark Twain
said, "The difference between the right word and the almost right word is the
difference between lightning and a lightning bug." For example, the words
"prosecute" and "persecute" are commonly confused, but not interchangeable. Two
others are peremptory/pre-emptive and prerequisites/perquisites. Can you think of
other such word pair confusion?

   In the attempt to be clear, which is your first concern, you will also want to be simple and familiar in
your language. Familiarity is a factor of attention; familiar language draws in the audience. Simple does not
mean simplistic, but the avoidance of multi-syllable words. If a speaker said, "A collection of pre-adolescents
fabricated an obese personification comprised of compressed mounds of minute aquatic crystals," you might
recognize it as "Some children made a snowman," but maybe not. The language is not simple or familiar and
therefore does not communicate well, although the words are correct and do mean the same thing, technically.

   Along with language needing to be specific and correct, language can use appropriate similes and
metaphors to become clearer. Literal language does not use comparisons like similes and metaphors;
figurative language uses comparisons with objects, animals, activities, roles, or historical or literary figures.
Literal says, "The truck is fast." Figurative says "The truck is as fast as..." or "The truck runs like..." or "He drives
that truck like Kyle Busch at Daytona." Similes use some form of "like" or "as" in the comparisons. Metaphors
are direct comparisons, such as "He is Kyle Busch at Daytona when he gets behind the wheel of that truck."
Here are some more examples of metaphors:

   Love is a battlefield.
      Upon hearing the charges, the accused clammed up and refused to speak without a lawyer.
      Every year a new crop of activists is born.

For rhetorical purposes, metaphors are considered stronger, but both can help you achieve clearer language,
if chosen wisely. To think about how metaphor is stronger than simile, think of the difference "Love is a

battlefield" and "Love is like a battlefield." Speakers are encouraged to pick and not overuse them. Also,
avoid mixed metaphors, as in this example: "That's awfully thin gruel for the right wing to hang their

hats on." Or "He found himself up a river and had to change horses." The mixed metaphor here is the use of "up
a river" and "change horses" together; you would either need to use an all river-based metaphor (dealing with
boats, water, tides, etc.) or a metaphor dealing specifically with horses. The example above about a "new crop"
"being born," is actually a mixed metaphor, since crops aren't born, but planted and harvested. Additionally, in
choosing metaphors and similes, speakers want to avoid clichs, discussed next.

   Clichs are expressions, usually similes, that are predictable. You know what comes next because they are

405 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
overused and sometimes out of date. Clichs do not have to be linguistic--we often see clichs in movies, such
as teen horror films where you know exactly what will happen next! It is not hard to think of clichs: "Scared
out of my . . ." or "When life gives you lemons. . ." or "All is fair in. . ." or, when describing a reckless driver, "She
drives like a . . . " If you filled in the blanks with "wits," "make lemonade," "love and war," "or "maniac," those
are clichs.

   Clichs are not just a problem because they are overused and boring; they also sometimes do not
communicate what you need, especially to audiences whose second language is English. "I will give you a
ballpark figure" is not as clear as "I will give you an estimate," and assumes the person is familiar with
American sports. Therefore, they also will make you appear less credible in the eyes of the audience because
you are not analyzing them and taking their knowledge, background, and needs into account. As the United
States becomes more diverse, being aware of your audience members whose first language is not English is a
valuable tool for a speaker.

   Additionally, some clichs are so outdated that no one knows what they mean. "The puppy was as cute as a
button" is an example. You might hear your great-grandmother say this, but who really thinks buttons are cute
nowadays? Clichs are also imprecise. Although clichs do have a comfort level to them, comfort puts people
to sleep. Find fresh ways, or just use basic, literal language. "The bear was big" is imprecise in terms of giving
your audience an idea of how frightful an experience faced by a bear would be. "The bear was as big as a house"
is a clich and an exaggeration, therefore imprecise. A better alternative might be, "The bear was two feet taller
than I am when he stood on his back legs." The opposite of clichs is clear, vivid, and fresh language.

   In trying to avoid clichs, use language with imagery, or sensory language. This is language that makes the
recipient smell, taste, see, hear, and feel a sensation. Think of the word "ripe." What is "ripe?" Do ripe fruits
feel a certain way? Smell a certain way? Taste a certain way? Ripe is a sensory word. Most words just appeal to

one sense, like vision. Think of color. How can you make the word "blue" more sensory? How
can you make the word "loud" more sensory? How would you describe the current state of your bedroom

or dorm room to leave a sensory impression? How would you describe your favorite meal to leave a sensory
impression? or a thunderstorm?

   Poetry uses much imagery, so to end this section on fresh, clear language, here is a verse from "Daffodils" by
William Wordsworth. Notice the metaphors ("daffodils dancing," "host," which brings to mind great heavenly
numbers), simile ("as the stars") and the imagery ("golden" rather than "yellow," and other appeals to feeling
and sight):

   A host, of golden daffodils;
   Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
   Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.
   Continuous as the stars that shine
   And twinkle on the Milky Way.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 406
                                            Effectiveness

Language achieves effectiveness by communicating the right message to the audience. Clarity contributes to
effectiveness, but there are some other aspects of effectiveness. To that end, language should be a means of
inclusion and identification, rather than exclusion. Let's establish this truth: Language is for communication;
communication is symbolic, and language is the main (but not only) symbol system we use for
communication. If language is for communication, then its goal should be to bring people together and to
create understanding.

   Unfortunately, we habitually use language for exclusion rather than inclusion. We can push people away
with our word choices rather than bringing them together. Stereotypes serve as examples of what we're talking
about here. What follows are some examples of language that can exclude members of your audience from
understanding what you are saying.

Jargon

Jargon used in your profession or hobby should only be used with audiences who share your profession or
hobby. Not only will the audience members who don't share your profession or hobby miss your meaning, but
they will feel that you are not making an honest effort to communicate or are setting yourself above them in
intelligence or rank. Lawyers are often accused of using "legalese," but other professions and groups do the
same. If audience members do not understand your references, jargon, or vocabulary, it is unlikely that they
will sit there and say, "This person is so smart! I wish I could be smart like this speaker." The audience member

407 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
is more likely to be thinking, "Why can't this speaker use words we understand and get off the high horse?"
(which I admit, is a clich!)

   What this means for you is that you need to be careful about assumptions of your audience's knowledge
and their ability to interpret jargon. For example, if you are trying to register for a class at the authors' college
and your adviser asks for the CRN, most other people would have no idea what you are talking about (course
reference number). Acronyms, such NPO, are common in jargon. Those trained in the medical field know
it is based on the Latin for "nothing by mouth." The military has many acronyms, such as MOS (military
occupational specialty, or career field in civilian talk). If you are speaking to an audience who does not know
the jargon of your field, using it will only make them annoyed by the lack of clarity.

   Sometimes we are not even aware of our jargon and its inadvertent effects. A student once complained to
one of the authors about her reaction when she heard that she had been "purged." The word sounds much
worse than the meaning it had in that context: that her name was taken off the official roll due nonpayment
before the beginning of the semester.

Slang

The whole point of slang is for a subculture or group to have its own code, almost like secret words. Once slang
is understood by the larger culture, it is no longer slang and may be classified as "informal" or "colloquial"
language. "Bling" was slang; now it's in the dictionary. Sports have a great deal of slang used by the players
and fans that then gets used in everyday language. For example, "That was a slam dunk" is used to describe
something easy, not just in basketball.

Complicated Vocabulary

If a speaker used the word "recalcitrant," some audience members would know the meaning or figure it out
("Calci-"is like calcium, calcium is hard, etc.), but many would not. It would make much more sense for them
to use a word readily understandable-"stubborn." Especially in oral communication, we should use language
that is immediately accessible. However, do not take this to mean "dumb down for your audience." It means
being clear and not showing off. For a speaker to say "I am cognizant of the fact that..." instead of "I know" or
"I am aware of..." adds nothing to communication.

Profanity and Cursing

It is difficult to think of many examples, other than artistic or comedy venues, where profanity or cursing
would be effective or useful with most audiences, so this kind of language is generally discouraged.

                                              Credibility

Another aspect of effectiveness is that your language should enhance your credibility. First, audiences trust
speakers who use clear, vivid, respectful, engaging, and honest language. On the other hand, audiences tend
not to trust speakers who use language that excludes others or who exhibit uneducated language patterns.
All of us make an occasional grammatical or usage error. However, constant verb and pronoun errors and
just plain getting words confused will hurt the audience's belief that you are competent and knowledgeable.
In addition, a speaker who uses language and references that are not immediately accessible or that are

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 408
unfamiliar will have diminished credibility. Finally, you should avoid the phrase "I guess" in a speech. Credible
speakers should know what they are talking about.

                                       Rhetorical Techniques

There are several traditional techniques that have been used to engage audiences and make ideas more
attention-getting and memorable. These are called rhetorical techniques. Although "rhetorical" is associated
with persuasive speech, these techniques are also effective with other types of speeches. We will not mention
all of them here, but some important ones are listed below. Several of them are based on a form of repetition.
You can refer to an Internet source for a full list of the dozens of rhetorical devices.

   Assonance is the repetition of vowel sounds in a sentence or passage. As such, it is a kind of rhyme. Minister
Tony Campolo said, "When Jesus told his disciples to pray for the kingdom, this was no pie in the sky by and
by when you die kind of prayer."

   Alliteration is the repetition of initial consonant sounds in a sentence or passage. In his "I Have a Dream
Speech," Dr. Martin Luther King said, "I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation
where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the content of their character." Not only does this
sentence use alliteration, it also uses the next rhetorical technique on our list, antithesis.

   Antithesis is the juxtaposition of contrasting ideas in balanced or parallel words, phrases, or grammatical
structures. Usually antithesis goes: Not this, but this. John F. Kennedy's statement from his 1961 inaugural
address is one of the most quoted examples of antithesis: "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what
you can do for your country." In that speech he gave another example, "If a free society cannot help the many
who are poor, it cannot save the few who are rich."

   Parallelism is the repetition of sentence structures. It can be useful for stating your main ideas. Which one
of these sounds better?

   "Give me liberty or I'd rather die."
   "Give me liberty or give me death."

The second one uses parallelism. Quoting again from JFK's inaugural address: "Let every nation know, whether
it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend,
oppose any foe to assure the survival and the success of liberty." The repetition of the three-word phrases in
this sentence (including the word "any" in each) is an example of parallelism.

   Anaphora is a succession of sentences beginning with the same word or group of words. In his inaugural
address, JFK began several succeeding paragraphs with "To those": "To those old allies," "To those new states,"
"To those people," etc.

   Hyperbole is intentional exaggeration for effect. Sometimes it is for serious purposes, other times for
humor. Commonly we use hyperbolic language in our everyday speech to emphasize our emotions, such as
when we say "I'm having the worst day ever" or "I would kill for a cup of coffee right now." Neither of those
statements is (hopefully) true, but it stresses to others the way you are feeling. Ronald Reagan, who was often
disparaged for being the oldest president, would joke about his age. In one case he said, "The chamber is
celebrating an important milestone this week: your 70th anniversary. I remember the day you started."

   Irony is the expression of one's meaning by using language that normally signifies the opposite, typically
for humorous or emphatic effect. Although most people think they understand irony as sarcasm (such as
saying to a friend who trips, "That's graceful"), it is a much more complicated topic. A speaker may use it when

409 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
they profess to say one thing but clearly means something else or say something that is obviously untrue and
everyone would recognize that and understand the purpose. Irony in oral communication can be difficult to
use in a way that affects everyone in the audience the same way.

   Using these techniques alone will not make you an effective speaker. Dr. King and President Kennedy
combined them with strong metaphors and images as well; for example, Dr. King described the promises
of the founding fathers as a "blank check" returned with the note "insufficient funds" as far as the black
Americans of his time were concerned. That was a very concrete, human, and familiar metaphor to his
listeners and still speaks to us today.

                                          Appropriateness

Appropriateness relates to several categories involving how persons and groups should be referred to and
addressed based on inclusiveness and context. The term "politically correct" has been overused to describe the
growing sensitivity to how the power of language can marginalize or exclude individuals and groups. While
there are silly extremes such as the term "vertically challenged" for "short," these humorous examples overlook
the need to be inclusive about language. Overall, people and groups should be respected and referred to in
the way they choose to be. Using inclusive language in your speech will help ensure you aren't alienating or
diminishing any members of your audience.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 410
Gender-Inclusive Language

The first common form of non-inclusive language is language that privileges one of the sexes over the other.
There are three common problem areas that speakers run into while speaking: using "he" as generic, using
"man" to mean all humans, and gender-typing jobs. Consider the statement, "Every morning when an officer
of the law puts on his badge, he risks his life to serve and protect his fellow citizens." Obviously, both male and
female police officers risk their lives when they put on their badges.

   A better way to word the sentence would be, "Every morning when officers of the law put on their badges,
they risk their lives to serve and protect their fellow citizens." Notice that in the better sentence, we made the
subject plural ("officers") and used neutral pronouns ("they" and "their") to avoid the generic "he." Likewise,
speakers of English have traditionally used terms like "man," and "mankind" when referring to both females
and males. Instead of using the word "man," refer to the "human race."

   The last common area where speakers get into trouble with gender and language has to do with job titles. It
is not unusual for people to assume, for example, that doctors are male and nurses are female. As a result, they
may say "she is a woman doctor" or "he is a male nurse" when mentioning someone's occupation, perhaps not
realizing that the statements "she is a
doctor" and "he is a nurse" already inform the listener as to the sex of the
person holding that job.

Ethnic Identity

Ethnic identity refers to a group an individual identifies with based on a common culture. For example, within
the United States we have numerous ethnic groups, including Italian Americans, Irish Americans, Japanese
Americans, Vietnamese Americans, Cuban Americans, and Mexican Americans. As with the earlier example of

411 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
"male nurse," avoid statements such as "The committee is made up of four women and a Vietnamese man." All
that should be said is, "The committee is made up of five people."

   If for some reason gender and ethnicity have to be mentioned--and usually it does not--the gender and
ethnicity of each member should be mentioned equally. "The committee is made up of three European-
American women, one Latina, and one Vietnamese male." In recent years, there has been a trend toward
steering inclusive language away from broad terms like "Asians" and "Hispanics" because these terms are not
considered precise labels for the groups they actually represent. If you want to be safe, the best thing you can
do is ask a couple of people who belong to an ethnic group how they prefer to be referred to in that context.

Disability

The last category of exclusive versus inclusive language that causes problems for some speakers relates to
individuals with physical or intellectual disabilities or forms of mental illness. Sometimes it happens that we
take a characteristic of someone and make that the totality or all of what that person is. For example, some
people are still uncomfortable around persons who use wheelchairs and don't know how to react. They may
totalize and think that the wheelchair defines and therefore limits the user. The person in the wheelchair
might be a great guitarist, sculptor, parent, public speaker, or scientist, but those qualities are not seen, only
the wheelchair.

   Although the terms "visually impaired" and "hearing impaired" are sometimes used for "blind" and "deaf,"
this is another situation where the person should be referred to as he or she prefers. "Hearing impaired"
denotes a wide range of hearing deficit, as does "visually impaired. "Deaf" and "blind" are not generally
considered offensive by these groups.

   Another example is how to refer to what used to be called "autism." Saying someone is "autistic" is similar
to the word "retarded" in that neither is appropriate. Preferable terms are "a person with an autism diagnosis"
or "a person on the autism spectrum." In place of "retarded," "a person with intellectual disabilities" should be
used. Likewise, slang words for mental illness should always be avoided, such as "crazy" or "mental."

                                      Other Types of Appropriateness

Language in a speech should be appropriate to the speaker and the speaker's background and personality, to
the context, to the audience, and to the topic. Let's say that you're an engineering student. If you're giving a
presentation in an engineering class, you can use language that other engineering students will know. On the
other hand, if you use that engineering vocabulary in a public speaking class, many audience members will
not understand you. As another example, if you are speaking about the Great Depression to an audience of
young adults or recent immigrants, you can't assume they will know the meaning of terms like "New Deal" and
"WPA," which would be familiar to an audience of senior citizens. Audience analysis is a key factor in choosing
the language to use in a speech.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 412
 12.3 Using Effective Language in Public Speaking

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1696#audio-1696-1

   At this point, we will make some applications and suggestions about using language as you grow as a public
speaker.

   First, get in the habit of using "stipulated definitions" with concrete examples (defining operationally). In
other words, define your terms for the audience. If you are using jargon, a technical term, a word that has

413 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
multiple meanings in different contexts, or an often-misunderstood word, you can say at the beginning of the
body of your speech, "In this speech I am going to be using the word, "X," and what I mean by it is..." And then
the best way to define a word is with a picture or example of what you mean, and perhaps also an example
of what you don't mean (visual aids can help here). Don't worry; this is not insulting to most audiences if the
word is technical or unfamiliar to them. On the other hand, providing dictionary definitions of common words
such as "love" or "loyalty" would be insulting to an audience and pretty boring.

   Second, develop specific language. The general semantics movement suggested ways to develop more
specific language that reflects the imperfection of our perceptions and the fact that reality changes. You can
develop specific language by the following:

   Distinguishing between individuals and the group (that is, avoid stereotyping). Arab 1 is not Arab 2 is
      not Arab 3, etc., and none of them are all the Arabs in the world.

   Specifying time and place of behavior instead of making broad statements. What was a true of a person
      in 1999 is not necessarily true of the person now.

   Using names for jobs or roles ("accountants," "administrative assistants," "instructors") instead of
      "people" or "workers."

   Avoid "always/never" language. "Always" and "never" usually do not reflect reality and tend to make
      listeners defensive.

   Avoid confusing opinion for fact. If I say, "Forrest Gump is a stupid movie," I am stating an opinion in
      the language of fact. If you preface opinions with "I believe," or "It is my opinion" you will be truthful
      and gain the appearance of being fair-minded and non-dogmatic. What should be said is "The first time
      I saw Forrest Gump, I didn't realize it was a farce, but after I saw it a second time, I understood it
      better." This sentence is much more specific and clarifying than "Forrest Gump is a stupid movie." Using
      this kind of language also helps make the speaker seem less dogmatic and closed-minded.

Third, personalize your language. In a speech it's fine to use personal pronouns as opposed to third person.
That means "I," "me," "we," "us," "you," etc. are often helpful in a speech. It gives more immediacy to the speech.
Be careful of using "you" for examples that might be embarrassing. "Let's say you are arrested for possession
of a concealed weapon," sounds like the audience members are potential criminals.

   Finally, develop your vocabulary, but not to show it off. One of the benefits of a college education is
that your vocabulary will expand greatly, and it should. A larger vocabulary will give you access to more
complicated reading material and allow you to understand the world better. But knowing the meaning of a
more complicated word doesn't mean you have to use it with every audience.

                                             Conclusion

Although the placement of this chapter may seem to indicate that language choices, or what the ancient
rhetoricians called "style," are not as important as other parts of speaking, language choices are important
from the very beginning of your speech preparation, even to your research and choice of search terms.
Audience analysis will help you to develop language that is clear, vivid, appropriate, credible, and persuasive.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 414
                    12.4 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. Describe the difference between denotative and connotative meanings of "Wall Street," "proud," and "time of
                 death." Think of other words with different denotative and connotative meanings.

            2. Describe a time when you heard a euphemism to describe something negative, like "passed away" or "being let
                 go." How did the language impact the message?

            3. Think of a time when you used jargon in conversation and it was misunderstood. What were the results of the
                 misunderstanding? What language could you have used instead of jargon?

            4. Why should you avoid using profanity in public speaking? Are there times when profanity might be useful in
                 public speaking? How can we ensure the appropriateness of our language?

                                                   Activities

            1. Draw a ladder on a piece of paper with several rungs. Think of an abstract word you can start with on the bottom
                 rung. On each level, make it more concrete using each rung of the ladder to create your own "ladder of
                 abstraction" (Hayakawa, 1939) in Section 12.2. For example- Creature->Domesticated Animal->Feline-->House
                 cat--> Persian->Garfield->red, overweight, Persian name Garfield

            2. In a group, pronounce these commonly mispronounced terms: chipotle, colonel, worcestershire, corp, quinoa,
                 dachshund, synecdoche, anemone, pho, acai, niche, gif, tenet, coupe de grace, hyperbole, data. If you are unsure
                 of the correct pronunciation, look them up on your phone/laptop. Can you think of any others? Share with the
                 group. Discuss the consequences of a mispronunciation during a presentation.

            3. In small groups, brainstorm and come up with a hyperbole to describe one aspect of your life as a college student
                 (nutrition, exhaustion, learning, cost, living, friends, growth, etc.). Share with the class.

415 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Chapter 13: Presentation Aids

                                                    Learning Objectives

 List and explain reasons why presentation aids are important in public speaking;
 Explain how presentation aids function in public speaking;
 Describe the various computer-based and non-computer-based types of presentation aids available to the students;
 Explain the correct use of various types of presentation aids;
 Design professional-looking slides using presentation software.

                     Key Terms

 Bar Graph
 Chart
 Diagram
 Graph
 Gustatory
 Line Graph
 Olfactory
 Pictograph
 Pie Graph
 Presentation Aids
 Tone

                     THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 416
           13.1 What are Presentation Aids?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1700#audio-1700-1

417 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
       "Well-designed visuals do more than provide information; they bring order to the
                                    conversation." -Dale Ludwig

When you give a speech, you are presenting much more than just a collection of words and ideas. Because you
are speaking "live and in person," your audience members will experience your speech through all five of their
senses: hearing, vision, smell, taste, and touch. In some speaking situations, the speaker appeals only to the
sense of hearing. They more or less ignore the other senses except to avoid visual distractions by dressing and
presenting themselves in an appropriate manner. But the speaking event can be greatly enriched by appeals to
the other senses. This is the role of presentation aids.

   Presentation aids are the resources beyond the speech words and delivery that a speaker uses to enhance
the message conveyed to the audience. The type of presentation aids that speakers most typically make use
of are visual aids: pictures, diagrams, charts and graphs, maps, and the like. Audible aids include musical
excerpts, audio speech excerpts, and sound effects. A speaker may also use fragrance samples or food samples
as olfactory (sense of smell) or gustatory (sense of taste) aids. Finally, presentation aids can be three-
dimensional objects, animals, and people; they can also change over a period of time, as in the case of a how-to
demonstration.

   As you can see, the range of possible presentation aids is almost unlimited. However, all presentation aids
have one thing in common: To be effective, each presentation aid a speaker uses must be a direct, uncluttered
example of a specific element of the speech. It is understandable that someone presenting a speech about
Abraham Lincoln might want to include a photograph of him, but because everyone already knows what
Lincoln looked like, the picture would not contribute much to the message unless, perhaps, the message was
specifically about the changes in Lincoln's appearance during his time in office.

   Other visual artifacts are more likely to deliver information more directly relevant to the speech--a diagram
of the interior of Ford's Theater where Lincoln was assassinated, a facsimile of the messy and much-edited
Gettysburg Address, or a photograph of the Lincoln family, for example. The key is that each presentation aid
must directly express an idea in your speech.

   Moreover, presentation aids must be used at the time when you are presenting the specific ideas related
to the aid. For example, if you are speaking about coral reefs and one of your supporting points is about the
location of the world's major reefs, it would make sense to display a map of these reefs while you're talking
about location. If you display it while you are explaining what coral actually is, or describing the kinds of fish
that feed on a reef, the map will not serve as a useful visual aid--in fact, it's likely to be a distraction.

  To be effective, presentation aids must also be easy to use and easy for the listeners to

see and understand. In this chapter, we will present some principles and strategies to help you incorporate
effective presentation aids into your speech. We will begin by discussing the functions that good presentation
aids fulfill. Next, we will explore some of the many types of presentation aids and how best to design and
utilize them. We will also describe various media that can be used for presentation aids. We will conclude with
tips for successful preparation and use of presentation aids in a speech.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 418
419 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
With a clear understanding of the role visual aids play in enhancing a speech, Pistol Pete settled down at

                                                     THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 420
his computer to create a slide deck for his upcoming presentation on Oklahoma State University traditions.
As he fired up his presentation software, Pete had four criteria in mind to ensure his visuals would be
effective: improving understanding, enhancing memory and retention, maintaining audience interest, and
establishing speaker credibility.

   As he crafted his first slide, Pete decided to set the tone with a captivating image of a vibrant OSU tradition
- the Sea of Orange Parade. He chose this image to immediately draw his audience into the world of OSU
traditions. He believed that such a vivid depiction of a beloved tradition would not only grab attention but also
make a lasting impression, enhancing memory and retention.

   For the main body of his presentation, Pete decided to use a combination of brief text points and
corresponding images. He was mindful to keep the text concise and informative, making sure it aligned with
what he was saying verbally. He paired each point with relevant images or short video clips that illustrated the
tradition in action. This visual reinforcement of his words aimed to improve the audience's understanding of
the traditions.

   Pete knew the importance of credibility for a speaker. So, he was careful to orally cite the information
referenced on his slides. This not only established his credibility but also provided a reference point for anyone
interested in learning more about the traditions at OSU.

   To maintain audience interest throughout the speech, Pete decided to infuse elements of surprise into
his slide deck. He included a few `Did you know?' slides at unexpected points, each revealing a fun or little-
known fact about OSU traditions. He believed these elements of surprise would keep his audience engaged
and attentive throughout his presentation.

   As he clicked through his completed slide deck, Pistol Pete felt a surge of satisfaction. He believed he
had created a visual aid that not only complemented his speech but would also enhance his audience's
understanding, keep them engaged, aid in memory and retention, and demonstrate his credibility. Now all
that remained was to deliver his informative speech with the same enthusiasm and passion that had driven
his research and preparation. Why do you think it's important to keep text brief and to a minimum on slides?
Is it important to include images on each slide?

*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

421 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         13.2 Functions of Presentation Aids

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1708#audio-1708-1

   Why should you use presentation aids? If you have prepared and rehearsed your speech adequately,
shouldn't a good speech with a good delivery be enough to stand on its own? While it is true that impressive
presentation aids will not rescue a poor speech, a good speech can often be made even better by the strategic
use of presentation aids. Presentation aids can fulfill several functions: they can serve to improve your

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 422
audience's understanding of the information you are conveying, enhance audience memory and retention of
the message, add variety and interest to your speech, and enhance your credibility as a speaker. Let's examine
each of these functions.

                               Improving Audience Understanding

Human communication is a complex process that often leads to misunderstandings. If you are like most
people, you can easily remember incidents when you misunderstood a message or when someone else
misunderstood what you said to them. Misunderstandings happen in public speaking just as they do in
everyday conversations.

   One reason for misunderstandings is the fact that perception and interpretation are highly complex
individual processes. Most of us have seen the image in which, depending on your perception, you see either
the outline of a vase or the facial profiles of two people facing each other. Or perhaps you have seen the image
of the woman who may or may not be young, depending on your frame of reference at the time. This shows
how interpretations can differ, and it means that your presentations must be based on careful thought and
preparation to maximize the likelihood that your listeners will understand your presentations as you intend
them to do so.

   As a speaker, one of your basic goals is to help your audience understand your message. To reduce
misunderstanding, presentation aids can be used to clarify or to emphasize.

Clarifying

Clarification is important in a speech because if some of the information you convey is unclear, your listeners
will come away puzzled or possibly even misled. Presentation aids can help clarify a message if the information
is complex or if the point being made is a visual one.

   If your speech is about the impact of the Coriolis Effect on tropical storms, for instance, you will have great
difficulty clarifying it without a diagram because the process is a complex one. The diagram above would be
effective because it shows the audience the interaction between equatorial wind patterns and wind patterns

423 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
moving in other directions. The diagram allows the audience to process the information in two ways: through
your verbal explanation and through the visual elements of the diagram. By the way, the Coriolis Effect is
defined as "an effect whereby a mass moving in a rotating system experiences a force (the Coriolis force )
acting perpendicular to the direction of motion and to the axis of rotation. On the earth, the effect tends to
deflect moving objects to the right in the northern hemisphere and to the left in the southern and is important
in the formation of cyclonic weather systems." You can see why a picture really helps with this definition.

   Another aspect of clarifying occurs when a speaker wants to help audience members understand a visual
concept. For example, if a speaker is talking about the importance of petroglyphs in Native American culture,
just describing the petroglyphs won't completely help your audience to visualize what they look like. Instead,
showing an example of a petroglyph, such as the one below can more easily help your audience form a clear
mental image of your intended meaning.

Emphasizing

When you use a presentational aid for emphasis, you impress your listeners with the importance of an idea. In
a speech on water conservation, you might try to show the environmental proportions of the resource. When
you use a conceptual drawing like the one below, you show that if the world water supply were equal to ten
gallons, only ten drops would be available and drinkable for human or household consumption. This drawing
is effective because it emphasizes the scarcity of useful water and thus draws attention to this important
information in your speech.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 424
   So, clarifying and emphasizing are two roles that support the "Improving Audience Understanding"
purpose of presentation aids. What are other purposes?

                                    Aiding Retention and Recall

The second function that presentation aids can serve is to increase the audience's chances of remembering
your speech. An article by the U.S. Department of Labor (1996) summarized research on how people learn and
remember. The authors found that "83% of human learning occurs visually, and the remaining 17% through the
other senses--11% through hearing, 3.5% through smell, 1% through taste, and 1.5% through touch."

   For this reason, exposure to an image can serve as a memory aid to your listeners. When your graphic
images deliver information effectively and when your listeners understand them clearly, audience members
are likely to remember your message long after your speech is over. Moreover, people often are able to
remember information that is presented in sequential steps more easily than if that information is presented
in an unorganized pattern. When you use a presentation aid to display the organization of your speech (such
as can be done with PowerPoint slides), you will help your listeners to observe, follow, and remember the
sequence of information you conveyed to them. This is why some instructors display a lecture outline for their
students to follow during class and why a slide with a preview of your main points can be helpful as you move
into the body of your speech.

   An added plus of using presentation aids is that they can boost your memory while you are speaking. Using

425 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
your presentation aids while you rehearse your speech will familiarize you with the association between a
given place in your speech and the presentation aid that accompanies that material.

                                    Adding Variety and Interest

A third function of presentation aids is simply to make your speech more interesting. For example, wouldn't a
speech on varieties of roses have greater impact if you accompanied your remarks with a picture of each rose?
You can imagine that your audience would be even more enthralled if you had the ability to display an actual
flower of each variety in a bud vase. Similarly, if you were speaking to a group of gourmet cooks about Indian
spices, you might want to provide tiny samples of spices that they could smell and taste during your speech.

                                 Enhancing a Speaker's Credibility

Presentation aids alone will not be enough to create a professional image. As we mentioned earlier, impressive
presentation aids will not rescue a poor speech. Even if you give a good speech, you run the risk of appearing
unprofessional if your presentation aids are poorly executed. Conversely, a high quality presentation will
contribute to your professional image. This means that in addition to containing important information,
your presentation aids must be clear, clean, uncluttered, organized, and large enough for the audience to see
and interpret correctly. Misspellings and poorly designed presentation aids can damage your credibility as a
speaker.

   In addition, make sure that you give proper credit to the source of any presentation aids that you take from
other sources. Using a statistical chart or a map without proper credit will detract from your credibility, just
as using a quotation in your speech without credit would. This situation will usually take place with digital
aids such as PowerPoint slides. The source of a chart or the data shown in a chart form should be cited at the
bottom the slide.

   If you focus your efforts on producing presentation aids that contribute effectively to your meaning, that
look professional, and that are handled well, your audience will most likely appreciate your efforts and pay
close attention to your message. That attention will help them learn or understand your topic in a new way and
will thus help the audience see you as a knowledgeable, competent, and credible speaker. With the prevalence
of digital communication, the audience expectation of quality visual aids has increased.

                           Avoiding Problems with Presentation Aids

Using presentation aids can come with some risks. However, with a little forethought and adequate practice,
you can choose presentation aids that enhance your message and boost your professional appearance in front
of an audience. One principle to keep in mind is to use only as many presentation aids as necessary to present
your message or to fulfill your classroom assignment. The number and the technical sophistication of your
presentation aids should never overshadow your speech.

  Another important consideration is technology. Keep your presentation aids within the limits
of the working technology available to you. Whether or not your classroom
technology works on the day of your speech, you will still have to present. What will
you do if the computer file containing your slides is corrupted? What will you do if
the easel is broken? What if you had counted on stacking your visuals on a table that

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 426
disappears right when you need it? Or the Internet connection is down for a
YouTube video you plan to show?

   You must be prepared to adapt to an uncomfortable and scary situation. This is why we urge students to go
to the classroom well ahead of time to test the equipment and ascertain the condition of items they're
planning to use. As the speaker, you are responsible for arranging the things you need to make your
presentation aids work as intended. Carry a roll of masking tape so you can display your poster even if the
easel is gone. Test the computer setup. Have your slides on a flash drive AND send it to yourself as an
attachment or upload to a Cloud service. Have an alternative plan prepared in case there is some glitch that
prevents your computer-based presentation aids from being usable. And of course, you must know how to
use the technology.

   More important than the method of delivery is the audience's ability to see and understand the presentation
aid. It must deliver clear information, and it must not distract from the message. Avoid overly elaborate
presentation aids. Instead, simplify as much as possible, emphasizing the information you want your
audience to understand.

   Another thing to remember is that presentation aids do not "speak for themselves." When you display a
visual aid, you should explain what it shows, pointing out and naming the most important features. If you use
an audio aid such as a musical excerpt, you need to tell your audience what to listen for. Similarly, if you use
a video clip, it is up to you as the speaker to point out the characteristics in the video that support the point
you are making--but probably beforehand, so you are not speaking over the video. At the same time, a visual
aid should be quickly accessible to the audience. This is where simplicity comes in. Just as in organization of a
speech you would not want to use 20 main points, but more like 3-5, you should limit categories of information
on a visual aid.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

427 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            13.3 Types of Presentation Aids

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1723#audio-1723-1

   Now that we've explored some basic hints for preparing visual aids, let's look at the most common types of
visual aids: charts, graphs, representations, objects/models, and people.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 428
                                                Charts

A chart is commonly defined as a graphical representation of data (often numerical) or a sketch representing
an ordered process. Whether you create your charts or do research to find charts that already exist, it is
important for them to exactly match the specific purpose in your speech. The rest of this section will explore
three common types of charts: statistical charts, sequence-of-steps chart, and decision trees.

Statistical Charts

For most audiences, statistical presentations must be kept as simple as possible, and they must be explained.
Unless you are familiar with statistics, this type of chart may be very confusing. When visually displaying
information from a quantitative study, you need to make sure that you understand the material and can
successfully and simply explain how one should interpret the data. If you are unsure about the data yourself,
then you should probably not use this type of information. This is definitely an example of a visual aid that,
though it delivers a limited kind of information, does not speak for itself. On the other hand, if you are
presenting to an upper level or graduate class in health sciences or to professionals in health occupations, this
chart would be appropriate. As with all other principles of public speaking, KNOW YOUR AUDIENCE.

Sequence-of-Steps Charts

Charts are also useful when you are trying to explain a process that involves several steps. The visual aid below
depicts the process of group development using a sequence-of-steps chart. Notice that the chart includes
labels to indicate the different phases of group development that you will learn more about in Chapter 15.
Additionally, the chart contains a visual that depicts movement through the different stages and contains
more specific details about each stage of group development. Adding these more specific details helps your
audience understand the process.

429 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Decision Trees

Decision trees are useful for showing the relationships between ideas. The chart below shows how a decision
tree could be used to determine whether or not to drink coffee. As with the other types of charts, you want to
be sure that the information in the chart is relevant to the purpose of your speech and that each question and
decision is clearly labeled.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 430
                                               Graphs

Strictly speaking, a graph may be considered a type of chart, but graphs are so widely used that we will discuss
them separately. A graph is a pictorial representation of the relationships of quantitative data using dots,
lines, bars, pie slices, and the like. Graphs show how one factor (such as size, weight, number of items) varies
in comparison to other items. Whereas a statistical chart may report the mean ages of individuals entering
college, a graph would show how the mean age changes over time. A statistical chart may report the amount of
computers sold in the United States, while a graph will use bars or lines to show their breakdown by operating
systems such as Windows, Macintosh, and Linux.

   Public speakers can show graphs using a range of different formats. Some of those formats are specialized
for various professional fields. Very complex graphs often contain too much information that is not related to
the purpose of a student's speech. If the graph is cluttered, it becomes difficult to comprehend. In this section,
we're going to analyze the common graphs speakers utilize in their speeches: line graphs, bar graphs, pie
graphs, and pictographs.

Line Graph

A line graph is designed to show trends over time. In the image below, we see a line graph depicting the four-
year graduation percentage rate of new freshmen at Oklahoma State. Notice that the four-year graduation rate
has seen a steady increase since Fall of 2012. This is far more effective in showing the relationship of numbers
than simply reading the numbers aloud.

431 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Bar Graph

Bar graphs are useful for showing the differences between quantities. They can be used for population
demographics, fuel costs, math ability in different grades, and many other kinds of data. The graph below
is well designed. It is relatively simple and is carefully labeled, making it easy for the speaker to guide the
audience through the recorded numbers of students enrolled in each college at Oklahoma State in the Spring
of 2023. The bar graph is designed to show how many students makes up each college. When you look at the
data, the first grouping clearly shows that a large number of students at OSU major in a field in the College of
Arts and Sciences.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 432
Pie Graph

Pie graphs are usually depicted as circles and are designed to show proportional relationships within sets
of data; in other words, they show parts of or percentages of a whole. They should be simplified as much as
possible without eliminating important information. As with other graphs, the sections of the pie need to be
plotted proportionally. In the pie graph shown below, we see a clear and proportional chart that has been color-
coded. Color-coding is useful when it's difficult to fit the explanations in the actual sections of the graph; in
that case, you may need to include a legend, or key, to indicate what the colors in the graph mean. In this
graph, audience members can see very quickly that Oklahoma State's 2022 student body was mostly made up
of white students.

433 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Pictograph

Similar to bar graphs, pictographs use numbers and/or sizes of iconic symbols to dramatize differences in
amounts. Check out the example below that displays OSU's undergraduate student classification in the Fall
of 2022. Pictographs, although interesting, do not allow for depiction of specific statistical data. If you were
trying to show the output of oil from various countries through oil wells, each oil well representing a ten
million barrels a day, it might be hard for the audience to see the difference between a third of an oil well and
a fourth of one, but that is a significant difference in amounts (3.3 million versus 2.5 million).

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 434
   Graphs can present challenges in being effective but also in being ethical. To be both ethical and effective,
you need a good understanding of what statistics mean, and you need to create or use graphs that show
amounts clearly. For example, if you were showing GPAs of freshmen, sophomore, junior, and senior students
at your college, and the bottom number on the graph was 2.25 rather than 0.0, that would result in a visually
bigger difference than what really exists .

                                              Diagrams

Diagrams are drawings or sketches that outline and explain the parts of an object, process, or phenomenon
that cannot be readily seen. Like graphs, diagrams can be considered a type of chart, as in the case of
organizational charts and process-flow charts. When you use a diagram, be sure to explain each part of
the phenomenon, paying special attention to elements that are complicated or prone to misunderstanding.
You will likely recognize the example below from Chapter One; this diagram describes the linear model of
communication. This diagram provides a visual representation of the process of communication as well as the
key components in that process.

435 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                                Maps

Maps are extremely useful if the information is clear and limited. There are all kinds of maps, including
population, weather, ocean current, political, and economic maps, so you should find the right kind for the
purpose of your speech. Choose a map that emphasizes the information you need to deliver. The map shown
below ("African Map with Nigerian Emphasis") is simple, showing clearly the geographic location of Nigeria.
This can be extremely valuable for some audiences who might not be able to name and locate countries on the
continent of Africa. The map also shows the relative size of Nigeria compared to its neighbors.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 436
   Below is another example of a map that has been scaled for emphasis. You might recognize this image from
OSU's online interactive campus map. You might be especially familiar with the emphasized portion of the
map, Boone Pickens Stadium. When using maps for presentation aids, make sure to clarify the aspects of the
map that you want the audience to understand.

437 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                    Photographs and Drawings

Sometimes a photograph or a drawing is the best way to show an unfamiliar but important detail. The
photograph below pictures the fountain in front of Edmon Low Library after it has been dyed orange for
OSU's annual Homecoming celebration. This photograph might be a good presentation aid for a speech about
Oklahoma State's Homecoming traditions. Audiences expect high quality in photographs now, and as with
all presentation aids they should enhance the speech and not just "be there." It is common to put stock
photographs on PowerPoint slides as "clip art," but they should be relevant and not detract from the message
of the slide.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 438
                                    Video or Audio Recordings

Another very useful type of presentation aid is a video or audio recording. Whether it is a short video from a
website such as YouTube or Vimeo, a segment from a song, or a piece of a podcast, a well-chosen video or audio
recording may be a good choice to enhance your speech. Imagine, for example, that you're giving a speech on
how Lap-Band surgeries help people lose weight. One of the sections of your speech could explain how the Lap-
Band works, so you could easily show a forty-three second video available on YouTube to demonstrate the part
of the surgery. Maybe you could include a recording of a real patient explaining why they decided to get the
Lap-Band.

   There is one major warning to using audio and video clips during a speech: do not forget that they are
supposed to be aids to your speech, not the speech itself. In addition, be sure to avoid these five mistakes that
speakers often make when using audio and video clips:

   Avoid choosing clips that are too long for the overall length of the speech. Your instructor can give you
      some guidelines for how long video and audio clips should be for the speeches in your class, if they are
      allowed (and make sure they are).

   Practice with the audio or video equipment prior to speaking. If you are unfamiliar with the equipment,
      you'll look foolish trying to figure out how it works. This fiddling around will not only take your audience
      out of your speech but also have a negative impact on your credibility. It also wastes valuable time.
      Finally, be sure that the speakers on the computer are on and at the right volume level.

   Cue the clip to the appropriate place prior to beginning your speech. We cannot tell you the number of

439 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
      times we've seen students spend valuable speech time trying to find a clip on YouTube or a DVD. You
      need to make sure your clip is ready to go before you start speaking. Later in this chapter we will look at
      using video links in slides.
   In addition to cuing the clip to the appropriate place, the browser window should be open and ready to
      go. If there are advertisements before the video, be sure to have the video cued to play after the ad. The
      audience should not have to sit through a commercial. There is a website called TubeChop that can allow
      you to cut a segment out of a YouTube video, then creating a new link. It has limitations but can be
      useful.
   The audience must be given context before a video or audio clip is played, specifically what the clip is
      and why it relates to the speech. At the same time, the video should not repeat what you have already
      said, but add to it.

                                         Objects or Models

Objects and models are another form of presentation aid that can be very helpful in getting your audience to
understand your message. Objects refer to anything you could hold up and talk about during your speech. If
you're talking about the importance of not using plastic water bottles, you might hold up a plastic water bottle
and a stainless steel water bottle as examples. Models, on the other hand, are re-creations of physical objects
that you cannot have readily available with you during a speech. If you're giving a speech on heart murmurs,
you may be able to show how heart murmurs work by holding up a model of the human heart. As will be
discussed in the section on handouts below, a speaker should not pass an object or model around during a
speech. It is highly distracting.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 440
441 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                        People and Animals

The next category of presentation aids are people and animals. We can often use ourselves or other people to
adequately demonstrate an idea during our speeches.

Animals as Presentation Aids

When giving a speech on a topic relating to animals, it is often tempting to bring an animal to serve as your
presentation aid. While this can sometimes add a very engaging dimension to the speech, it carries some
serious risks that you need to consider.

   The first risk is that animal behavior tends to be unpredictable. You may think this won't be a problem if
your presentation aid animal is small enough to be kept confined throughout your speech--for example, a
goldfish in a bowl or a lizard or bird in a cage. However, even caged animals can be very distracting to your
audience if they run about, chirp, or exhibit other agitated behavior. The chances are great that an animal
will react to the stress of an unfamiliar situation by displaying behavior that does not contribute positively to
your speech or to the cleanliness of the physical environment. Additionally, the animal's behavior may not only
affect audience attention during your speech, but potentially during your classmates' speeches as well.

   The second risk is that some audience members may respond negatively to a live animal. In addition to
common fears and aversions to animals like snakes, spiders, and mice, many people have allergies to various
animals. One of the authors had an experience where a student brought his six-foot yellow python to class for
a speech. As a result, one of the other students refused to stay in the room because of her snake phobia (the
instructor was not too comfortable either).

   The third risk is that some locations may have regulations about bringing non-service animals onto the

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 442
premises. If animals are allowed, the person bringing the animal may be required to bring a veterinary
certificate or may be legally responsible for any damage caused by the animal.

   For these reasons, before you decide to use an animal as a presentation aid, ask yourself if you could make
your point equally well with a picture, model, diagram, or other representation of the animal in question.

Speaker as Presentation Aid

Speakers can often use their own bodies to demonstrate facets of a speech. If your speech is about ballroom
dancing or ballet, you might use your body to demonstrate the basic moves in the cha-cha or the five basic
ballet positions.

Other People as Presentation Aids

In some cases, such as for a demonstration speech, you might want to ask someone else to serve as your
presentation aid. You should arrange ahead of time for a person (or persons) to be an effective aid--do not
assume that an audience member will volunteer on the spot. If you plan to demonstrate how to immobilize a
broken bone, your volunteer must know ahead of time that you will touch them as much as necessary to splint
the break.

   You must also make certain that they will arrive dressed presentably and that they will not draw attention
away from your message through their appearance or behavior. The transaction between you and your human
presentation aid must be appropriate, especially if you are going to demonstrate something like a dance step.
In short, make sure your helper will know what is expected of them and consents to it.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

443 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            13.4 Using Presentation Slides

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1733#audio-1733-1

   Ever since the 1990s and the mainstreaming of personal computer technology, speakers have had the option
of using slide presentation software to accompany their speeches and presentations. The most commonly
known one is PowerPoint, although there are several others:

   Prezi, available at www.prezi.com
   Slide Rocket, available at www.sliderocket.com
   Google Slides, available in Google Drive and useful for collaborative

      assignments
   Keynote, the Apple presentation slide software on MACs

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 444
   Impress, an Open Office product (http://www.openoffice.org/product/impress.html)

   PrezentIt

   AdobeAcrobat Presenter

   ThinkFree

These products, some of which are offered free for trial or basic subscriptions (called a "freemium), allow you
to present professional-looking slides. Each one is "robust," a word used to mean it has a large number of
functions and features, some of which are helpful and some of which are distracting. For example, you can
use the full range of fonts, although many of them are not appropriate for presentations because they are hard
to read. In this section we will discuss the proper use of presentation slides, with the assumption that you
understand the basics of cutting, pasting, inserting, etc. involved in these products. You may have taken a class
in high school where you learned to use the technology, but that is not the same as learning to use them for
actual presentations.

               The Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Presentation Slides

In some industries and businesses, there is an assumption that speakers will use presentation slides. They
allow visualization of concepts, they are easily portable, they can be embedded with videos and audio, words
can dance around the screen--why wouldn't a speaker use them? You will probably also be expected to have
slide presentations in future assignments in college. Knowing how to use them, beyond the basic technology,
is vital to being a proficient presenter.

   But why not use them? Franck Frommer, a French journalist and communication expert, published the book
How PowerPoint Makes You Stupid (2012), whose title says it all. He criticizes the "linearity" of PowerPoint and
similar presentation software, meaning that audiences are not encouraged to see the relationship of ideas and
that PowerPoint hurts critical thinking in the audience. Slide follows slide of bulleted information without one
slide being more important or the logical connections being clear.

   As recently as the mid-2000s, critics such as well-known graphic expert and NASA consultant Edward Tufte
(2005) charged that PowerPoint's tendency to force the user to put a certain number of bullet points on each
slide in a certain format was a serious threat to the accurate presentation of data. As Tufte put it, "the rigid
slide-by-slide hierarchies, indifferent to content, slice and dice the evidence into arbitrary compartments,
producing an anti-narrative with choppy continuity."

   Tufte argues that poor decision making, such as was involved with the 2003 space shuttle Columbia disaster,
may have been related to the shortcomings of such presentation aids in NASA meetings. While more recent
versions of PowerPoint and similar programs allow much more creative freedom in designing slides, this
freedom comes with a responsibility--the user needs to take responsibility for using the technology to support
the speech and not get carried away with the many special effects the software is capable of producing.

   It should be mentioned here that Prezi helps address one of the major criticisms of PowerPoint. Because
Prezi, in its design stage, looks something like a mind map on a very large canvas with grid lines, it allows you
to show the relationship and hierarchy of ideas better. For example, you can see and design the slides so that
the "Big Ideas" are in big circles and the subordinate ideas are in smaller ones.

   In addition to recognizing the truth behind Frommer's and Tufte's critiques, we have all sat through a
presenter who committed the errors of putting far too much text on the slide. When a speaker does this,
the audience is confused--do they read the text or listen to the speaker? An audience member cannot do
both. Then, the speaker feels the need to read the slides rather than use PowerPoint for what it does best,

445 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
visual reinforcement and clarification. We have also seen many poorly designed PowerPoint slides, either
through haste or lack of knowledge: slides where the graphics are distorted (elongated or squatty), words
and graphics not balanced, text too small, words printed over photographs, garish or nauseating colors, or
animated figures left up on the screen for too long and distracting the audience. What about you? Can you
think about PowerPoint "don'ts" that have hurt your reception of a presentation or lecture? This would be a
good discussion for class, and a good way to know what not to do with your own slides.

                                   Creating Quality Slide Shows

Slides should show the principles of good design, which include unity, emphasis or focal point, scale and
proportion, balance, and rhythm (Lauer & Pentak, 2000). Presenters should also pay attention to tone and
usability. With those principles in mind, here are some tips for creating and then using presentation software.

Unity and Consistency

Generally it is best to use a single font for the text on your visuals so that they look like a unified set. Or you can
use two different fonts in consistent ways, such as having all headings and titles in the same font and all bullet
points in the same font. Additionally, the background should probably remain consistent, whether you choose
one of the many design templates or if you just opt for a background color.

   In terms of unity, the adage, "Keep It Simple, Speaker" definitely applies to presentation slides. Each
slide should have one message, one photo, one graphic. The audience members should know what they are
supposed to look at on the slide. A phrase to remember about presentation slides and the wide range of design
elements available is "Just because you can,
doesn't mean you should."

   Another area related to unity and consistency, as well as audience response, is the use of animation or
movement. There are three types of animation in slideshows. First, you can embed little characters or icons
that have movement. These may seem like fun, but they have limited use and should not stay on the screen
very long--you can use the second type of animation to take them off the screen.

   That second type is the designed movement of text or objects on and off the screen. Although using this
function takes up time in preparing your slides, especially if you want to do it well and be creative with it, it is
very useful. You can control what your audience is seeing. It also avoids bringing up all the text and material
on a slide at one time, which tempts the audience again to pay more attention to the screen than to you.
Movement on the screen attracts attention, for better or worse. PowerPoint, for example, allows bouncing
words, pulsating text, swirling phrases, even Star Wars scroll, which may or may not serve your purpose.

   The third type of animation is called slide transitions, which is the design of how the next slide appears. In
PowerPoint you can have the slides appear automatically or as blinds, as little checkerboards, from different
sides of the screen, in opening circles, etc. (You can also use sound effects, but that is strongly discouraged.)
In Prezi, the slides transition by zooming in and out, which is a clever effect but does make some audience
members experience motion sickness. In general, you want to use a consistent and efficient pattern of
movement with the second and third types of animation.

Emphasis, Focal Point, and Visibility

Several points should be made about how to make sure the audience sees what they need to see on the slides.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 446
    1. It is essential to make sure the information is large enough for the audience to see; and since the
         display size may vary according to the projector you are using, this is another reason for practicing in
         advance with the equipment you intend to use.

    2. The standard rule is for text is 7 X 7, or sometimes (if the screen is smaller) 6 X 6. Does this mean 49 or
         36 words on the slide? No. It means, in the case of 7 X 7, that you should have no more than seven
         horizontal lines of text (this does not mean bullet points, but lines of text, including the heading) and
         the longest line should not exceed seven words.

    3. Following the 7 X 7 rule will keep you from putting too much information on a slide, and you should
         also avoid too many slides. Less sometimes really is more. Again, there is no hard and fast rule, but a
         ten-minute speech probably needs fewer than ten slides, unless you can make a good argument for
         more based on the content of the speech. If, however, the slides are just text, more than ten is too
         many.

    4. Do not assume that all the templates feature visible text. Text should not be smaller than 22 point font
         for best visibility, and some of the templates use much smaller fonts than 22 point. This is especially
         important in those situations where the speaker creates handouts. Text smaller than 22 is very
         difficult to see on handouts of your slides. (However, handouts are not recommended for most
         situations.)

    5. High contrast between the text and slides is extremely important. White fonts against very dark
         backgrounds and black fonts against very light backgrounds are probably your safest bet here.
         Remember that the way it looks on your computer screen is not the exactly how it will look when
         projected--the light is coming from a different place. Avoid words on photos.

    6. Also in terms of visibility, most experts say that sans serif fonts such as Arial, Tahoma, and Verdana
         are better for reading from screens than serif fonts such as Times New Roman, Bookface, Georgia, or
         Garamond. Merriam-Webster (2018) defines "serif" as "any of the short lines stemming from and at
         an angle to the upper and lower ends of the strokes of a letter." Serifs are additions to the letters on
         different fonts that give them a different appearance and help the flow of eye when reading.

447 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   How does the slide pictured above stack up beside these rules for visibility? You probably noticed that slide
is a "fail" in terms of high contrast between the font and background and the use of a block of text not broken
up for easy reading. The audience would feel like they are supposed to read it but not be able to.

Tone

Fonts, color, clip art, photographs, and templates all contribute to tone, which is the attitude being conveyed
in the slides. If you want a light tone, such as for a speech about cruises, some colors (springtime, pastel, cool,
warm, or primary colors) and fonts (such as Comic Sans) and lots of photographs will be more appropriate.
For a speech about the Holocaust, more somber colors and design elements would be more fitting, whereas
clip art would not be.

Scale and Proportion

Although there are several ways to think about scale and proportion, we will discuss three here. First, bullet
points. Bullet points infer that the items in the bulleted list are equal and the sequence doesn't matter. If you
want to communicate order or sequence or priority, use numbers. Do not mix outline points or numerical
points with bullet points. Also, you should not put your outline (Roman numerals, etc.) on the slide.

   Bullet points should be short--not long, full sentences--but at the same time should be long enough to
mean something. In a speech on spaying and neutering pets, the bullet point "pain" may be better replaced
with "Pet feels little pain." Second, when you are designing your slides, it is best to choose a template and stick
with it. If you input all your graphics and material and then change the template, the format of the slide will

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 448
change, in some cases dramatically, and you will have distorted graphics and words covered up. You will then
have to redesign each slide, which can be unnecessarily time-consuming.

   The third aspect of scale and proportion is the relationship between the graphics and text in terms of size.
This aspect is discussed below in the next section on "Balance." Also, a graphic should be surrounded by some
empty space and not just take up the whole slide.

Balance

In general you want symmetrical slides. Below are four examples of slides that are unbalanced; the last one
achieves a better symmetry and design.

This slide leaves too much "white space" below the text, leaving an imbalance between the text and graphic; the
graphic goes up into the title, and the title could be centered.

449 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   This slide does not break the text up into bullets and is therefore hard to read; the graphic is strangely small,
and the heading is in a different font. Script fonts are often hard to read on screens.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 450
   In this slide, similar problems from the one above are repeated, but the text is also too small and the graphic
is distorted because it was not sized from the corner.

451 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   This slide is far too "busy." The additional clip art is not helpful, the font is too small, and the ideas are
disconnected. Having text in all caps and presented vertically is also difficult to read.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 452
   This version provides more visual balance and with better scale and proportion.

                                       Rhythm in Presenting

The rhythm of your slide display should be reasonably consistent--you would not want to display a dozen
different slides in the first minute of a five-minute presentation and then display only one slide per minute
for the rest of the speech. Timing them so that the audience can actually take them in is important. Presenters
often overdo the number of slides, thinking they will get a better grade, but too many slides just causes overkill.

   If you can obtain a remote mouse to change slides, that can help you feel independent of the mouse attached
to the computer. However, you have to practice with the remote "clicker." But if you have to use the mouse to
change slide, keep your hands off of it between clicks. We have seen students wiggle the little arrow all over
the screen. It is extremely annoying.

   Whether using a remote "clicker" or the attached mouse, you must attend to the connection between what is
on the screen and what you are actually talking about at the moment. Put reminders in your notes about when
you need to change slides during your speech.

   For better or worse, we have become very screen-oriented in our communication, largely because screens
change often and that changing teaches us to expect new stimuli, which we crave. If the screen is up but you
are not talking about what is on the screen, it is very confusing to the audience.

   If you are using PowerPoint and if you are not talking about something on a slide, hit the "B" key or the blank
screen button on the remote mouse. This action will turn the screen to black. You can also hit the "W" key,
which turns the screen to white, but that will make the audience think something is coming. Unfortunately,
the downside of the "B" key action is that it will return you to the previous screen. To avoid this, some

453 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
presenters put a black slide between slides in the presentation so that hitting the forward key gives the same
effect, but hitting it again takes them to a new screen. (Other programs have similar functions; for example, if
using Prezi, the "B" key also shows a black screen.)

   In fact, a basic presentation rule is to only show your visual aid when you are talking about it, and remove it
when you no longer are talking about it. Some other practical considerations are as follows:

    1. Be sure the file is saved in a format that will be "readable" on the computer where you are presenting.
         A common example is that a Keynote presentation (Apple) does not open on all PCs. You can save
         Keynote as a .ppt file for use on a PC. Likewise, if you chose to use Prezi or other web-based
         presentation software, you will need a strong, reliable Internet connection to show the slides.

    2. Any borrowed graphic must be cited on the slide where it is used; the same would be true of borrowed
         textual material. Putting your sources only on the last slide is insufficient.

    3. A very strong temptation for speakers is to look at the projected image rather than the audience
         during the speech. This practice cuts down on eye contact, of course, and is distracting for the
         audience. Two solutions for that are to print your notes from the presentation slides and/or use the
         slides as your note structure. Also remember that if the image is on the computer monitor in front of
         you, it is on the screen behind you.

    4. Always remember--and this cannot be emphasized enough--technology works for you, not you for
         the technology. The presentation aids are aids, not the speech itself.

    5. As mentioned before, sometimes life happens--technology does not work. It could be that the
         projector bulb goes out or the Internet connection is down. The show must go on.

    6. If you are using a video or audio clip from an Internet source, it is probably best to hyperlink the URL
         on one of the slides rather than minimize the program and change to the Internet site. You can do this
         by highlighting a key word on the slide, right clicking to find "hyperlink," and then pasting the URL
         there. Although you can also embed video in a PowerPoint, it makes the file extremely large and that
         may cause problems of its own.

    7. Finally, it is common for speakers to think "the slide changes, so the audience know there is a change,
         so I don't need a verbal transition." Please do not fall into this trap. Verbal transitions are just as, and
         maybe more, necessary for a speech using slides.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 454
           13.5 Low-Tech Presentation Aids

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1735#audio-1735-1

   One reason for using digital media is that they can't be prone to physical damage in the form of smudges,
scratches, dents, and rips. Unlike posters and objects, presentation software can be kept professional looking
if you have to carry them through a rainstorm or blizzard. However, there are times when it makes sense to
use "low-tech" media for presentations. Here are some directions for those times.

455 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                          Dry-Erase Board

If you use a chalkboard or dry-erase board, you are not using a prepared presentation aid. Your failure to
prepare visuals ahead of time can be interpreted in several ways, mostly negative. If other speakers carefully
design, produce, and use attractive visual aids, yours will stand out by contrast. You will be seen as the speaker
who does not take the time to prepare even a simple aid. Do not use a chalkboard or dry-erase board and
pretend it's a prepared presentation aid.

   However, numerous speakers do utilize chalk and dry-erase boards effectively. Typically, these speakers use
the chalk or dry-erase board for interactive components of a speech. For example, maybe you're giving a speech
in front of a group of executives. You may have a PowerPoint all prepared, but at various points in your speech
you want to get your audience's responses. (More recent technologies, such as on iPads, allow you to do the
interaction on the screen, but this would have to be supported by the environment.) Chalk or dry-erase boards
are very useful when you want to visually show information that you are receiving from your audience. If you
ever use a chalk or dry-erase board, follow these four simple rules:

    1. Write large enough so that everyone in the room can see (which is harder than it sounds; it is also
         hard to write and talk at the same time!).

    2. Print legibly; don't write in cursive script.
    3. Write short phrases; don't take time to write complete sentences.
    4. Be sure you have markers that will not go dry, and clean the board afterward.

                                              Flipchart

A flipchart is useful for situations when you want to save what you have written for future reference or
to distribute to the audience after the presentation. As with whiteboards, you will need good markers and
readable handwriting, as well as a strong easel to keep the flipchart upright.

                                               Posters

You may have the opportunity in your college years to attend or participate in a "poster session." These are
times during an academic conference where visitors can view a well-designed poster depicting a research
project and discuss it one-on-one with the researcher. These kinds of posters are quite large and involve a great
deal of work. They can be generated from PowerPoint but often require a special printer. Otherwise, posters
are probably not the best way to approach presentation aids in a speech. There are problems with visibility as
well as portability. Avoid producing a presentation aid that looks like you simply cut pictures out of magazines
and pasted them on. Slapping some text and images on a board looks unprofessional and will not be viewed as
credible or effective.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 456
                                              Handouts

Handouts are appropriate for delivering information that audience members can take away with them. As we
will see, handouts require a great deal of management if they are to contribute to your credibility as a speaker.

   First, make sure the handout is worth the trouble of making, copying, and distributing it. Does the audience
really need the handout? Second, make sure to bring enough copies of the handout for each audience member
to get one. Having to share or look on with one's neighbor does not contribute to a professional image. Under
no circumstances should you ever provide a single copy of a handout to pass around. It is distracting and
everyone will see it at different times in the speech, which is also true about passing any object around the
room.

   There are three possible times to distribute handouts: before you begin your speech, during the speech,
and after your speech is over. Naturally, if you need your listeners to follow along in a handout, you will need
to distribute it before your speech begins. If you have access to the room ahead of time, place a copy of the
handout at or on each seat in the audience. If not, ask a volunteer to distribute them as quickly as possible
while you prepare to begin speaking. If the handout is a "takeaway," leave it on a table near the door so that
those audience members who are interested can take one on their way out; in this case, don't forget to tell
them to do so as you conclude your speech. It is almost never appropriate to distribute handouts during your
speech, as it is distracting, takes up time, and interrupts the pace of your presentation.

457 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                            Conclusion

To finish this chapter, we will recap and remind you about the principles of effective presentation aids.
Whether your aid is a slide show, object, a person, or dry erase board, these standards are essential:

   Presentation aids must be easily seen or heard by your audience. Squinting and head-cocking are not
      good reactions. Neither should they look at the screen the whole time and ignore the speaker.

   Presentation aids must be portable, easily handled, and efficient.
   Presentation aids should disappear when not in use.
   Presentation aids should be aesthetically pleasing, which includes in good taste. Avoid shock value just

      for shock value. You might want to show pictures of diseased organs and teeth, deformities, or corpses
      for your speech to make a point, but context is everything. Will your audience react so strongly that the
      overall point is missed? Additionally, electronic media today allows you to create very "busy" slides with
      varieties of fonts, colors, collages of photos, etc. Keep in mind the principles of unity and focal point.
   Color is another aesthetic aspect. Some colors are just more soothing, readable, and appropriate than
      others. Also, the color on your slides may be different when projected from what is on your computer.
      Finally, presentation aids must support your speech and have high relevance to your content.
This chapter has covered a wide range of information about all kinds of audio and visual aids, but audiences
today expect and appreciate professionally designed and handled presentation aids. The stakes are higher
now, but the tools are many.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 458
                    13.6 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. What is the best or worst presentation aid you have seen used by a speaker? What made it effective or ineffective?
            2. What are some reasons for using a presentation aid in your speech?
            3. You have been asked to give an informative speech on your student organization's accomplishments this year.

                 Which type of presentation aid would be best? Would you include any graphs or charts?
            4. When using presentation slides, what are some of the main pitfalls for speakers?
            5. Should every speech have a presentation aid? Why or why not?

                                                   Activities

            1. Form five or six small groups. Each group will choose an informative speech topic and find an appropriate
                 presentation aid for that topic. Finally, each group will present their topic and presentation aid to the class by
                 citing it orally and describing how the presentation aid will be used in the speech. Discuss the following
                 questions:
                     Why did each group make the choices they did?
                     Which presentation aids worked best? Why?
                     Together, list the most important considerations for choosing and implementing effective presentation aids.

            2. Form five or six groups. Each group will be given two types of presentation aids listed in Section 13:3: Types of
                 Presentation Aids. Students will then list the pros and cons of using those types of presentations aids and provide
                 examples of speeches in which those aids would be most effective. Finally, groups will present what they have
                 learned to the class.

            3. Form five or six groups. Each group will be given sample presentation aids to critique using advice from Section
                 13:4 Using Presentation Aids and Section 13.5: Low-Tech Presentation Aids. Give each visual aid a rating on a scale
                 from one to ten. Finally, groups share their analysis aloud.

459 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Chapter 14: Informative Speaking

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Recognize opinion versus factual information.
 Recognize the different types of informative speeches.
 Distinguish the best organizational approach for types of informative speeches.
 Employ proven guidelines for preparing an informative speech.
 Construct an informative speech.

                      Key Terms

 Informative Speech
 Irrefutable
 Opinion

                      THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 460
         14.1 What is an Informative Speech?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1739#audio-1739-1

461 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
  "The improvement of understanding is for two ends: first our own increase for knowledge;
             secondly, to enable us to deliver that knowledge to others." -John Locke

Defining what an informative speech is can be both straight-forward and somewhat tricky at the same time.
Very simply, an informative speech can first be defined as a speech based entirely and exclusively on facts.
Basically, an informative speech conveys knowledge, a task that every person engages in every day in some
form or another. Whether giving someone who is lost driving directions, explaining the specials of the day as
a server, or describing the plot of a movie to friends, people engage in forms of informative speaking daily.
Secondly, an informative speech does not attempt to convince the audience that one thing is better than
another. It does not advocate a course of action.

   Consider the following two statements:

   2 + 2 = 4
      George Washington was the first President of the United States.

In each case, the statement made is what can be described as irrefutable, meaning a statement or claim that
cannot be argued. In the first example, even small children are taught that having two apples and then getting
two more apples will result in having four apples. This statement is irrefutable in that no one in the world will
(or should!) argue this: It is a fact.

   Similarly, with the statement "George Washington was the first President of the United States," this again
is an irrefutable fact. If you asked one hundred history professors and read one hundred history textbooks, the
professors and textbooks would all say the same thing: Washington was the first president. No expert, reliable
source, or person with any common sense would argue about this.

   (Someone at this point might say, "No, John Hanson was the first president." However, he was president
under the Articles of Confederation for a short period--November 5, 1781, to November 3, 1782--not under our
present Constitution. This example shows the importance of stating your facts clearly and precisely and being
able to cite their origins.)

   Therefore, an informative speech should not incorporate opinion as its basis. This can be the tricky part of
developing an informative speech, because some opinion statements sometimes sound like facts (since they
are generally agreed upon by many people), but are really opinion.

   For example, in an informative speech on George Washington, you might say, "George Washington was one
of the greatest presidents in the history of the United States." While this statement may be agreed upon by
most people, it is possible for some people to disagree and argue the opposite point of view. The statement
"George Washington was one of the greatest presidents in the history of the United States" is not irrefutable,
meaning someone could argue this claim. If, however, you present the opinion as an opinion from a source,
that is acceptable: it is a fact that someone (hopefully someone with expertise) holds the opinion. You do
not want your central idea, your main points, and the majority of your supporting material to be opinion or
argument in an informative speech.

   Additionally, you should never take sides on an issue in an informative speech, nor should you "spin"
the issue in order to influence the opinions of the listeners. Even if you are informing the audience about
differences in views on controversial topics, you should simply and clearly explain the issues. This is not to say,
however, that the audience's needs and interests have nothing to do with the informative speech. We come
back to the WIIFM principle ("What's in it for me?) because even though an informative speech is fact-based,
it still needs to relate to people's lives in order to maintain their attention.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 462
   The question may arise here, "If we can find anything on the Internet now, why bother to give an
informative speech?" The answer lies in the unique relationship between audience and speaker found in the
public speaking context. The speaker can choose to present information that is of most value to the audience.
Secondly, the speaker is not just overloading the audience with data. As we have mentioned before, that's
not really a good idea because audiences cannot remember great amounts of data and facts after listening.
The focus of the content is what matters. This is where the specific purpose and central idea come into play.
Remember, public speaking is not a good way to "dump data" on the audience, but to make information
meaningful.

   Finally, although we have stressed that the informative speech is fact-based and does not have the purpose
of persuasion, information still has an indirect effect on someone. If a classmate gives a speech on correctly
using the Heimlich Maneuver to help a choking victim, the side effect (and probably desired result) is that the
audience would use it when confronted with the situation.

463 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 464
With his informative speech about the traditions of OSU looming, Pistol Pete knew he needed to ensure his
preparation outline was in tip-top shape. While he was confident about his content, he wanted to make certain
his structure was clear and cohesive. Who better to help with that than the experts at the OSU Writing Center?

   As he approached the Writing Center, Pete felt a mix of nervousness and excitement. The Writing Center
had a reputation for being a resourceful hub, a place where many students had honed their writing skills.

   He was greeted warmly by a student consultant named Sarah. "How can I help you today, Pistol Pete?" she
asked with a smile. Pete explained his assignment and his desire to refine his preparation outline.

   Sarah began by asking Pete about his main objectives for the speech. As he shared his thoughts, she listened
attentively, jotting down notes. She then asked to see the current state of his outline. As Pete handed it over,
he explained his three main points and how he intended to delve into each one.

   Sarah reviewed the outline, making annotations. She noticed that while Pete had a wealth of information,
it would be beneficial to reorganize some points to improve flow and cohesiveness. They worked together to
structure the outline, ensuring each point logically led to the next.

   She also gave Pete tips on effective transitions to maintain audience engagement and create a seamless
progression between points. Pete, always eager to learn, scribbled down notes, asking questions when needed.

   Noticing that Pete had included a lot of historical details in his outline, Sarah suggested incorporating
personal anecdotes or experiences related to the traditions to add a touch of relatability. Pete loved the idea
and thought of a couple of personal stories he could weave in.

   Before wrapping up, Sarah directed Pete to some online resources available through the Writing Center's
website, which could further help him refine his speech. She also reminded him about the importance of
rehearsing his speech multiple times to ensure it flowed smoothly with the revised outline.

   Pistol Pete left the Writing Center feeling empowered and grateful. Sarah's guidance had transformed his
outline into a clear and engaging roadmap for his speech. He felt more prepared than ever to share the rich
traditions of OSU with his audience, all thanks to the support he received at the Writing Center. Have you ever
visited the Writing Center on campus?

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

465 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         14.2 Types of Informative Speeches

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1741#audio-1741-1

While the topics to choose from for informative speeches are nearly limitless, they can generally be pared
down into five broad categories. Understanding the type of informative speech that you will be giving can help
you to figure out the best way to organize, research, and prepare for it, as will be discussed below.

Type 1: History

A common approach to selecting an informative speech topic is to discuss the history or development of
something. With so much of human knowledge available via the Internet, finding information about the
origins and evolution of almost anything is much easier than it has ever been (with the disclaimer that there
are quite a few websites out there with false information). With that in mind, some of the areas that a historical
informative speech could cover would include:

Objects

(Example: the baseball; the saxophone). Someone at some point in history was the first to develop what is
considered the modern baseball. Who was it? What was it originally made of? How did it evolve into the
baseball that is used by Major League Baseball today?

Places

(Example: your college; Disney World). There is a specific year that you college or university opened, a specific
number of students who were initially enrolled, and often colleges and universities have name and mission
changes. All of these facts can be used to provide an overall understanding of the college and its history.
Likewise, the Disney World of today is different from the Disney World of the early 1970s; the design has
developed over the last fifty years.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 466
Ideas

(Example: democracy; freedom of speech). It is possible to provide facts on an idea, although in some cases
the information may be less precise. For example, while no one can definitively point to a specific date or
individual who first developed the concept of democracy, it is known to have been conceived in ancient
Greece (Raaflaub, Ober, & Wallace, 2007). By looking at the civilizations and cultures that adopted forms of
democracy throughout history, it is possible to provide an audience with a better understanding of how the
idea has been shaped into what it has become today.

Type 2: Biography

A biography is similar to a history, but in this case the subject is specifically a person, whether living or
deceased. For the purposes of this class, biographies should focus on people of some note or fame, since doing
research on people who are not at least mildly well-known could be difficult. But again, as with histories,
there are specific and irrefutable facts that can help provide an overview of someone's life, such as dates that
President Lincoln was born (February 12, 1809) and died (April 15, 1865) and the years he was in office as
president (1861-1865).

   This might be a good place to address research and support. The basic dates of Abraham Lincoln's life could
be found in multiple sources and you would not have to cite the source in that case. But if you use the work of
a specific historian to explain how Lincoln was able to win the presidency in the tumultuous years before the
Civil War, that would need a citation of that author and the publication.

467 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Type 3: Processes

Examples of process speech topics would be how to bake chocolate chip cookies; how to throw a baseball; how
a nuclear reactor works; how a bill works its way through Congress.

   Process speeches are sometimes referred to as demonstration or "how to" speeches because they often
entail demonstrating something. These speeches require you to provide steps that will help your audience
understand how to accomplish a specific task or process. However, How To speeches can be tricky in that there
are rarely universally agreed upon (i.e. irrefutable) ways to do anything. If your professor asked the students
in his or her public speaking class to each bring in a recipe for baking chocolate chip cookies, would all of them
be the exact same recipe?

   Probably not, but they would all be similar and, most importantly, they would all give you chocolate chip
cookies as the end result. Students giving a demonstration speech will want to avoid saying "You should bake
the cookies for 12 minutes" since that is not how everyone does it. Instead, the student should say something
like:

   "You can bake the cookies for 10 minutes."
      "One option is to bake the cookies for 10 minutes."
      "This particular recipe calls for the cookies to be baked for 10 minutes."

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 468
Each of the previous three statements is absolutely a fact that no one can argue or disagree with. While some
people may say 12 minutes is too long or too short (depending on how soft or hard they like their cookies), no
one can reasonably argue that these statements are not true.

   On the other hand, there is a second type of process speech that focuses not on how the audience can achieve
a result, such as changing oil in their cars or cooking something, but on how a process is achieved. The goal is
understanding and not performance. After a speech on how to change a car tire, the audience members could
probably do it (they might not want to, but they would know the steps). However, after a speech on how a bill
goes through Congress, the audience would understand this important part of democracy but not be ready to
serve in Congress.

Type 4: Ideas and Concepts

Sometimes an informative speech is designed to explain an idea or concept. What does democracy mean?
What is justice? In this case, you will want to do two things. First, you'll want to define the idea or concept for
the audience. The second is to make your concept concrete, real, and specific for your audience with examples.

Type 5: Categories or Divisions

Sometimes an informative speech topic doesn't lend itself to a specific type of approach, and in those cases
the topics tend to fall into a "general" category of informative speeches. For example, if a student wanted to
give an informative speech on the four "C's" of diamonds (cut, carat, color, and clarity), they certainly wouldn't
approach it as if they were providing the history of diamonds, nor would they necessarily be informing anyone
on "how to" shop for or buy diamonds or how diamonds are mined. The approach in this case would simply be
to inform an audience on the four "C's" and what they mean. Other examples of this type of informative speech
would be positions in playing volleyball or the customs to know when traveling in China.

   As stated above, identifying the type of informative speech being given can help in several ways (conducting
research, writing the introduction and conclusion), but perhaps the biggest benefit is that the type of
informative speech being given will help determine, to some degree, the organizational pattern that will need
to be used (see Chapter 7). For example, a How To speech must be in chronological order. There really isn't a
way (or reason) to present a How To speech other than how the process is done in a time sequence. That is
to say, for a speech on how to bake chocolate chip cookies, getting the ingredients (Main Point 1) must come
before mixing the ingredients (Main Point 2), which must come before baking them (Main Point 3). Putting
them in any other order will only confuse the audience.

   Similarly, most Histories and Biographies will be organized chronologically, but not always. It makes sense
to explain the history of the baseball from when it was first developed to where it is today, but certain
approaches to Histories and Biographies can make that irrelevant. For an informative speech on Benjamin
Franklin, a student might choose as his or her three main points: 1) His time as a printer, 2) His time as an
inventor, 3) His time as a diplomat. These main points are not in strict chronological order because Franklin
was a printer, inventor, and diplomat at the same time during periods of his whole life. However, this example
would still be one way to inform an audience about him without using the chronological organizational
pattern.

   As for general informative speeches, since the topics that can be included in this category are very diverse
and cover a range of subject matter, the way they are organized will be varied as well. However, if the topic is
"types of" something or "kinds of" something, the organizational pattern would be topical; if it were the layout
of a location, such as the White House, it would be spatial.

469 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                               THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 470
14.3 Guidelines for Selecting an Informative Speech
                          Topic

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1743#audio-1743-1

471 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                  Pick a Specific or Focused Topic

Perhaps one of the biggest and most common misconceptions students have about informative speech topics
is that the topic needs to be broad in order to fill the time requirements for the speech. It is not uncommon
for a student to propose an informative speech topic such as "To inform my audience about the history of
music." How is that topic even possible? When does the history of music even begin? The thinking here is that
this speech will be easy to research and write since there is so much information available. But the opposite is
actually true. A topic this broad makes doing research even harder.

   Let's consider the example of a student who proposes the topic "To inform my audience about the Civil War."
The Civil War was, conservatively speaking, four years long, resulted in over 750,000 casualties, and arguably
changed the course of human history. So to think that it is possible to cover all of that in five to seven minutes
is unrealistic. Also, a typical college library has hundreds of books dealing with the Civil War. How will you
choose which ones are best suited to use for your speech?

   The better approach in this case is to be as specific as possible. A revised specific purpose for this speech
might be something like "To inform my audience about the Gettysburg Address." This topic is much more
compact (the Gettysburg Address is only a few minutes long), and doing research will now be exponentially
easier--although you will still find hundreds of sources on it. Or, an even more specific topic would be like the
one in the outline at the end of this chapter: "To inform my classmates of the specific places in Gettysburg,
Pennsylvania, that are considered haunted."

   Instead of looking through all the books in your campus library on the Civil War, searching through the
library's databases and catalog for material on the Gettysburg Address will yield a much more manageable
number of books and articles. It may sound counterintuitive, but selecting a speech topic that is very
specifically focused will make the research and writing phases of the informative speech much easier.

                          Avoid Faux or Fake Informative Speech Topics

Sometimes students think that because something sounds like an informative speech topic, it is one. This
happens a lot with political issues that are usually partisan in nature. Some students may feel that the speech
topic "To inform my audience why William Henry Harrison was a bad president" sounds factual, but really this
is an opinion. Similarly, a number of topics that include conspiracy and paranormal subject matter are usually
mistaken for good informative topics as well.

   It is not uncommon for a student to propose the topic "To inform my audience about the existence of
extraterrestrials," thinking it is a good topic. After all, there is plenty of evidence to support the claim, right?
There are pictures of unidentified objects in the sky that people claim are from outer space, there are people
who claim to have seen extraterrestrials, and most powerful of all, there are people who say that they have been
abducted by aliens and taken into space.

   The problem here, as you have probably already guessed, is that these facts are not irrefutable. Not every
single person who sees something unknown in the sky will agree it is an alien spacecraft, and there can be
little doubt that not everyone who claims to have been abducted by a UFO is telling the truth. This isn't to say
that you can't still do an informative speech on alien sites. For example, two viable options are "To inform my
audience about the SETI Project" or "To inform my audience of the origin of the Area 51 conspiracy." However,
these types of speeches can quickly devolve into opinion if you aren't careful, which would then make them
persuasive speeches. Even if you start by trying to be objective, unless you can present each side equally, it will
end up becoming a persuasive speech. Additionally, when a speaker picks such a topic, it is often because of a
latent desire to persuade the audience about them.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 472
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

473 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    14.4 Guidelines for Preparing an Informative
                         Speech

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1745#audio-1745-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 474
                                         Don't Be Too Broad

In preparing and writing an informative speech, one of the most common mistakes students make is to think
that they must be comprehensive in covering their topic, which isn't realistic. Take for example an informative
speech on Abraham Lincoln. Lincoln was 56 years old when he died, so to think that it is possible to cover his
entire life's story in 5 to 7 minutes is un-realistic. The better option is to select three aspects of his life and focus
on those as a way to provide an overall picture of who he was. So a proposed speech on Lincoln might have the
specific purpose: "To inform my audience about Abraham Lincoln's administration of the Civil War." This is
still a huge topic in that massive books have been written about it, but it could be addressed in three or four
main points such as:

   I. The Civil War began in the aftermath of Lincoln's Election and Inauguration
   II. Finding the right military leaders for the Union was his major challenge at the beginning.
   III. The Emancipation Proclamation changed the nature of the War.
   IV. Lincoln adopted a policy that led to the North's victory.

Regardless of the topic, you will never be able to cover everything that is known about your topic, so don't try.
Select the things that will best help the audience gain a general understanding of the topic, that will interest
them, and that they hopefully will find valuable.

                                Be Accurate, Clear, and Interesting

A good informative speech conveys accurate information to the audience in a way that is clear and that keeps
the listener interested in the topic. Achieving all three of these goals--accuracy, clarity, and interest--is the
key to being an effective speaker. If information is inaccurate, incomplete, or unclear, it will be of limited
usefulness to the audience.

   Part of being accurate is making sure that your information is current. Even if you know a great deal about
your topic or wrote a good paper on the topic in a high school course, you will need to verify the accuracy and
completeness of what you know, especially if it is medical or scientific information. Most people understand
that technology changes rapidly, so you need to update your information almost constantly. The same is true
for topics that, on the surface, may seem to require less updating. For example, the Civil War occurred over 150
years ago, but contemporary research still offers new and emerging theories about the causes of the war and
its long-term effects. So even with a topic that seems to be unchanging, carefully check the information to be
sure it's accurate and up to date.

   What defines "interesting?" In approaching the informative speech, you should keep in mind the good
overall principle that the audience is asking, "what's in it for me?" The audience is either consciously or
unconsciously wondering "What in this topic for me? How can I use this information? Of what value is this
speech content to me? Why should I listen to it?" One reason this textbook uses examples of the Civil War
is that the authors' college is located by several Civil War sites and even a major battlefield. Students see
reminders of the Civil War on a regular basis.

   You might consider it one of the jobs of the introduction to directly or indirectly answer these questions. If
you can't, then you need to think about your topic and why you are addressing it. If it's only because the topic
is interesting to you, you are missing the point. For example, why should we know about Abraham Lincoln's

475 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
administration of the Civil War? Obviously, because it had significant, long-term consequences to Americans,
and you should articulate that in terms the audience can understand.

                                 Keep in Mind Audience Diversity

Finally, remember that not everyone in your audience is the same, so an informative speech should be
prepared with audience diversity in mind. If the information in a speech is too complex or too simplistic, it will
not hold the interest of the listeners. Determining the right level of complexity can be hard. Audience analysis
is one important way to do this. Do the members of your audience belong to different age groups? Did they
all go to public schools in the United States, or are some them international students? Are they all students
majoring in the same subject, or is there a mixture of majors? Never assume that just because an audience is
made up of students, they all share a knowledge set.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 476
    14.5 Giving Informative Speeches in Groups

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1747#audio-1747-1

   There are instances where you will be called upon to give an informative speech as part of a group of other
informative speakers. This situation may be referred to as a panel or as a symposium. The difference is that in
a panel, the focus is on a discussion by experts in front of an audience. The expert speakers may start with an

477 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
opening statement, but typically the panelists are seated and their opening remarks are designed to present
their basic position or stance and the bulk of time is spent in question-and-answer from the audience, from
the moderator, or from each other. Some tips for panels are given here.

   A symposium is more formal and the experts or presenters have put together prepared speeches on different
aspects of an overall topic. For example, they may all be experts on juveniles in the criminal justice system,
but they have chosen or been assigned a specific informative topic for the audience, who are probably also
professionals in that field. One might speak on challenges with legal representation for juveniles, another on
family reconciliation, another on educational opportunities, and so on. While there may be time for question
and answers at the end, the bulk of the time is taken up by the prepared speeches.

   The author has used the symposium format in her teaching of the informative speech for over 25 years. The
students at first are skeptical, but usually afterward they see the benefit of the experience in the classroom. For
one thing, instead of a class of 25-30 separate and unrelated informative speeches in the class, there are four
sets of related speeches that explore a topic in more depth. Some popular topics have been physical and mental
health issues (diabetes, breast cancer, pets, schizophrenia, phobias), the arts (musical genres, history of film),
travel, and food. In those years, there have been topics that didn't work. Serial killers and sexually transmitted
infections were two of them. One speech on that is acceptable. Six or seven, not so much. Just to clarify, the
author always assigns the groups but the students pick the topics.

   Here are some pointers if you are assigned to give a symposium-style informative speech:

    1. Spend ample time discussing the topics so that everyone is supportive of the overall topic and the way
         the topic is broken down into separate speech topics. Do not let one person run the show and insist on
         a specific topic. A strong personality can sway the rest of the group and then later the other members
         become unhappy about the topic and resentful of the persuasive member.

    2. Try to develop topics in different ways; for example, let's take the overall topic of phobias. The
         temptation is for each separate speech to be a specific phobia. While this is all right, it becomes
         repetitive to the audience. There are other ways to develop the subtopics (origins, different treatment
         options, phobias related to certain demographic groups) instead of six or seven speeches on different
         phobias.

    3. Be in constant communication with your peers so that you know exactly what their topics are and
         how they are being developed. You don't want one or two co-presenters to "go rogue" and change their
         topics without the knowledge of the others in the group. You also do not want to end up overlapping,
         so that part of your speech is actually in someone else's speech. Share phone numbers so you can text
         or call each other, if the members are willing.

    4. You should appoint a moderator who will introduce the speeches and speakers and close or call for
         questions when the speeches are completed, and possibly summarize the set of speeches at the end.
         This member does not have to be the first or last speaker in the group.

    5. Be sure the order of speeches is logical, not random.

    6. Be sure to get to the class early so you can set up and feel secure that your team members are present.

    7. If you are required to have a question-and-answer session at the end, the moderator should try to
         make sure that the participation is balanced and one talkative person doesn't answer all the questions.
         There will be questions you cannot answer, so just be honest and say, "I didn't find that answer in my
         research."

Many instructors use this format because it not only teaches informative speaking skills, but because it

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 478
emphasizes team work. You will be expected to do many team projects in your educational and professional
careers, and this is a good way to start learning effective teamwork skills.

                                             Conclusion

Learning how to give informative speeches will serve you well in your college career and your future work.
Keep in mind the principles in this chapter but also those of the previous chapters: relating to the
informational needs of the audience, using clear structure, and incorporating interesting and attention-
getting supporting evidence.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

479 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
14.6 Sample Informative Speech Outline

                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 480
481 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 482
483 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 484
485 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 486
487 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 488
489 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
               14.7 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. List as many types of informative speeches that you have heard in your everyday life. What are the common
     elements of these speeches?

2. Of the informative speeches you have heard before, are there any speakers that stand out to you? Why?
3. What are the most important considerations when choosing an informative speech topic?
4. Why do you think it is important to know the differences between facts and opinions when preparing an

     informative speech?
5. How would you define and describe a controversial idea, such as assisted suicide for terminally ill patients,

     without your presentation becoming emotional? Is it possible for an informative speech to be emotional without
     becoming persuasive? Explain.
6. Have you ever sensed that a speaker who professed to be informing you was actually trying to persuade you?
     What was it about the presentation that gave you this impression? Did it make you skeptical about the speaker's
     information?

                                           Activities

1. Form five groups. Each group will be given a type of informative speech listed in Section 14:2: Types of
     Informative Speeches (history, biography, processes, ideas and concepts, and categories or divisions). Brainstorm
     to create at least three informative speech topics for the type of speech the group has been given. Each group will
     share the topics with the class who will then vote on the most and least interesting topics to better understand the
     audience's interests. Finally, students should brainstorm their own informative speech topic individually and then
     share with their group members for feedback.

2. Watch a sample informative speech video and use the informative speech grading rubric to evaluate the speech.
     Discuss your finding with the class.

                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 490
    Chapter 15: Understanding Small Group
                   Communication

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Define small group communication.
     Explain the characteristics and functions of small groups.
     Compare and contrast different types of small groups.
     Discuss advantages and disadvantages of small groups.
     Explain the process and characteristics of the stages of group development.
     Explain the relationship between group cohesion and group climate.
     Describe the process of group member socialization.
     Explain the relationship between conformity and groupthink.
     Define various types of group conflict and identify strategies for managing each type.

                                                              Key Terms

     Adjourning
     Forming
     Group Climate
     Group Cohesion
     Group Fantasies
     Group Socialization
     Groupthink
     Interdependence
     Interpersonal Conflict
     Norming
     Performing
     Primary Group

491 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Primary Tension
 Procedural Conflict
 Relational-Oriented Group
 Secondary Group
 Secondary Tension
 Small Group Communication
 Social Cohesion
 Social Loafing
 Storming
 Substantive Conflict
 Symbolic Convergence
 Synergy
 Task Cohesion
 Task-Oriented Group
 Team
 Virtual Group

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 492
        15.1 Communicating in Small Groups

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1753#audio-1753-1

493 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
  "Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world.
                   Indeed, it is the only thing that ever has." -Margaret Mead

When you think of small groups, you probably think of the much dreaded "group assignment" that you've
endured in high school and college. You are less likely to think of the numerous other groups to which
you belong that bring more positive experiences, such as your family and friendship groups or shared-
interest groups. Group communication scholars are so aware of this common negative sentiment toward
group communication that they coined the term grouphate to describe it. Susan M. Sorensen, "Group-Hate:
A Negative Reaction to Group Work" (paper presented at the annual meeting of the International
Communication Association, Minneapolis, MN, May, 1981). Small groups, however, aren't just entities meant
to torture students; they have served a central purpose in human history and evolution. Groups make it easier
for us to complete a wide variety of tasks; help us establish meaningful social bonds; and help us create,
maintain, and change our sense of self (Owen Hargie, Skilled Interpersonal Interaction: Research, Theory, and
Practice, 5th ed. London: Routledge, 2011, 433). Negative group experiences are often exacerbated by a lack
of knowledge about group communication processes. We are just expected to know how to work in groups
without much instruction or practice. This lack of knowledge about group communication can lead to negative
group interactions, which creates a negative cycle that perpetuates further negative experiences. Fortunately,
as with other areas of communication, instruction in group communication can improve people's skills and
increase people's satisfaction with their group experiences.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 494
   The excitement of a new group project in his speech class had Pistol Pete eager to dive in, brainstorm
ideas, and collaborate with his group members. However, his enthusiasm was met with silence. Despite his
numerous texts and messages on the group discussion board, his teammates had yet to respond.

   Faced with this challenge, Pete understood that he had to take initiative to ensure the project moved
forward. He knew that he couldn't control the responses of his group members, but he could certainly control
his actions.

   Firstly, he decided to schedule a group meeting. He sent out an email proposing a few different times
and days, hoping that providing options would accommodate everyone's schedules. He emphasized the
importance of starting early on the project and the benefits of brainstorming together.

   Next, he reached out individually to each member. Sometimes, personal communication can be more
effective than group messages. He asked about their schedules, preferences for project roles, and initial ideas
for the project.

   While waiting for responses, Pete took the initiative to start brainstorming ideas for the project himself. He
outlined potential topics, research resources, and a tentative plan of action. He shared this preliminary work
with the group, hoping it might spark ideas and kickstart the conversation.

   Recognizing that everyone might not be comfortable speaking up in a group setting, Pete suggested
creating a shared document where everyone could contribute ideas at their own pace. This way, everyone had
an avenue to contribute, and the collective thoughts of the team could start to take shape.

495 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Finally, he considered that his peers might be overwhelmed or unsure about the project. So, Pete offered to
help them understand the project better and encouraged them to ask questions. He tried to foster an open and
supportive group environment, where everyone felt comfortable sharing their thoughts and concerns.

   Throughout this process, Pistol Pete was proactive and patient, understanding that good teamwork often
requires good leadership. He was confident that with persistence and a positive attitude, he would be able to
rally his group and get the project on track. After all, being a Cowboy wasn't just about spirit and pride, but
also about resilience and determination.
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 496
          15.2 Understanding Small Groups

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1759#audio-1759-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1759#audio-1759-2

497 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   The communication skills most often discussed are directed toward dyadic communication, meaning that
they are applied in two-person interactions. While many of these skills can be transferred to and used in
small group contexts, the more complex nature of group interaction necessitates some adaptation and some
additional skills. Small group communication refers to interactions among three or more people who are
connected through a common purpose, mutual influence, and a shared identity. In this section, we will learn
about the characteristics, functions, and types of small groups.

            CHARACTERISTICS OF SMALL GROUPS

Different groups have different characteristics, serve different purposes, and can lead to positive, neutral, or
negative experiences. While our interpersonal relationships primarily focus on relationship building, small
groups usually focus on some sort of task completion or goal accomplishment. A college learning community
focused on math and science, a campaign team for a state senator, and a group of local organic farmers are
examples of small groups that would all have a different size, structure, identity, and interaction pattern.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 498
SIZE OF SMALL GROUPS

There is no set number of members for the ideal small group. A small group requires a minimum of three
people (because two people would be a pair or dyad), but the upper range of group size is contingent on the
purpose of the group. When groups grow beyond fifteen to twenty members, it becomes difficult to consider
them a small group based on the previous definition. An analysis of the number of unique connections
between members of small groups shows that they are deceptively complex. For example, within a six-person
group, there are fifteen separate potential dyadic connections, and a twelve-person group would have sixty-six
potential dyadic connections (Hargie, 2011). As you can see, when we double the number of group members,
we more than double the number of connections, which shows that network connection points in small
groups grow exponentially as membership increases. So, while there is no set upper limit on the number of
group members, it makes sense that the number of group members should be limited to those necessary to
accomplish the goal or serve the purpose of the group. Small groups that add too many members increase the
potential for group members to feel overwhelmed or disconnected.

STRUCTURE OF SMALL GROUPS

Internal and external influences affect a group's structure. In terms of internal influences, member
characteristics play a role in initial group formation. For instance, a person who is well informed about the
group's task and/or highly motivated as a group member may emerge as a leader and set into motion internal
decision-making processes, such as recruiting new members or assigning group roles, that affect the structure
of a group (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Different members will also gravitate toward different roles within the group
and will advocate for certain procedures and courses of action over others. External factors such as group size,
task, and resources also affect group structure. Some groups will have more control over these external factors
through decision making than others. For example, a commission that is put together by a legislative body to
look into ethical violations in athletic organizations will likely have less control over its external factors than a
self-created weekly book club.

   Group structure is also formed through formal and informal network connections. In terms of formal
networks, groups may have clearly defined roles and responsibilities or a hierarchy that shows how members
are connected. The group itself may also be a part of an organizational hierarchy that networks the group
into a larger organizational structure. This type of formal network is especially important in groups that have
to report to external stakeholders. These external stakeholders may influence the group's formal network,
leaving the group little or no control over its structure. Conversely, groups have more control over their
informal networks, which are connections among individuals within the group and among group members
and people outside of the group that aren't official. For example, a group member's friend or relative may be
able to secure a space to hold a fundraiser at a discounted rate, which helps the group achieve its task. Both

499 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
types of networks are important because they may help facilitate information exchange within a group and
extend a group's reach in order to access other resources.

   Size and structure also affect communication within a group (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). In terms of size, the
more people in a group, the more issues with scheduling and coordination of communication. Remember that
time is an important resource in most group interactions and a resource that is usually strained. Structure
can increase or decrease the flow of communication. Reachability refers to the way in which one member is
or isn't connected to other group members. For example, the "Circle" group structure in the graphic below
shows that each group member is connected to two other members. This can make coordination easy when
only one or two people need to be brought in for a decision. In this case, Erik and Callie are very reachable
by Winston, who could easily coordinate with them. However, if Winston needed to coordinate with Bill or
Stephanie, he would have to wait on Erik or Callie to reach that person, which could create delays. The circle
can be a good structure for groups who are passing along a task and in which each member is expected to
progressively build on the others' work. A group of scholars coauthoring a research paper may work in such a
manner, with each person adding to the paper and then passing it on to the next person in the circle. In this
case, they can ask the previous person questions and write with the next person's area of expertise in mind.
The "Wheel" group structure in the graphic below shows an alternative organization pattern. In this structure,
Tara is very reachable by all members of the group. This can be a useful structure when Tara is the person
with the most expertise in the task or the leader who needs to review and approve work at each step before it
is passed along to other group members. But Phillip and Shadow, for example, wouldn't likely work together
without Tara being involved.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 500
501 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Looking at the group structures, we can make some assumptions about the communication that takes place
in them. The wheel is an example of a centralized structure, while the circle is decentralized. Research has
shown that centralized groups are better than decentralized groups in terms of speed and efficiency (Ellis &
Fisher, 1994). But decentralized groups are more effective at solving complex problems. In centralized groups
like the wheel, the person with the most connections, person C, is also more likely to be the leader of the group
or at least have more status among group members, largely because that person has a broad perspective of
what's going on in the group. The most central person can also act as a gatekeeper. Since this person has access
to the most information, which is usually a sign of leadership or status, he or she could consciously decide to
limit the flow of information. But in complex tasks, that person could become overwhelmed by the burden of
processing and sharing information with all the other group members. The circle structure is more likely to
emerge in groups where collaboration is the goal and a specific task and course of action isn't required under
time constraints. While the person who initiated the group or has the most expertise in regards to the task
may emerge as a leader in a decentralized group, the equal access to information lessens the hierarchy and
potential for gatekeeping that is present in the more centralized groups.

INTERDEPENDENCE

Small groups exhibit interdependence, meaning they share a common purpose and a common fate. If the
actions of one or two group members lead to a group deviating from or not achieving their purpose, then
all members of the group are affected. Conversely, if the actions of only a few of the group members lead to
success, then all members of the group benefit. This is a major contributor to many college students' dislike of
group assignments, because they feel a loss of control and independence that they have when they complete
an assignment alone. This concern is valid in that their grades might suffer because of the negative actions
of someone else or their hard work may go to benefit the group member who just skated by. Group meeting
attendance is a clear example of the interdependent nature of group interaction. Many of us have arrived at a
group meeting only to find half of the members present. In some cases, the group members who show up have
to leave and reschedule because they can't accomplish their task without the other members present. Group
members who attend meetings but withdraw or don't participate can also derail group progress. Although
it can be frustrating to have your job, grade, or reputation partially dependent on the actions of others, the
interdependent nature of groups can also lead to higher-quality performance and output, especially when
group members are accountable for their actions.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 502
SHARED IDENTITY

The shared identity of a group manifests in several ways. Groups may have official charters or mission and
vision statements that lay out the identity of a group. For example, the Girl Scout mission states that "Girl
Scouting builds girls of courage, confidence, and character, who make the world a better place" (Girl Scouts,
2012). The mission for this large organization influences the identities of the thousands of small groups called
troops. Group identity is often formed around a shared goal and/or previous accomplishments, which adds
dynamism to the group as it looks toward the future and back on the past to inform its present. Shared
identity can also be exhibited through group names, slogans, songs, handshakes, clothing, or other symbols.
At a family reunion, for example, matching t-shirts specially made for the occasion, dishes made from recipes
passed down from generation to generation, and shared stories of family members that have passed away help
establish a shared identity and social reality.

   A key element of the formation of a shared identity within a group is the establishment of the in-group as
opposed to the out-group. The degree to which members share in the in-group identity varies from person to
person and group to group. Even within a family, some members may not attend a reunion or get as excited
about the matching t-shirts as others. Shared identity also emerges as groups become cohesive, meaning they
identify with and like the group's task and other group members. The presence of cohesion and a shared
identity leads to a building of trust, which can also positively influence productivity and members' satisfaction.

               FUNCTIONS OF SMALL GROUPS

Why do we join groups? Even with the challenges of group membership that we have all faced, we still seek out
and desire to be a part of numerous groups. In some cases, we join a group because we need a service or access
to information. We may also be drawn to a group because we admire the group or its members. Whether we
are conscious of it or not, our identities and self-concepts are built on the groups with which we identify. So, to
answer the earlier question, we join groups because they function to help us meet instrumental, interpersonal,
and identity needs.

GROUPS MEET INSTRUMENTAL NEEDS

Groups have long served the instrumental needs of humans, helping with the most basic elements of survival

503 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
since ancient humans first evolved. Groups helped humans survive by providing security and protection
through increased numbers and access to resources. Today, groups are rarely such a matter of life and death,
but they still serve important instrumental functions. Labor unions, for example, pool efforts and resources
to attain material security in the form of pay increases and health benefits for their members, which protects
them by providing a stable and dependable livelihood. Individual group members must also work to secure
the instrumental needs of the group, creating a reciprocal relationship. Members of labor unions pay dues
that help support the group's efforts. Some groups also meet our informational needs. Although they may
not provide material resources, they enrich our knowledge or provide information that we can use to then
meet our own instrumental needs. Many groups provide referrals to resources or offer advice. For example,
several consumer protection and advocacy groups have been formed to offer referrals for people who have
been the victim of fraudulent business practices. Whether a group forms to provide services to members that
they couldn't get otherwise, advocate for changes that will affect members' lives, or provide information, many
groups meet some type of instrumental need.

GROUPS MEET INTERPERSONAL NEEDS

Group membership meets interpersonal needs by giving us access to inclusion, control, and support. In terms
of inclusion, people have a fundamental drive to be a part of a group and to create and maintain social
bonds. As we've learned, humans have always lived and worked in small groups. Family and friendship groups,
shared-interest groups, and activity groups all provide us with a sense of belonging and being included in an
in-group. People also join groups because they want to have some control over a decision-making process or to
influence the outcome of a group. Being a part of a group allows people to share opinions and influence others.
Conversely, some people join a group to be controlled, because they don't want to be the sole decision maker
or leader and instead want to be given a role to follow.

   Just as we enter into interpersonal relationships because we like someone, we are drawn toward a group
when we are attracted to it and/or its members. Groups also provide support for others in ways that
supplement the support that we get from significant others in interpersonal relationships. Some groups, like
therapy groups for survivors of sexual assault or support groups for people with cancer, exist primarily to
provide emotional support. While these groups may also meet instrumental needs through connections and
referrals to resources, they fulfill the interpersonal need for belonging that is a central human need.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 504
GROUPS MEET IDENTITY NEEDS

Our affiliations are building blocks for our identities, because group membership allows us to use reference
groups for social comparison--in short, identifying us with some groups and characteristics and separating
us from others. Some people join groups to be affiliated with people who share similar or desirable
characteristics in terms of beliefs, attitudes, values, or cultural identities. For example, people may join the
National Organization for Women because they want to affiliate with others who support women's rights or a
local chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) because they want
to affiliate with African Americans, people concerned with civil rights, or a combination of the two. Group
memberships vary in terms of how much they affect our identity, as some are more prominent than others at
various times in our lives. While religious groups as a whole are too large to be considered small groups, the
work that people do as a part of a religious community--as a lay leader, deacon, member of a prayer group, or
committee--may have deep ties to a person's identity.

The prestige of a group can initially attract us because we want that group's identity to "rub off" on our
own identity. Likewise, the achievements we make as a group member can enhance our self-esteem, add
to our reputation, and allow us to create or project certain identity characteristics to engage in impression
management. For example, a person may take numerous tests to become a part of Mensa, which is an
organization for people with high IQs, for no material gain but for the recognition or sense of achievement
that the affiliation may bring. Likewise, people may join sports teams, professional organizations, and honor
societies for the sense of achievement and affiliation. Such groups allow us opportunities to better ourselves
by encouraging further development of skills or knowledge. For example, a person who used to play the oboe
in high school may join the community band to continue to improve on his or her ability.

                   TYPES OF SMALL GROUPS

There are many types of small groups, but the most common distinction made between types of small groups
is that of task-oriented and relational-oriented groups (Hargie, 2011). Task-oriented groups are formed to
solve a problem, promote a cause, or generate ideas or information (McKay, Davis, & Fanning, 1995). In such
groups, like a committee or study group, interactions and decisions are primarily evaluated based on the
quality of the final product or output. The three main types of tasks are production, discussion, and problem-
solving tasks (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Groups faced with production tasks are asked to produce something
tangible from their group interactions such as a report, design for a playground, musical performance, or
fundraiser event. Groups faced with discussion tasks are asked to talk through something without trying to
come up with a right or wrong answer. Examples of this type of group include a support group for people
with HIV/AIDS, a book club, or a group for new fathers. Groups faced with problem-solving tasks have to
devise a course of action to meet a specific need. These groups also usually include a production and discussion
component, but the end goal isn't necessarily a tangible product or a shared social reality through discussion.

505 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Instead, the end goal is a well-thought-out idea. Task-oriented groups require honed problem-solving skills to
accomplish goals, and the structure of these groups is more rigid than that of relational-oriented groups.

   Relational-oriented groups are formed to promote interpersonal connections and are more focused on
quality interactions that contribute to the well-being of group members. Decision making is directed at
strengthening or repairing relationships rather than completing discrete tasks or debating specific ideas or
courses of action. All groups include task and relational elements, so it's best to think of these orientations as
two ends of a continuum rather than as mutually exclusive. For example, although a family unit works together
daily to accomplish tasks like getting the kids ready for school and friendship groups may plan a surprise party
for one of the members, their primary and most meaningful interactions are still relational.

   To more specifically look at the types of small groups that exist, we can examine why groups form. Some
groups are formed based on interpersonal relationships. Our family and friends are considered primary
groups, or long-lasting groups that are formed based on relationships and include significant others. These
are the small groups in which we interact most frequently. They form the basis of our society and our
individual social realities. Kinship networks provide important support early in life and meet physiological
and safety needs, which are essential for survival. They also meet higher-order needs such as social and self-
esteem needs. When people do not interact with their biological family, whether voluntarily or involuntarily,
they can establish fictive kinship networks, which are composed of people who are not biologically related but
fulfill family roles and help provide the same support.

   We also interact in many secondary groups, which are characterized by less frequent face-to-face
interactions, less emotional and relational communication, and more task-related communication than
primary groups (Barker, 1991). While we are more likely to participate in secondary groups based on self-
interest, our primary-group interactions are often more reciprocal or other oriented. For example, we may join
groups because of a shared interest or need.

   Groups formed based on shared interest include social groups and leisure groups such as a group of
independent film buffs, science fiction fans, or bird watchers. Some groups form to meet the needs of
individuals or of a particular group of people. Examples of groups that meet the needs of individuals include
study groups or support groups like a weight loss group. These groups are focused on individual needs, even
though they meet as a group, and they are also often discussion oriented. Service groups, on the other hand,
work to meet the needs of individuals but are task oriented. Service groups include Habitat for Humanity and
Rotary Club chapters, among others. Still other groups form around a shared need, and their primary task is
advocacy. For example, the Gay Men's Health Crisis is a group that was formed by a small group of eight people
in the early 1980s to advocate for resources and support for the still relatively unknown disease that would
later be known as AIDS. Similar groups form to advocate for everything from a stop sign at a neighborhood
intersection to the end of human trafficking.

   As we already learned, other groups are formed primarily to accomplish a task. Teams are task-oriented
groups in which members are especially loyal and dedicated to the task and other group members (Larson
& LaFasto, 1989). In professional and civic contexts, the word team has become popularized as a means of
drawing on the positive connotations of the term--connotations such as "high-spirited," "cooperative," and
"hardworking." Scholars who have spent years studying highly effective teams have identified several common
factors related to their success. Successful teams have (Adler & Elmhorst, 2005)

   clear and inspiring shared goals,

   a results-driven structure,

   competent team members,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 506
   a collaborative climate,
   high standards for performance,
   external support and recognition, and
   ethical and accountable leadership.

Increasingly, small groups and teams are engaging in more virtual interaction. Virtual groups take advantage
of new technologies and meet exclusively or primarily online to achieve their purpose or goal. Some virtual
groups may complete their task without ever being physically face-to-face. Virtual groups bring with them
distinct advantages and disadvantages.

 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF SMALL GROUPS

As with anything, small groups have their advantages and disadvantages. Advantages of small groups include
shared decision making, shared resources, synergy, and exposure to diversity. It is within small groups that
most of the decisions that guide our country, introduce local laws, and influence our family interactions are
made. In a democratic society, participation in decision making is a key part of citizenship. Groups also help
in making decisions involving judgment calls that have ethical implications or the potential to negatively
affect people. Individuals making such high-stakes decisions in a vacuum could have negative consequences
given the lack of feedback, input, questioning, and proposals for alternatives that would come from group
interaction. Group members also help expand our social networks, which provide access to more resources. A
local community-theater group may be able to put on a production with a limited budget by drawing on these
connections to get set-building supplies, props, costumes, actors, and publicity in ways that an individual
could not. The increased knowledge, diverse perspectives, and access to resources that groups possess relates
to another advantage of small groups--synergy.

   Synergy refers to the potential for gains in performance or heightened quality of interactions when
complementary members or member characteristics are added to existing ones (Larson Jr., 2010). Because of
synergy, the final group product can be better than what any individual could have produced alone. When
I worked in housing and residence life, I helped coordinate a "World Cup Soccer Tournament" for the
international students that lived in my residence hall. As a group, we created teams representing different
countries around the world, made brackets for people to track progress and predict winners, got sponsors,
gathered prizes, and ended up with a very successful event that would not have been possible without the
synergy created by our collective group membership. The members of this group were also exposed to
international diversity that enriched our experiences, which is also an advantage of group communication.

   Participating in groups can also increase our exposure to diversity and broaden our perspectives. Although
groups vary in the diversity of their members, we can strategically choose groups that expand our diversity,
or we can unintentionally end up in a diverse group. When we participate in small groups, we expand our
social networks, which increase the possibility to interact with people who have different cultural identities
than ourselves. Since group members work together toward a common goal, shared identification with the

507 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
task or group can give people with diverse backgrounds a sense of commonality that they might not have
otherwise. Even when group members share cultural identities, the diversity of experience and opinion within
a group can lead to broadened perspectives as alternative ideas are presented and opinions are challenged and
defended. One of my favorite parts of facilitating class discussion is when students with different identities
and/or perspectives teach one another things in ways that I could not on my own. This example brings
together the potential of synergy and diversity. People who are more introverted or just avoid group
communication and voluntarily distance themselves from groups--or are rejected from groups--risk losing
opportunities to learn more about others and themselves.

  There are also disadvantages to small group interaction. In some cases, one person
can be just as or more effective than a group of people. Think about a situation in
which a highly specialized skill or knowledge is needed to get something done. In
this situation, one very knowledgeable person is probably a better fit for the task
than a group of less knowledgeable people. Group interaction also has a tendency to
slow down the decision-making process. Individuals connected through a hierarchy
or chain of command often work better in situations where decisions must be made
under time constraints. When group interaction does occur under time constraints,
having one "point person" or leader who coordinates action and gives final approval
or disapproval on ideas or suggestions for actions is best.

   Group communication also presents interpersonal challenges. A common problem is coordinating and
planning group meetings due to busy and conflicting schedules. Some people also have difficulty with the
other-centeredness and self-sacrifice that some groups require. The interdependence of group members
that we discussed earlier can also create some disadvantages. Group members may take advantage of the
anonymity of a group and engage in social loafing, meaning they contribute less to the group than other
members or than they would if working alone (Karau & Williams, 1993). Social loafers expect that no one will
notice their behaviors or that others will pick up their slack. It is this potential for social loafing that makes
many students and professionals dread group work, especially those who have a tendency to cover for other
group members to prevent the social loafer from diminishing the group's productivity or output.

                                             References

Adler, R. B., and Jeanne Marquardt Elmhorst, Communicating at Work: Principles and Practices for Businesses and
the Professions, 8th ed. (Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, 2005), 248-50.

   Ahuja, M. K., and John E. Galvin, "Socialization in Virtual Groups," Journal of Management 29, no. 2 (2003):
163.

   Barker, D. B., "The Behavioral Analysis of Interpersonal Intimacy in Group Development," Small Group
Research 22, no. 1 (1991): 79.

   Comer, D. R., "Organizational Newcomers' Acquisition of Information from Peers," Management
Communication Quarterly 5, no. 1 (1991): 64-89.

   Ellis, D. G., and B. Aubrey Fisher, Small Group Decision Making: Communication and the Group Process, 4th ed.
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), 57.

   Girl Scouts, "Facts," accessed July 15, 2012, http://www.girlscouts.org/who_we_are/facts.
   Hargie, O., Skilled Interpersonal Interaction: Research, Theory, and Practice, 5th ed. (London: Routledge, 2011),
452-53.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 508
   Karau, S. J., and Kipling D. Williams, "Social Loafing: A Meta-Analytic Review and Theoretical Integration,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 65, no. 4 (1993): 681.

   Larson, C. E., and Frank M. J. LaFasto, TeamWork: What Must Go Right/What Must Go Wrong (Newbury Park,
CA: Sage, 1989), 73.

   Larson Jr., J. R., In Search of Synergy in Small Group Performance (New York: Psychology Press, 2010).
   McKay, M., Martha Davis, and Patrick Fanning, Messages: Communication Skills Book, 2nd ed. (Oakland, CA:
New Harbinger Publications, 1995), 254.
   Myers, S. A., and Alan K. Goodboy, "A Study of Grouphate in a Course on Small Group Communication,"
Psychological Reports 97, no. 2 (2005): 385.
   Walther, J. B., and Ulla Bunz, "The Rules of Virtual Groups: Trust, Liking, and Performance in Computer-
Mediated Communication," Journal of Communication 55, no. 4 (2005): 830.
   Weimer, M., "Why Students Hate Groups," The Teaching Professor, July 1, 2008, accessed July 15, 2012,
http://www.teachingprofessor.com/articles/teaching-and-learning/why-students-hate-groups.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

509 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
           15.3 Small Group Development

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1762#audio-1762-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 510
                            FORMING

Small groups have to start somewhere. Even established groups go through changes
as members come and go, as tasks are started and completed, and as relationships
change. In this section, we will learn about the stages of group development, which
are forming, storming, norming, performing, and adjourning (Tuckman & Jensen,
1977). As with most models of communication phenomena, although we order the
stages and discuss them separately, they are not always experienced in a linear
fashion. Additionally, some groups don't experience all five stages, may experience
stages multiple times, or may experience more than one stage at a time.

   During the forming stage, group members begin to reduce uncertainty associated with new relationships
and/or new tasks through initial interactions that lay the foundation for later group dynamics. Groups return
to the forming stage as group members come and go over the life span of a group. Although there may not be
as much uncertainty when one or two new people join a group as there is when a group first forms, groups
spend some time in the forming stage every time group membership changes.

   Given that interpersonal bonds are likely not yet formed and people are unfamiliar with the purpose of
the group or task at hand, there are high levels of uncertainty. Early stages of role negotiation begin and
members begin to determine goals for the group and establish rules and norms. Group cohesion also begins
to form during this stage. Group cohesion refers to the commitment of members to the purpose of the group
and the degree of attraction among individuals within the group (Hargie, 2011). The cohesion that begins
in this stage sets the group on a trajectory influenced by group members' feelings about one another and
their purpose or task. Groups with voluntary membership may exhibit high levels of optimism about what
the group can accomplish. Although the optimism can be motivating, unrealistic expectations can lead to
disappointment, making it important for group members to balance optimism with realism. Groups with
assigned or mandatory membership may include members that carry some degree of resentment toward the
group itself or the goals of the group. These members can start the group off on a negative trajectory that will
lessen or make difficult group cohesiveness. Groups can still be successful if these members are balanced out
by others who are more committed to and positive in regards to the purpose of the group.

   Many factors influence how the forming stage of group development plays out. The personalities of the
individuals in the group, the skills that members bring, the resources available to the group, the group's
size, and the group's charge all contribute to the creation of the early tone of and climate within a group
(Ellis & Fisher, 1994). For example, more dominant personalities may take early leadership roles in the group
that can affect subsequent decisions. Group members' diverse skill sets and access to resources can also
influence the early stages of role differentiation. In terms of size, the bonding that begins in the forming stage
becomes difficult when the number of people within the group prevents every person from having a one-on-
one connection with every other member of the group. Also, in larger groups, more dominant members tend
to assert themselves as leaders and build smaller coalitions within the group, which can start the group on a
trajectory toward more conflict during the upcoming storming stage (Ellis & Fisher, 1994).

   When a group receives an external charge, meaning that the goal or purpose of the group is decided
by people outside the group, there may be less uncertainty related to the task dimensions of the group.
Additionally, decisions about what roles people will play including group leaders and other decisions about
the workings of the group may come from the outside, which reduces some of the uncertainty inherent in
the forming stage. Relational uncertainty can also be diminished when group members have preexisting
relationships or familiarity with each other. Although the decreased uncertainty may be beneficial at this

511 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
stage, too much imposed structure from the outside can create resentment or a feeling of powerlessness
among group members. So a manageable amount of uncertainty is actually a good thing for group cohesion
and productivity.

                           STORMING

During the storming stage of group development, conflict emerges as people begin to perform their various
roles, have their ideas heard, and negotiate where they fit in the group's structure. The uncertainty present
in the forming stage begins to give way as people begin to occupy specific roles and the purpose, rules, and
norms of a group become clearer. Conflict develops when some group members aren't satisfied with the role
that they or others are playing or the decisions regarding the purpose or procedures of the group. For example,
if a leader begins to emerge or is assigned during the forming stage, some members may feel that the leader
is imposing his or her will on other members of the group. As we will learn in our section on group leadership,
leaders should expect some degree of resentment from others who wanted to be the leader, have interpersonal
conflicts with the leader, or just have general issues with being led.

   Although the word storming and the concept of conflict have negative connotations, conflict can be positive
and productive. Just like storms can replenish water supplies and make crops grow, storming can lead to
group growth. While conflict is inevitable and should be experienced by every group, a group that gets stuck at
the storming stage will likely not have much success in completing its task or achieving its purpose. Influences
from outside the group can also affect the conflict in the storming stage. Interpersonal conflicts that predate
the formation of the group may distract the group from the more productive idea- or task-oriented conflict
that can be healthy for the group and increase the quality of ideas, decision making, and output.

                                                           THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 512
                           NORMING

During the norming stage of group development, the practices and expectations of the group are solidified,
which leads to more stability, productivity, and cohesion within the group. Group norms are behaviors that
become routine but are not explicitly taught or stated. In short, group norms help set the tone for what group
members ought to do and how they ought to behave (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Many implicit norms are derived
from social norms that people follow in their everyday life. Norms within the group about politeness, lateness,
and communication patterns are typically similar to those in other contexts. Sometimes a norm needs to be
challenged because it is not working for the group, which could lead a group back to the storming stage.
Other times, group members challenge norms for no good reason, which can lead to punishment for the group
member or create conflict within the group.

   At this stage, there is a growing consensus among group members as to the roles that each person will play,
the way group interactions will typically play out, and the direction of the group. Leaders that began to emerge
have typically gained the support of other group members, and group identity begins to solidify. The group
may now be recognizable by those on the outside, as slogans, branding, or patterns of interaction become
associated with the group. This stage of group development is key for the smooth operation of the group.

513 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Norms bring a sense of predictability and stability that can allow a group to move on to the performing stage of
group development. Norms can also bring with them conformity pressures that can be positive or negative. In
general, people go along with a certain amount of pressure to conform out of a drive to avoid being abnormal
that is a natural part of our social interaction (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Too much pressure, however, can lead
people to feel isolated and can create a negative group climate. We will learn more about pressure as a group
dynamic later in this chapter.

   Explicit rules may also guide group interaction. Rules are explicitly stated guidelines for members and
may refer to things like expected performance levels or output, attitudes, or dress codes. Rules may be
communicated through verbal instructions, employee handbooks, membership policies, or codes of conduct
(Hargie, 2011). Groups can even use procedures like Robert's Rules of Order to manage the flow of
conversations and decision-making procedures. Group members can contest or subvert group rules just as
they can norms. Violations of group rules, however, typically result in more explicit punishments than do
violations of norms.

                         PERFORMING

During the performing stage of group development, group members work relatively smoothly toward the
completion of a task or achievement of a purpose. Although interactions in the performing stage are task
focused, the relational aspects of group interaction provide an underlying support for the group members.
Socialization outside of official group time can serve as a needed relief from the group's task. During task-
related interactions, group members ideally begin to develop a synergy that results from the pooling of skills,
ideas, experiences, and resources. Synergy is positive in that it can lead group members to exceed their
expectations and perform better than they could individually. Glitches in the group's performance can lead
the group back to previous stages of group development. Changes in membership, member roles, or norms
can necessitate a revisiting of aspects of the forming, storming, or norming stages. One way to continue to
build group cohesion during the performing stage is to set short-term attainable group goals. Accomplishing
something, even if it's small, can boost group morale, which in turn boosts cohesion and productivity.

                         ADJOURNING

The adjourning stage of group development occurs when a group dissolves because it has completed its
purpose or goal, membership is declining and support for the group no longer exists, or it is dissolved

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 514
because of some other internal or external cause. Some groups may live on indefinitely and not experience the
adjourning stage. Other groups may experience so much conflict in the storming stage that they skip norming
and performing and dissolve before they can complete their task. For groups with high social cohesion,
adjourning may be a difficult emotional experience. However, group members may continue interpersonal
relationships that formed even after the group dissolves. In reality, many bonds, even those that were very
close, end up fading after the group disbands. This doesn't mean the relationship wasn't genuine;
interpersonal relationships often form because of proximity and shared task interaction. Once that force
is gone, it becomes difficult to maintain friendships, and many fade away. For groups that had negative
experiences, the adjourning stage may be welcomed.

   To make the most out of the adjourning stage, it is important that there be some guided and purposeful
reflection. Many groups celebrate their accomplishments with a party or ceremony. Even groups that had
negative experiences or failed to achieve their purpose can still learn something through reflection in the
adjourning stage that may be beneficial for future group interactions. Often, group members leave a group
experience with new or more developed skills that can be usefully applied in future group or individual
contexts. Even groups that are relational rather than task focused can increase members' interpersonal,
listening, or empathetic skills or increase cultural knowledge and introduce new perspectives.

                                             References

Ellis, D. G., and B. Aubrey Fisher, Small Group Decision Making: Communication and the Group Process, 4th ed. (New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), 14.

   Hargie, O., Skilled Interpersonal Interaction: Research, Theory, and Practice, 5th ed. (London: Routledge, 2011),
445.

   Tuckman, B. W., and Mary Ann C. Jensen, "Stages of Small-Group Development Revisited," Group and
Organizational Studies 2, no. 4 (1977): 419-27.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

515 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
             15.4 Small Group Dynamics

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1767#audio-1767-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1767#audio-1767-2

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 516
   Any time a group of people come together, new dynamics are put into place that differ from the dynamics
present in our typical dyadic interactions. The impressions we form about other people's likeability and the
way we think about a group's purpose are affected by the climate within a group that is created by all members.
Groups also develop norms, and new group members are socialized into a group's climate and norms just as
we are socialized into larger social and cultural norms in our everyday life. The pressure to conform to norms
becomes more powerful in group situations, and some groups take advantage of these forces with positive and
negative results. Last, the potential for productive and destructive conflict increases as multiple individuals
come together to accomplish a task or achieve a purpose. This section explores the dynamics mentioned
previously in order to better prepare you for future group interactions.

              GROUP COHESION AND CLIMATE

When something is cohesive, it sticks together, and the cohesion within a group helps establish an overall
group climate. Group climate refers to the relatively enduring tone and quality of group interaction that is
experienced similarly by group members. To better understand cohesion and climate, we can examine two
types of cohesion: task and social.

   Task cohesion refers to the commitment of group members to the purpose and activities of the group.

517 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Social cohesion refers to the attraction and liking among group members. Ideally, groups would have an
appropriate balance between these two types of cohesion relative to the group's purpose, with task-oriented
groups having higher task cohesion and relational-oriented groups having higher social cohesion. Even the
most task-focused groups need some degree of social cohesion, and vice versa, but the balance will be
determined by the purpose of the group and the individual members. For example, a team of workers from the
local car dealership may join a local summer softball league because they're good friends and love the game.
They may end up beating the team of faculty members from the community college who joined the league just
to get to know each other better and have an excuse to get together and drink beer in the afternoon. In this
example, the players from the car dealership exhibit high social and task cohesion, while the faculty exhibit
high social but low task cohesion.

   Cohesion benefits a group in many ways and can be assessed through specific group behaviors and
characteristics. Groups with an appropriate level of cohesiveness (Hargie, 2011)

   set goals easily;

   exhibit a high commitment to achieving the purpose of the group;

   are more productive;

   experience fewer attendance issues;

   have group members who are willing to stick with the group during times of difficulty;

   have satisfied group members who identify with, promote, and defend the group;

   have members who are willing to listen to each other and offer support and constructive criticism; and

   experience less anger and tension.

Appropriate levels of group cohesion usually create a positive group climate, since group climate is affected by
members' satisfaction with the group. Climate has also been described as group morale. Following are some
qualities that contribute to a positive group climate and morale (Marston & Hecht, 1988):

   Participation. Group members feel better when they feel included in discussion and a part of the
      functioning of the group.

   Messages. Confirming messages help build relational dimensions within a group, and clear, organized,
      and relevant messages help build task dimensions within a group.

   Feedback. Positive, constructive, and relevant feedback contribute to group climate.

   Equity. Aside from individual participation, group members also like to feel as if participation is
      managed equally within the group and that appropriate turn taking is used.

   Clear and accepted roles. Group members like to know how status and hierarchy operate within a
      group. Knowing the roles isn't enough to lead to satisfaction, though--members must also be
      comfortable with and accept those roles.

   Motivation. Member motivation is activated by perceived connection to and relevance of the group's
      goals or purpose.

Group cohesion and climate is also demonstrated through symbolic convergence
(Bormann, 1985). Symbolic convergence refers to the sense of community or group
consciousness that develops in a group through non-task-related communication

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 518
such as stories and jokes. The originator of symbolic convergence theory, Ernest
Bormann, claims that the sharing of group fantasies creates symbolic convergence.
Fantasy, in this sense, doesn't refer to fairy tales, sexual desire, or untrue things. In
group communication, group fantasies are verbalized references to events outside
the "here and now" of the group, including references to the group's past, predictions
for the future, or other communication about people or events outside the group
(Griffin, 2009). For example, as a graduate student, I spent a lot of time talking
with others in our small group about research, writing, and other things related to
our classes and academia in general. Most of this communication wouldn't lead to
symbolic convergence or help establish the strong social bonds that we developed
as a group. Instead, it was our grad student "war stories" about excessive reading
loads and unreasonable paper requirements we had experienced in earlier years of
grad school, horror stories about absent or vindictive thesis advisors, and "you won't
believe this" stories from the classes that we were teaching that brought us together.

   In any group, you can tell when symbolic convergence is occurring by observing how people share such
fantasies and how group members react to them. If group members react positively and agree with or
appreciate the teller's effort or other group members are triggered to tell their own related stories, then
convergence is happening and cohesion and climate are being established. Over time, these fantasies build
a shared vision of the group and what it means to be a member that creates a shared group consciousness.
By reviewing and applying the concepts in this section, you can hopefully identify potential difficulties with
group cohesion and work to enhance cohesion when needed in order to create more positive group climates
and enhance your future group interactions.

               SOCIALIZING GROUP MEMBERS

Group socialization refers to the process of teaching and learning the norms, rules, and expectations
associated with group interaction and group member behaviors. Group norms, rules, and cohesion can only
be created and maintained through socialization (Ahuja & Galvin, 2003). It is also through socialization that
a shared identity and social reality develops among group members, but this development is dependent on
several factors. For example, groups with higher levels of cohesion are more likely to have members that
"buy into" rules and norms, which aids in socialization. The need for socialization also changes throughout a
group's life span. If membership in a group is stable, long-term members should not need much socialization.
However, when new members join a group, existing members must take time to engage in socialization. When
a totally new group is formed, socialization will be an ongoing process as group members negotiate rules and
procedures, develop norms, and create a shared history over time.

   The information exchanged during socialization can be broken down into two general categories: technical
and social knowledge (Ahuja & Galvin, 2003). Technical knowledge focuses on skills and information needed
to complete a task, and social knowledge focuses on behavioral norms that guide interaction. Each type of

519 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
information is usually conveyed through a combination of formal and informal means. Technical knowledge
can be fairly easily passed along through orientations, trainings, manuals, and documents, because this
content is often fairly straightforward. Social knowledge is more ambiguous and is usually conveyed through
informal means or passively learned by new members through observation. To return to our earlier
terminology, technical knowledge relates more to group rules and social knowledge relates more to group
norms.

   Companies and social organizations socialize new members in different ways. A new training cohort at an
established company may be given technical rule-based information in the form of a manual and a history of
the organization and an overview of the organizational culture to help convey social knowledge about group
norms. Members of some small groups like fraternities or professional organizations have to take pledges or
oaths that may convey a mixture of technical and social knowledge. Social knowledge may be conveyed in
interactions that are separate from official group time. For example, literally socializing as a group is a good
way to socialize group members. Many large and successful businesses encourage small groups within the
company to socialize outside of work time in order to build cohesion and group solidarity.

   Socialization continues after initial membership through the enforcement of rules and norms. When
someone deviates from the rules and norms and is corrected, it serves as a reminder for all other members and
performs a follow-up socializing function. Since rules are explicitly stated and documented, deviation from
the rules can have consequences ranging from verbal warnings, to temporary or permanent separation from
the group, to fines or other sanctions. And although norms are implicit, deviating from them can still have
consequences. Even though someone may not actually verbally correct the deviation, the self-consciousness,
embarrassment, or awkwardness that can result from such deviations is often enough to initiate corrective
actions. Group norms can be so implicit that they are taken for granted and operate under group members'
awareness.

   Group rules and norms provide members with a sense of predictability that helps reduce uncertainty and
increase a sense of security for one's place within the group. They also guide group members' involvement
with the group, help create a shared social reality, and allow the group to function in particular ways without
having actual people constantly educating, monitoring, and then correcting member behaviors (Hargie, 2011).
Of course, the degree to which this is successful depends on the buy-in from group members.

                      GROUP PRESSURES

There must be some kind of motivating force present within groups in order for the rules and norms to help
govern and guide a group. Without such pressure, group members would have no incentive to conform to
group norms or buy into the group's identity and values. In this section, we will discuss how rules and norms
gain their power through internal and external pressures and how these pressures can have positive and
negative effects.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 520
                         CONFORMITY

In general, some people are more likely to accept norms and rules than others, which can influence the
interaction and potential for conflict within a group. While some people may feel a need for social acceptance
that leads them to accept a norm or rule with minimal conformity pressure, others may actively resist because
they have a valid disagreement or because they have an aggressive or argumentative personality (Ellis &
Fisher, 1994). Such personality traits are examples of internal pressures that operate within the individual
group member and act as a self-governing mechanism. When group members discipline themselves and
monitor their own behavior, groups need not invest in as many external mechanisms to promote conformity.
Deviating from the group's rules and norms that a member internalized during socialization can lead to self-
imposed feelings of guilt or shame that can then initiate corrective behaviors and discourage the member
from going against the group.

   External pressures in the form of group policies, rewards or punishments, or other forces outside of
individual group members also exert conformity pressure. In terms of group policies, groups that have an
official admission process may have a probation period during which new members' membership is

521 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
contingent on them conforming to group expectations. Deviation from expectations during this "trial period"
could lead to expulsion from the group. Supervisors, mentors, and other types of group leaders are also agents
that can impose external pressures toward conformity. These group members often have the ability to provide
positive or negative reinforcement in the form of praise or punishment, which are clear attempts to influence
behavior.

   Conformity pressure can also stem from external forces when the whole group stands to receive a reward or
punishment based on its performance, which ties back to the small group characteristic of interdependence.
Although these pressures may seem negative, they also have positive results. Groups that exert an appropriate
and ethical amount of conformity pressure typically have higher levels of group cohesion, which as we learned
leads to increased satisfaction with group membership, better relationships, and better task performance.
Groups with a strong but healthy level of conformity also project a strong group image to those outside the
group, which can raise the group's profile or reputation (Hargie, 2011). Pressures toward conformity, of course,
can go too far, as is evidenced in tragic stories of people driven to suicide because they felt they couldn't live
up to the conformity pressure of their group and people injured or killed enduring hazing rituals that take
expectations for group conformity to unethical and criminal extremes.

                         GROUPTHINK

Groupthink is a negative group phenomenon characterized by a lack of critical evaluation of proposed ideas
or courses of action that results from high levels of cohesion and/or high conformity pressures (Janis, 1972).
We can better understand groupthink by examining its causes and effects. When group members fall victim to
groupthink, the effect is uncritical acceptance of decisions or suggestions for plans of action to accomplish a
task or goal. Group meetings that appear to go smoothly with only positive interaction among happy, friendly
people may seem ideal, but these actions may be symptomatic of groupthink (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). When
people rush to agreement or fear argument, groupthink has a tendency to emerge. Decisions made as a
result of groupthink may range from a poorly-thought-out presentation method that bores the audience to a
mechanical failure resulting in death.

   Two primary causes of groupthink are high levels of cohesion and excessive conformity pressures. When
groups exhibit high levels of social cohesion, members may be reluctant to criticize or question another
group member's ideas or suggestions for fear that it would damage the relationship. When group members
have a high level of task cohesion, they may feel invincible and not critically evaluate ideas. High levels
of cohesion may actually lessen conformity pressures since group members who identify strongly with the
group's members and mission may not feel a need to question the decisions or suggestions made by others.
For those who aren't blinded by the high levels of cohesion, internal conformity pressures may still lead them
to withhold criticism of an idea because the norm is to defer to decisions made by organization leaders or
a majority of group members. External conformity pressures because of impending reward or punishment,
time pressures, or an aggressive leader are also factors that can lead to groupthink.

   To Avoid Groupthink, Groups Should (Hargie, 2011)

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 522
   Divvy up responsibilities between group members so decision-making power isn't in the hands of a few
   Track contributions of group members in such a way that each person's input and output is recorded so

      that it can be discussed
   Encourage and reward the expression of minority or dissenting opinions
   Allow members to submit ideas prior to a discussion so that opinions aren't swayed by members who

      propose ideas early in a discussion
   Question each major decision regarding its weaknesses and potential negative consequences relative to

      competing decisions (encourage members to play "devil's advocate")
   Have decisions reviewed by an outside party that wasn't involved in the decision-making process
   Have a "reflection period" after a decision is made and before it is implemented during which group

      members can express reservations or second thoughts about the decision

                       GROUP CONFLICT

Conflict can appear in indirect or direct forms within group interaction, just as it can in interpersonal
interactions. Group members may openly question each other's ideas or express anger toward or dislike for
another person. Group members may also indirectly engage in conflict communication through innuendo,
joking, or passive-aggressive behavior. Although we often view conflict negatively, conflict can be beneficial
for many reasons. When groups get into a rut, lose creativity, or become complacent, conflict can help get a
group out of a bad or mediocre routine. Conversely, conflict can lead to lower group productivity due to strain
on the task and social dimensions of a group. There are three main types of conflict within groups: procedural,
substantive, and interpersonal (Fujishin, 2001). Each of these types of conflict can vary in intensity, which can
affect how much the conflict impacts the group and its members.

                   PROCEDURAL CONFLICT

Procedural conflict emerges from disagreements or trouble with the mechanics of group operations. In this
type of conflict, group members differ in their beliefs about how something should be done. Procedural conflict
can be handled by a group leader, especially if the leader put group procedures into place or has the individual
power to change them. If there is no designated leader or the leader doesn't have sole power to change

523 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
procedures (or just wants input from group members), proposals can be taken from the group on ways to
address a procedural conflict to initiate a procedural change. A vote to reach a consensus or majority can also
help resolve procedural conflict.

                   SUBSTANTIVE CONFLICT

Substantive conflict focuses on group members' differing beliefs, attitudes, values, or ideas related to the
purpose or task of the group. Rather than focusing on questions of how, substantive conflicts focus on
questions of what. Substantive conflicts may emerge as a group tries to determine its purpose or mission. As
members figure out how to complete a task or debate which project to start on next, there will undoubtedly
be differences of opinion on what something means, what is acceptable in terms of supporting evidence for
a proposal, or what is acceptable for a goal or performance standard. Leaders and other group members
shouldn't rush to close this type of conflict down. As we learned in our earlier discussion of groupthink, open
discussion and debate regarding ideas and suggestions for group action can lead to higher-quality output and
may prevent groupthink. Leaders who make final decisions about substantive conflict for the sake of moving
on run the risk of creating a win/lose competitive climate in which people feel like their ideas may be shot
down, which could lead to less participation. To resolve this type of conflict, group members may want to do

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 524
research to see what other groups have done in similar situations, as additional information often provides
needed context for conflict regarding information and ideas. Once the information is gathered, weigh all
proposals and try to discover common ground among perspectives. Civil and open discussions that debate the
merits of an idea are more desirable than a climate in which people feel personally judged for their ideas.

                 INTERPERSONAL CONFLICT

Interpersonal conflict emerges from conflict between individual members of the group. Whereas procedural
conflict deals with how and substantive conflict deals with what, interpersonal conflict deals with who. Such
conflict can be completely irrelevant to the functioning or purpose of the group, perhaps focusing instead on
personality differences. Interpersonal conflict can be the result of avoided or improperly handled procedural
or substantive conflict that festers and becomes personal rather than task focused. This type of conflict can
also result from differences in beliefs, attitudes, and values (when such differences are taken personally
rather than substantively); different personalities; or different communication styles. While procedural and
substantive conflict may be more easily expressed because they do not directly address a person, interpersonal
conflict may slowly build as people avoid openly criticizing or confronting others. Passive-aggressive behavior
is a sign that interpersonal conflict may be building under the surface, and other group members may want
to intervene to avoid escalation and retaliation. Leaders can also meet with people involved in interpersonal
conflict privately to help them engage in perception checking and act as mediators, if needed. While people
who initiate procedural or substantive conflict may be perceived by other group members as concerned about
the group's welfare and seen as competent in their ability to notice areas on which the group could improve,
people who initiate interpersonal conflict are often held in ill-regard by other group members (Ellis & Fisher,
1994).

           PRIMARY AND SECONDARY TENSIONS

Relevant to these types of conflict are primary and secondary tensions that emerge in every group (Bormann &
Borman, 1988). When the group first comes together, members experience primary tension, which is tension
based on uncertainty that is a natural part of initial interactions. It is only after group members begin to
"break the ice" and get to know each other that the tension can be addressed and group members can proceed
with the forming stage of group development. Small talk and politeness help group members manage primary
tensions, and there is a relatively high threshold for these conflicts because we have all had experiences

525 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
with such uncertainty when meeting people for the first time and many of us are optimistic that a little
time and effort will allow us to get through the tensions. Since some people are more comfortable initiating
conversation than others, it's important for more extroverted group members to include less talkative
members. Intentionally or unintentionally excluding people during the negotiation of primary tensions can
lead to unexpected secondary tensions later on. During this stage people are also less direct in their
communication, using more hedges and vague language than they will later in the group process. The indirect
communication and small talk that characterize this part of group development aren't a waste of time, as
they help manage primary tensions and lay the foundation for future interactions that may involve more
substantive conflict.

   Secondary tension emerges after groups have passed the forming stage of group development and begin
to have conflict over member roles, differing ideas, and personality conflicts. These tensions are typically
evidenced by less reserved and less polite behavior than primary tensions. People also have a lower tolerance
threshold for secondary tensions, because rather than being an expected part of initial interaction, these
conflicts can be more negative and interfere with the group's task performance. Secondary tensions are
inevitable and shouldn't be feared or eliminated. It's not the presence or absence of secondary tension that
makes a group successful or not; it's how it handles the tensions when they emerge. A certain level of secondary
tension is tolerable, not distracting, and can actually enhance group performance and avoid groupthink.
When secondary tensions rise above the tolerance threshold and become distracting, they should be released
through direct means such as diplomatic confrontation or indirect means such as appropriate humor or
taking a break. While primary tensions eventually disappear (at least until a new member arrives), secondary
tensions will come and go and may persist for longer periods of time. For that reason, we will now turn to a
discussion of how to manage conflict in group interaction.

          MANAGING CONFLICT IN SMALL GROUPS

Some common ways to manage conflict include clear decision-making procedures, third-party mediation, and
leader facilitation (Ellis & Fisher, 1994).Commonly used methods for decision making such as majority vote
can help or hurt conflict management efforts. While an up-and-down vote can allow a group to finalize a
decision and move on, members whose vote fell on the minority side may feel resentment toward other group
members. This can create a win/lose climate that leads to further conflict. Having a leader who makes ultimate
decisions can also help move a group toward completion of a task, but conflict may only be pushed to the
side and left not fully addressed. Third-party mediation can help move a group past a conflict and may create
less feelings of animosity, since the person mediating and perhaps making a decision isn't a member of the
group. In some cases, the leader can act as an internal third-party mediator to help other group members work
productively through their conflict.

   Tips for Managing Group Conflict (Ellis & Fisher, 1994)

    1. Clarify the issue at hand by getting to the historical roots of the problem. Keep in mind that
         perception leads us to punctuate interactions differently, so it may be useful to know each person's

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 526
         perspective of when, how, and why the conflict began.
    2. Create a positive discussion climate by encouraging and rewarding active listening.
    3. Discuss needs rather than solutions. Determine each person's needs to be met and goals for the

         outcome of the conflict before offering or acting on potential solutions.
    4. Set boundaries for discussion and engage in gatekeeping to prevent unproductive interactions like

         tangents and personal attacks.
    5. Use "we" language to maintain existing group cohesion and identity, and use "I" language to help

         reduce defensiveness.

    ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF CONFLICT

Remember that a complete lack of conflict in a group is a bad sign, as it indicates either a lack of activity or
a lack of commitment on the part of the members (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Conflict, when properly handled, can
lead a group to have a better understanding of the issues they face. For example, substantive conflict brings
voice to alternative perspectives that may not have been heard otherwise. Additionally, when people view
conflict as healthy, necessary, and productive, they can enter into a conflict episode with an open mind and an
aim to learn something. This is especially true when those who initiate substantive conflict are able to share
and defend their views in a competent and civil manner. Group cohesion can also increase as a result of well-
managed conflict. Occasional experiences of tension and unrest followed by resolutions makes groups feel like
they have accomplished something, which can lead them to not dread conflict and give them the confidence to
more productively deal with it the next time.

   Conflict that goes on for too long or is poorly handled can lead to decreased cohesiveness. Group members
who try to avoid a conflict can still feel anger or frustration when the conflict drags on. Members who
consistently take task-oriented conflict personally and escalate procedural or substantive conflict to
interpersonal conflict are especially unpopular with other group members. Mishandled or chronic conflict can
eventually lead to the destruction of a group or to a loss in members as people weigh the costs and rewards
of membership (Ellis & Fisher, 1994). Hopefully a skilled leader or other group members can take on conflict
resolution roles in order to prevent these disadvantages of conflict.

                                             References

Ahuja, M. K. and John E. Galvin, "Socialization in Virtual Groups," Journal of Management 29, no. 2 (2003): 163.
   Bormann, E. G. "Symbolic Convergence Theory: A Communication Formulation," Journal of Communication,

35, no. 4 (1985): 128-38.
   Bormann, E. G., and Nancy C. Borman, Effective Small Group Communication, 4th ed. (Santa Rosa, CA: Burgess

Publishing, 1988), 72.

527 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Campo, S., Gretchen Poulos, and John W. Sipple, "Prevalence and Profiling: Hazing among College Students
and Points of Intervention," American Journal of Health Behavior 29, no. 2 (2005): 138.

   Cimino, A., "The Evolution of Hazing: Motivational Mechanisms and the Abuse of Newcomers," Journal of
Cognition and Culture 11, no. 3-4 (2011): 235.

   Daniel, L. J., and Charles R. Davis, "What Makes High-Performance Teams Excel?" Research Technology
Management 52, no. 4 (2009): 40-41.

   du Chatenier, E., Jos A. A. M. Verstegen, Harm J. A. Biemans, Martin Mulder, and Onno S. W. F. Omta,
"Identification of Competencies in Open Innovation Teams," Research and Development Management 40, no. 3
(2010): 271.

   Ellis, D. G., and B. Aubrey Fisher, Small Group Decision Making: Communication and the Group Process, 4th ed.
(New York: McGraw-Hill, 1994), 133.

   Fujishin, R., Creating Effective Groups: The Art of Small Group Communication (San Francisco, CA: Acada Books,
2001): 160-61.

   Griffin, E., A First Look at Communication Theory, 7th ed. (Boston, MA: McGraw-Hill, 2009), 28.
   Hargie, O., Skilled Interpersonal Interaction: Research, Theory, and Practice, 5th ed. (London: Routledge, 2011),
445.
   Jain, A. K., Jon M. Thompson, Joseph Chaudry, Shaun McKenzie, and Richard W. Schwartz, "High-
Performance Teams for Current and Future Physician Leaders: An Introduction," Journal of Surgical Education
65 (2008): 145.
   Janis, I. L., Victims of Groupthink: A Psychological Study of Foreign-Policy Decisions and Fiascos (New York:
Houghton Mifflin, 1972).
   Marston, P. J. and Michael L. Hecht, "Group Satisfaction," in Small Group Communication, 5th ed., eds. Robert
Cathcart and Larry Samovar (Dubuque, IA: Brown, 1988), 236-46.
   Richardson, B. K., Zuoming Wang, and Camille A. Hall, "Blowing the Whistle against Greek Hazing: The
Theory of Reasoned Action as a Framework for Reporting Intentions," Communication Studies 63, no. 2 (2012):
173.
   Solansky, S. T., "Team Identification: A Determining Factor of Performance," Journal of Managerial Psychology
26, no. 3 (2011): 250.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 528
                    15.5 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. Think back to a recent time when you have had to problem-solve or perform a task in a small group. What went
                 well for your group? What did not go well for your group? How can you use this knowledge to make your small
                 group speech as smooth as possible?

            2. Which type of small group from Section 15.2: Understanding Small Groups best describes your group for the small
                 group speech?

            3. How can your group use the knowledge of small group development (forming, storming, norming, performing,
                 adjourning) to better understand and improve your group communication?

            4. Think back to previous groups again and discuss your experience regarding group climate and socialization? Can
                 you think of specific types of communication that created a positive group climate? How might you use this
                 knowledge to encourage positive group socialization prior to your small group speech?

                                                   Activities

            1. Small groups work to create a group contract that includes the following information:
                     How will you ensure that each group member has mutual concern for the topic?
                     How will you divide the small group speech to ensure task cohesion? Equitable division of responsibilities?
                     How will you all communicate with each other to ensure group cohesion?
                     How will you ensure group members respond/reply in a timely manner? Provide the minimum number of sources?
                     How will you handle the three types of group conflict?
                     Finally, list important dates (meeting times), specific project requirements, and member responsibilities before signing
                        the contract.

            2. With your assigned small group members, create a word tree with "small group work" as the root word. Assign
                 one group member to be the notetaker and to identify key words from the comments of all group members
                 (including the notetaker). These key words should be added to the tree. The branches of the tree could include
                 concepts such as: (1) some of the advantages of working with a small group; (2) some of the disadvantages of

529 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
    working with a small group; (3) the role of group cohesion; (4) the impact of groupthink; and (5) any other topics
    that are important to your group. As you conclude this exercise together, talk about how past experiences of group
    members can benefit the upcoming small group speech project.
3. With your assigned small group members, organize a series of emojis to represent a movie, book, television show,
    or song. Be creative and make your solution challenging. Submit your "emoji illustration," (or "emoji quiz") to a
    Canvas Dropbox. As your instructor shares each group's emoji sequence, work together to interpret each group's
    solution as quickly as possible. The first group to correctly decipher all the "emoji illustrations" wins.
4. As a newly formed problem-solving group, create a list of 10 criteria that make for an amazing group/team
    member. Which one is most/least important? Why did you select these criteria? Present your list to the class.
5. With your assigned small group members, your instructor will hand out the list of photos required to win the
    photo scavenger hunt. Groups must stay together and every member must be present in the pictures. You can take
    a group selfie or you can ask someone from outside the group to take it. The group that gets back to the classroom
    with the most photos from the list in the required time frame wins. Group members will then write about the
    group member roles and assign one to each member of the group based on their communication during the
    exercise.

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 530
 Chapter 16: Small Groups & Decision Making

                                                        Learning Objectives

     Discuss the various perspectives on how and why people become leaders.
     Compare and contrast various leadership styles.
     Discuss the types of power a leader may use.
     Identify and discuss task-related group roles and behaviors; maintenance group roles and behaviors; and negative group

        roles and behaviors.
     Discuss the common components and characteristics of problems.
     Explain the five steps of the group problem-solving process.
     Describe the brainstorming and discussion that should take place before the group makes a decision.
     Compare and contrast the different decision-making techniques.
     Discuss the various influences on decision making.

                                                              Key Terms

     Achievement-Oriented Leaders
     Coercive Power
     Consensus Rule
     Designated Leaders
     Directive Leaders
     Emergent Leaders
     Expediter
     Expert Power
     Gatekeeper
     Harmonizer
     Information Power
     Information Provider
     Information Seeker

531 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 Interpreter
 Leader
 Leadership
 Legitimate Power
 Majority Rule
 Minority Rule
 Nominal Group Technique
 Participative Leaders
 Problem Question
 Problem Statement
 Recorder
 Referent Power
 Reward Power
 Self-Centered Roles
 Supporter
 Supportive Leaders
 Tension Releaser
 Unproductive Roles

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 532
   16.1 Leadership, Roles, and Problem Solving in
                         Groups

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1771#audio-1771-1

533 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                  "A single leaf working alone provides no shade." -Chuck Page

What makes a good leader? What are some positive and negative roles that people play in groups? How do
groups solve problems and make decisions in order to accomplish their task? This chapter will begin to answer
those questions, because leadership and group member roles influence the performance of small groups.
Whether you consider yourself a leader or not, all members of a group can perform leadership functions, and
being familiar with these behaviors can improve your group's performance. Likewise, knowing the various
roles that typically emerge in a group can help you better understand a group's dynamics and hopefully
improve your overall group experience.

   When Pistol Pete initially found himself facing unresponsiveness from his group members for the speech
class project, he was disappointed but not disheartened. Drawing upon his role as the spirited and resourceful
mascot of Oklahoma State University, he stepped up, demonstrating effective leadership skills that soon
propelled him into the role of the group's leader.

   Pete began by setting a clear direction for the project, presenting a tentative plan and outlining potential
topics. His initiative served as a starting point, providing a framework for the group's discussions and actions.

   Understanding the importance of open communication, he established multiple channels for discussion,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 534
from group meetings to a shared document where everyone could contribute ideas at their own pace. This
ensured that every member had an opportunity to express their thoughts and ideas.

   However, Pete knew that a group wasn't just about the leader but about every individual member. He
made it a point to involve every group member, assigning roles and responsibilities based on their strengths
and interests. He also encouraged each member to contribute to the shared document, fostering a sense of
ownership and involvement.

   To ensure everyone stayed on track, Pete set up regular check-ins where they could discuss their progress,
address any issues, and adjust their plan if needed. He was always available to provide help and support,
maintaining an open and positive communication environment.

   But Pete also understood that encouragement and motivation were as important as clear roles and regular
communication. He made sure to recognize each member's contributions, highlighting their good work and
progress during meetings. This not only boosted their morale but also reinforced the importance of their roles
and responsibilities in the project.

   Under Pistol Pete's leadership, the group began to show signs of progress. The once-empty shared
document started to fill with ideas, discussions became more active and productive, and the project began to
take shape.

   Despite the initial hurdles, Pistol Pete's effective leadership had steered the group towards cooperation and
productivity. His ability to lead, motivate, and involve each member had transformed the group's dynamic,
setting them on a path to not just complete their project, but to do it well, embodying the Cowboy spirit of
resilience, collaboration, and excellence. How would you have handled a group experience like this one? Would
you do it differently than Pete did?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

535 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
 16.2 Leadership and Small Group Communication

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1777#audio-1777-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1777#audio-1777-2

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 536
537 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Leadership is one of the most studied aspects of group communication. Scholars in business,
communication, psychology, and many other fields have written extensively about the qualities of leaders,
theories of leadership, and how to build leadership skills. It's important to point out that although a group may
have only one official leader, other group members play important leadership roles. Making this distinction
also helps us differentiate between leaders and leadership (Hargie, 2011). The leader is a group role that is
associated with a high-status position and may be formally or informally recognized by group members.
Leadership is a complex of beliefs, communication patterns, and behaviors that influence the functioning of
a group and move a group toward the completion of its task. A person in the role of leader may provide no or
poor leadership. Likewise, a person who is not recognized as a "leader" in title can provide excellent leadership.
In the remainder of this section, we will discuss some approaches to the study of leadership, leadership styles,
and leadership and group dynamics.

         WHY AND HOW PEOPLE BECOME LEADERS

Throughout human history, some people have grown into, taken, or been given positions as leaders. Many
early leaders were believed to be divine in some way. In some indigenous cultures, shamans are considered
leaders because they are believed to be bridges that can connect the spiritual and physical realms. Many early
kings, queens, and military leaders were said to be approved by a god to lead the people. Today, many leaders
are elected or appointed to positions of power, but most of them have already accumulated much experience
in leadership roles. Some leaders are well respected, some are feared, some are hated, and many elicit some
combination of these reactions. This brief overview illustrates the centrality of leadership throughout human
history, but it wasn't until the last hundred years that leadership became an object of systematic study.

   Before we move onto specific approaches to studying leadership, let's distinguish between designated and
emergent leaders. In general, some people gravitate more toward leadership roles than others, and some
leaders are designated while other are emergent (Hargie, 2011). Designated leaders are officially recognized
in their leadership role and may be appointed or elected by people inside or outside the group. Designated
leaders can be especially successful when they are sought out by others to fulfill and are then accepted in
leadership roles. On the other hand, some people seek out leadership positions not because they possess
leadership skills and have been successful leaders in the past but because they have a drive to hold and wield
power. Many groups are initially leaderless and must either designate a leader or wait for one to emerge
organically. Emergent leaders gain status and respect through engagement with the group and its task and
are turned to by others as a resource when leadership is needed. Emergent leaders may play an important role
when a designated leader unexpectedly leaves. We will now turn our attention to three common perspectives
on why some people are more likely to be designated leaders than others and how leaders emerge in the
absence of or in addition to a designated leader.

  Leaders Emerge Because of Their Traits

The trait approach to studying leadership distinguishes leaders from followers based on traits, or personal

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 538
characteristics (Pavitt, 1999). Some traits that leaders, in general, share are related to physical appearance,
communication ability, intelligence, and personality (Cragan & Wright, 1991). In terms of physical appearance,
designated leaders tend to be taller and more attractive than other group members. This could be because
we consciously and/or subconsciously associate a larger size (in terms of height and build, but not body
fat) with strength and strength with good leadership. As far as communication abilities, leaders speak more
fluently, have a more confident tone, and communicate more often than other group members. Leaders
are also moderately more intelligent than other group members, which is attractive because leaders need
good problem-solving skills. Interestingly, group members are not as likely to designate or recognize an
emergent leader that they perceive to be exceedingly more intelligent than them. Last, leaders are usually
more extroverted, assertive, and persistent than other group members. These personality traits help get these
group members noticed by others, and expressivity is often seen as attractive and as a sign of communication
competence.

   The trait approach to studying leaders has provided some useful information regarding how people view
ideal leaders, but it has not provided much insight into why some people become and are more successful
leaders than others. The list of ideal traits is not final, because excellent leaders can have few, if any, of these
traits and poor leaders can possess many. Additionally, these traits are difficult to change or control without
much time and effort. Because these traits are enduring, there isn't much room for people to learn and develop
leadership skills, which makes this approach less desirable for communication scholars who view leadership
as a communication competence. Rather than viewing these traits as a guide for what to look for when
choosing your next leader, view them as traits that are made meaningful through context and communication
behaviors.

LEADERS EMERGE BECAUSE OF THE SITUATION

The emergent approach to studying leadership considers how leaders emerge in groups that are initially
leaderless and how situational contexts affect this process (Pavitt, 1999). The situational context that
surrounds a group influences what type of leader is best. Situations may be highly structured, highly
unstructured, or anywhere in between (Cragan & Wright, 1991). Research has found that leaders with a high
task orientation are likely to emerge in both highly structured contexts like a group that works to maintain a
completely automated factory unit and highly unstructured contexts like a group that is responding to a crisis.
Relational-oriented leaders are more likely to emerge in semistructured contexts that are less formal and in
groups composed of people who have specific knowledge and are therefore be trusted to do much of their work
independently (Fiedler, 1967). For example, a group of local business owners who form a group for professional
networking would likely prefer a leader with a relational-oriented style, since these group members are likely
already leaders in their own right and therefore might resent a person who takes a rigid task-oriented style
over a more collegial style.

   Leaders emerge differently in different groups, but there are two stages common to each scenario (Bormann
& Bormann, 1988). The first stage only covers a brief period, perhaps no longer than a portion of one meeting.
During this first stage, about half of the group's members are eliminated from the possibility of being the

539 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
group's leader. Remember that this is an informal and implicit process--not like people being picked for a
kickball team or intentionally vetted. But there are some communicative behaviors that influence who makes
the cut to the next stage of informal leader consideration. People will likely be eliminated as leader candidates
if they do not actively contribute to initial group interactions, if they contribute but communicate poorly, if
they contribute but appear too rigid or inflexible in their beliefs, or if they seem uninformed about the task of
the group.

   The second stage of leader emergence is where a more or less pronounced struggle for leadership begins. In
one scenario, a leader candidate picks up an ally in the group who acts as a supporter or lieutenant, reinforcing
the ideas and contributions of the candidate. If there are no other leader candidates or the others fail to pick up
a supporter, the candidate with the supporter will likely become the leader. In a second scenario, there are two
leader candidates who both pick up supporters and who are both qualified leaders. This leads to a more intense
and potentially prolonged struggle that can actually be uncomfortable for other group members. Although the
two leader candidates don't overtly fight with each other or say, "I should be leader, not you!" they both take
strong stances in regards to the group's purpose and try to influence the structure, procedures, and trajectory
for the group. Group members not involved in this struggle may not know who to listen to, which can lead to
low task and social cohesion and may cause a group to fail. In some cases, one candidate-supporter team will
retreat, leaving a clear leader to step up. But the candidate who retreated will still enjoy a relatively high status
in the group and be respected for vying for leadership. The second-place candidate may become a nuisance for
the new emergent leader, questioning his or her decisions. Rather than excluding or punishing the second-
place candidate, the new leader should give him or her responsibilities within the group to make use of the
group member's respected status.

LEADERS EMERGE BASED ON COMMUNICATION SKILL
AND COMPETENCE

This final approach to the study of leadership is considered a functional approach, because it focuses on how
particular communication behaviors function to create the conditions of leadership. This last approach is the
most useful for communication scholars and for people who want to improve their leadership skills, because
leadership behaviors (which are learnable and adaptable) rather than traits or situations (which are often
beyond our control) are the primary focus of study. As we've already learned, any group member can exhibit
leadership behaviors, not just a designated or emergent leader. Therefore leadership behaviors are important
for all of us to understand even if we don't anticipate serving in leadership positions (Cragan & Wright, 1991).

   The communication behaviors that facilitate effective leadership encompass three main areas of group
communication including task, procedural, and relational functions. Although any group member can
perform leadership behaviors, groups usually have patterns of and expectations for behaviors once they get to
the norming and performing stages of group development. Many groups only meet one or two times, and in
these cases it is likely that a designated leader will perform many of the functions to get the group started and
then step in to facilitate as needed.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 540
   Leadership behaviors that contribute to a group's task-related functions include providing, seeking, and
evaluating information. Leaders may want to be cautious about contributing ideas before soliciting ideas
from group members, since the leader's contribution may sway or influence others in the group, therefore
diminishing the importance of varying perspectives. Likewise a leader may want to solicit evaluation of ideas
from members before providing his or her own judgment. In group situations where creativity is needed
to generate ideas or solutions to a problem, the task leader may be wise to facilitate brainstorming and
discussion.

   This can allow the leader to keep his or her eye on the "big picture" and challenge group members to make
their ideas more concrete or discuss their implications beyond the group without adding his or her own
opinion. To review, some of the key leadership behaviors that contribute to the task-related functions of a
group include the following (Cragan & Wright, 1991):

   Contributing ideas

   Seeking ideas

   Evaluating ideas

   Seeking idea evaluation

   Visualizing abstract ideas

   Generalizing from specific ideas

Leadership behaviors that contribute to a group's procedural-related functions help guide the group as it
proceeds from idea generation to implementation. Some leaders are better at facilitating and managing ideas
than they are at managing the administrative functions of a group. So while a group leader may help establish
the goals of the group and set the agenda, another group member with more experience in group operations
may step in to periodically revisit and assess progress toward completion of goals and compare the group's
performance against its agenda. It's also important to check in between idea-generating sessions to clarify,
summarize, and gauge the agreement level of group members. A very skilled and experienced leader may
take primary responsibility for all these behaviors, but it's often beneficial to share them with group members
to avoid becoming overburdened. To review, some of the key leadership behaviors that contribute to the
procedural functions of a group include the following (Cragan & Wright, 1991):

   Goal setting

   Agenda making

   Clarifying

   Summarizing

   Verbalizing consensus

   Generalizing from specific ideas

Leadership behaviors that contribute to a group's relational functions include creating a participative and
inclusive climate, establishing norms of reflection and self-analysis, and managing conflict. By encouraging
participation among group members, a leader can help quell people who try to monopolize discussion and
create an overall climate of openness and equality. Leaders want to make sure that people don't feel personally
judged for their ideas and that criticism remains idea centered, not person centered. A safe and positive
climate typically leads to higher-quality idea generation and decision making. Leaders also encourage group

541 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
members to metacommunicate, or talk about the group's communication. This can help the group identify and
begin to address any interpersonal or communication issues before they escalate and divert the group away
from accomplishing its goal. A group with a well-established participative and inclusive climate will be better
prepared to handle conflict when it emerges. Remember that conflict when handled competently can enhance
group performance. Leaders may even instigate productive conflict by playing devil's advocate or facilitating
civil debate of ideas. To review, some of the key leadership behaviors that contribute to the relational functions
of a group include the following (Cragan & Wright, 1991):

   Regulating participation
   Climate making
   Instigating group self-analysis
   Resolving conflict
   Instigating productive conflict

                      LEADERSHIP STYLES

Given the large amount of research done on leadership, it is not surprising that there are several different
ways to define or categorize leadership styles. In general, effective leaders do not fit solely into one style in any
of the following classifications. Instead, they are able to adapt their leadership style to fit the relational and
situational context (Wood, 1977). One common way to study leadership style is to make a distinction among
autocratic, democratic, and laissez-faire leaders (Lewin, Lippitt, & White, 1939). These leadership styles can be
described as follows:

   Autocratic leaders set policies and make decisions primarily on their own, taking advantage of the
      power present in their title or status to set the agenda for the group.

   Democratic leaders facilitate group discussion and like to take input from all members before making a
      decision.

   Laissez-faire leaders take a "hands-off" approach, preferring to give group members freedom to reach
      and implement their own decisions.

While this is a frequently cited model of leadership styles, we will focus in more detail on a model that was
developed a few years after this one. I choose to focus on this later model because it offers some more specifics
in terms of the communicative elements of each leadership style. The four leadership styles used in this model
are directive, participative, supportive, and achievement oriented (House & Mitchell, 1974).

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 542
DIRECTIVE LEADERS

Directive leaders help provide psychological structure for their group members by clearly communicating
expectations, keeping a schedule and agenda, providing specific guidance as group members work toward
the completion of their task, and taking the lead on setting and communicating group rules and procedures.
Although this is most similar to the autocratic leadership style mentioned before, it is more nuanced and
flexible. The originators of this model note that a leader can be directive without being seen as authoritarian.
To do this, directive leaders must be good motivators who encourage productivity through positive
reinforcement or reward rather than through the threat of punishment.

   A directive leadership style is effective in groups that do not have a history and may require direction to get
started on their task. It can also be the most appropriate method during crisis situations in which decisions
must be made under time constraints or other extraordinary pressures. When groups have an established
history and are composed of people with unique skills and expertise, a directive approach may be seen as
"micromanaging." In these groups, a more participative style may be the best option.

PARTICIPATIVE LEADERS

Participative leaders work to include group members in the decision-making process by soliciting and
considering their opinions and suggestions. When group members feel included, their personal goals are
more likely to align with the group and organization's goals, which can help productivity. This style of
leadership can also aid in group member socialization, as the members feel like they get to help establish
group norms and rules, which affects cohesion and climate. When group members participate more, they
buy into the group's norms and goals more, which can increase conformity pressures for incoming group
members. As we learned earlier, this is good to a point, but it can become negative when the pressures lead to
unethical group member behavior. In addition to consulting group members for help with decision making,
participative leaders also grant group members more freedom to work independently. This can lead group
members to feel trusted and respected for their skills, which can increase their effort and output.

   The participative method of leadership is similar to the democratic style discussed earlier, and it is a
style of leadership practiced in many organizations that have established work groups that meet consistently
over long periods of time. US companies began to adopt a more participative and less directive style of
management in the 1980s after organizational scholars researched teamwork and efficiency in Japanese
corporations. Japanese managers included employees in decision making, which blurred the line between the
leader and other group members and enhanced productivity. These small groups were called quality circles,
because they focused on group interaction intended to improve quality and productivity (Cragan & Wright,
1991).

543 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SUPPORTIVE LEADERS

Supportive leaders show concern for their followers' needs and emotions. They want to support group
members' welfare through a positive and friendly group climate. These leaders are good at reducing the stress
and frustration of the group, which helps create a positive climate and can help increase group members'
positive feelings about the task and other group members. As we will learn later, some group roles function to
maintain the relational climate of the group, and several group members often perform these role behaviors.
With a supportive leader as a model, such behaviors would likely be performed as part of established group
norms, which can do much to enhance social cohesion. Supportive leaders do not provide unconditionally
positive praise. They also competently provide constructive criticism in order to challenge and enhance group
members' contributions.

   A supportive leadership style is more likely in groups that are primarily relational rather than task focused.
For example, support groups and therapy groups benefit from a supportive leader. While maintaining positive
relationships is an important part of any group's functioning, most task-oriented groups need to spend more
time on task than social functions in order to efficiently work toward the completion of their task. Skilled
directive or participative leaders of task-oriented groups would be wise to employ supportive leadership
behaviors when group members experience emotional stress to prevent relational stress from negatively
impacting the group's climate and cohesion.

ACHIEVEMENT-ORIENTED LEADERS

Achievement-oriented leaders strive for excellence and set challenging goals, constantly seeking
improvement and exhibiting confidence that group members can meet their high expectations. These leaders
often engage in systematic social comparison, keeping tabs on other similar high-performing groups to assess
their expectations and the group's progress. This type of leadership is similar to what other scholars call
transformational or visionary leadership and is often associated with leaders like former Apple CEO Steve
Jobs, talk show host and television network CEO Oprah Winfrey, former president Bill Clinton, and business
magnate turned philanthropist Warren Buffett. Achievement-oriented leaders are likely less common than
the other styles, as this style requires a high level of skill and commitment on the part of the leader and the
group. Although rare, these leaders can be found at all levels of groups ranging from local school boards to
Fortune 500 companies. Certain group dynamics must be in place in order to accommodate this leadership
style. Groups for which an achievement-oriented leadership style would be effective are typically intentionally
created and are made up of members who are skilled and competent in regards to the group's task. In many
cases, the leader is specifically chosen because of his or her reputation and expertise, and even though the
group members may not have a history of working with the leader, the members and leader must have a high
degree of mutual respect.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 544
                  LEADERSHIP AND POWER

Leaders help move group members toward the completion of their goal using various motivational strategies.
The types of power leaders draw on to motivate have long been a topic of small group study. A leader may
possess or draw on any of the following five types of power to varying degrees: legitimate, expert, referent,
information, and reward/coercive (French Jr. & Raven, 1959). Effective leaders do not need to possess all five
types of power. Instead, competent leaders know how to draw on other group members who may be better
able to exercise a type of power in a given situation.

LEGITIMATE POWER

The very title of leader brings with it legitimate power, which is power that flows from the officially recognized
position, status, or title of a group member. For example, the leader of the "Social Media Relations
Department" of a retail chain receives legitimate power through the title "director of social media relations." It
is important to note though that being designated as someone with status or a position of power doesn't mean
that the group members respect or recognize that power. Even with a title, leaders must still earn the ability
to provide leadership. Of the five types of power, however, the leader alone is most likely to possess legitimate
power.

EXPERT POWER

Expert power comes from knowledge, skill, or expertise that a group member possesses and other group
members do not. For example, even though all the workers in the Social Media Relations Department have
experience with computers, the information technology (IT) officer has expert power when it comes to
computer networking and programming. Because of this, even though the director may have a higher status,
she or he must defer to the IT officer when the office network crashes. A leader who has legitimate and expert
power may be able to take a central role in setting the group's direction, contributing to problem solving,
and helping the group achieve its goal. In groups with a designated leader who relies primarily on legitimate
power, a member with a significant amount of expert power may emerge as an unofficial secondary leader.
A group mmber with expertise in an area relevant to the group's task may draw on expert power to lead the

545 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
group. For example, a transplant surgeon may lead a team of other doctors and nurses during the surgery
while a critical case nurse may take the lead during postsurgery recovery.

REFERENT POWER

Referent power comes from the attractiveness, likeability, and charisma of the group member. As we learned
earlier, more physically attractive people and more outgoing people are often chosen as leaders. This could be
due to their referent power. Referent power also derives from a person's reputation. A group member may
have referent power if he or she is well respected outside of the group for previous accomplishments or even
because he or she is known as a dependable and capable group member. Like legitimate power, the fact that a
person possesses referent power doesn't mean he or she has the talent, skill, or other characteristic needed to
actually lead the group. A person could just be likable but have no relevant knowledge about the group's task
or leadership experience. Some groups actually desire this type of leader, especially if the person is meant to
attract external attention and serve as more of a "figurehead" than a regularly functioning group member. For
example, a group formed to raise funds for a science and nature museum may choose a former mayor, local
celebrity, or NASA astronaut as their leader because of his or her referent power. In this situation it would

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 546
probably be best for the group to have a secondary leader who attends to task and problem-solving functions
within the group.

INFORMATION POWER

Information power comes from a person's ability to access information that comes through informal channels
and well-established social and professional networks. We have already learned that information networks
are an important part of a group's structure and can affect a group's access to various resources. When a
group member is said to have "know how," they possess information power. The knowledge may not always
be official, but it helps the group solve problems and get things done. Individuals develop information power
through years of interacting with others, making connections, and building and maintaining interpersonal
and instrumental relationships. For example, the group formed to raise funds for the science and nature
museum may need to draw on informal information networks to get leads on potential donors, to get
information about what local science teachers would recommend for exhibits, or to book a band willing to
perform for free at a fundraising concert.

REWARD AND COERCIVE POWER

The final two types of power, reward and coercive, are related. Reward power comes from the ability of a
group member to provide a positive incentive as a compliance-gaining strategy, and coercive power comes
from the ability of a group member to provide a negative incentive. These two types of power can be difficult
for leaders and other group members to manage, because their use can lead to interpersonal conflict. Reward
power can be used by nearly any group member if he or she gives another group member positive feedback
on an idea, an appreciation card for hard work, or a pat on the back. Because of limited resources, many
leaders are frustrated by their inability to give worthwhile tangible rewards to group members such as prizes,
bonuses, or raises. Additionally, the use of reward power may seem corny or paternalistic to some or may
arouse accusations of favoritism or jealousy among group members who don't receive the award.

   Coercive power, since it entails punishment or negative incentive, can lead to interpersonal conflict and a
negative group climate if it is overused or used improperly. While any leader or group member could make
threats to others, leaders with legitimate power are typically in the best position to use coercive power. In
such cases, coercive power may manifest in loss of pay and/or privileges, being excluded from the group,
or being fired (if the group work is job related). In many volunteer groups or groups that lack formal rules

547 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
and procedures, leaders have a more difficult time using coercive power, since they can't issue official
punishments. Instead, coercive power will likely take the form of interpersonal punishments such as ignoring
group members or excluding them from group activities.

                                             References

Bormann, E. G., and Nancy C. Bormann, Effective Small Group Communication, 4th ed. (Santa Rosa, CA: Burgess
CA, 1988), 130-33.

   Cragan, J. F., and David W. Wright, Communication in Small Group Discussions: An Integrated Approach, 3rd ed.
(St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1991), 120.

   Deutschman, A., "Exit the King," The Daily Beast, September 21, 2011, accessed August 23, 2012,
http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2011/08/28/steve-jobs-american-genius.html.

   Fiedler, F. E., A Theory of Leadership Effectiveness (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967).
   French Jr., J. R. P., and Bertram Raven, "The Bases of Social Power," in Studies in Social Power, ed. Dorwin
Cartwright (Ann Arbor, MI: Institute for Social Research, 1959), 150-67.
   Hargie, O., Skilled Interpersonal Interaction: Research, Theory, and Practice (London: Routledge, 2011), 456.
   House, R. J., and Terrence R. Mitchell, "Path-Goal Theory of Leadership," Journal of Contemporary Business 3
(1974): 81-97.
   Lewin, K., Ronald Lippitt, and Ralph K. White, "Patterns of Aggressive Behavior in Experimentally Created
`Social Climates,'" Journal of Social Psychology 10, no. 2 (1939): 269-99.
   Pavitt, C., "Theorizing about the Group Communication-Leadership Relationship," in The Handbook of Group
Communication Theory and Research, ed. Lawrence R. Frey (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1999), 313.
   Wood, J. T., "Leading in Purposive Discussions: A Study of Adaptive Behavior," Communication Monographs
44, no. 2 (1977): 152-65.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 548
              16.3 Group Member Roles

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1784#audio-1784-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1784#audio-1784-2

   Just as leaders have been long studied as a part of group communication research, so too have group

549 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
member roles. Group roles are more dynamic than leadership roles in that a role can be formal or informal
and played by more than one group member. Additionally, one group member may exhibit various role
behaviors within a single group meeting or play a few consistent roles over the course of his or her involvement
with a group. Some people's role behaviors result from their personality traits, while other people act out a
certain role because of a short-term mood, as a reaction to another group member, or out of necessity. Group
communication scholars have cautioned us to not always think of these roles as neatly bounded all-inclusive
categories. After all, we all play multiple roles within a group and must draw on multiple communication
behaviors in order to successfully play them. When someone continually exhibits a particular behavior, it may
be labeled as a role, but even isolated behaviors can impact group functioning. In this section, we will discuss
the three categories of common group roles that were identified by early group communication scholars.
These role categories include task-related roles, maintenance roles, and individual roles that are self-centered
or unproductive for the group (Benne & Sheats, 1948).

           TASK-RELATED ROLES AND BEHAVIORS

Task roles and their related behaviors contribute directly to the group's completion of a task or achievement
of its goal or purpose. Task-related roles typically serve leadership, informational, or procedural functions. In
this section we will discuss the following roles and behaviors: task leader, expediter, information provider,
information seeker, gatekeeper, and recorder.

TASK LEADER

Within any group, there may be a task leader who has a high group status because of his or her maturity,
problem-solving abilities, knowledge, and/or leadership experience and skills and functions primarily to help
the group complete its task (Cragan & Wright, 1991). This person may be a designated or emergent leader,
but in either case, task leaders tend to talk more during group interactions than other group members and
also tend to do more work in the group. Depending on the number of tasks a group has, there may be more
than one task leader, especially if the tasks require different sets of skills or knowledge. Because of the added
responsibilities of being a task leader, people in these roles may experience higher levels of stress. A task
leader's stresses, however, may be lessened through some of the maintenance role behaviors that we will
discuss later.

   Task-leader behaviors can be further divided into two types: substantive and procedural (Pavitt, 1999). The

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 550
substantive leader is the "idea person" who communicates "big picture" thoughts and suggestions that feed
group discussion. The procedural leader is the person who gives the most guidance, perhaps following up on
the ideas generated by the substantive leader. A skilled and experienced task leader may be able to perform
both of these roles, but when the roles are filled by two different people, the person considered the procedural
leader is more likely than the substantive leader to be viewed by members as the overall group leader. This
indicates that task-focused groups assign more status to the person who actually guides the group toward the
completion of the task (a "doer") than the person who comes up with ideas (the "thinker").

EXPEDITER

The expediter is a task-related role that functions to keep the group on track toward completing its task by
managing the agenda and setting and assessing goals in order to monitor the group's progress. An expediter
doesn't push group members mindlessly along toward the completion of their task; an expediter must have a
good sense of when a topic has been sufficiently discussed or when a group's extended focus on one area has
led to diminishing returns. In such cases, the expediter may say, "Now that we've had a thorough discussion
of the pros and cons of switching the office from PCs to Macs, which side do you think has more support?" or
"We've spent half of this meeting looking for examples of what other libraries have done and haven't found
anything useful. Maybe we should switch gears so we can get something concrete done tonight."

551 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   If you've ever worked in a restaurant, you're probably familiar with an expediter's role in the kitchen. The
person working "expo" helps make sure that the timing on all the dishes for a meal works out and that each
plate is correct before it goes out to the table. This is by no means an easy job, since some entres cook quicker
than others and not everyone orders their burger the same way. So the expediter helps make order out of
chaos by calling the food out to the kitchen in a particular order that logically works so that all the food will
come up at the same time. Once the food is up, he or she also checks what's on the plate against what's on the
ticket to make sure it matches. Expediting in a restaurant and in a small group is like a dance that requires
some flexible and creative thinking and an ability to stick to a time frame and assess progress. To avoid the
perception that group members are being rushed, a skilled expediter can demonstrate good active-listening
skills by paraphrasing what has been discussed and summarizing what has been accomplished in such a way
that makes it easier for group members to see the need to move on.

INFORMATION PROVIDER

The role of information provider includes behaviors that are more evenly shared than in other roles, as ideally,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 552
all group members present new ideas, initiate discussions of new topics, and contribute their own relevant
knowledge and experiences. When group members are brought together because they each have different
types of information, early group meetings may consist of group members taking turns briefing each other
on their area of expertise. In other situations, only one person in the group may be chosen because of his
or her specialized knowledge and this person may be expected to be the primary information provider for
all other group members. For example, I was asked to serve on a university committee that is reviewing our
undergraduate learning goals. Since my official role is to serve as the "faculty expert" on the subcommittee
related to speaking, I played a more central information-provider function for our group during most of our
initial meetings. Since other people on the subcommittee weren't as familiar with speaking and its place
within higher education curriculum, it made sense that information-providing behaviors were not as evenly
distributed in this case.

INFORMATION SEEKER

The information seeker asks for more information, elaboration, or clarification on items relevant to the
group's task. The information sought may include factual information or group member opinions. In general,
information seekers ask questions for clarification, but they can also ask questions that help provide an
important evaluative function. Most groups could benefit from more critically oriented information-seeking
behaviors. As our discussion of groupthink notes, critical questioning helps increase the quality of ideas and
group outcomes and helps avoid groupthink. By asking for more information, people have to defend (in a
nonadversarial way) and/or support their claims, which can help ensure that the information being discussed
is credible, relevant, and thoroughly considered. When information seeking or questioning occurs as a result
of poor listening skills, it risks negatively impacting the group. Skilled information providers and seekers
are also good active listeners. They increase all group members' knowledge when they paraphrase and ask
clarifying questions about the information presented.

553 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
GATEKEEPER

The gatekeeper manages the flow of conversation in a group in order to achieve an appropriate balance
so that all group members get to participate in a meaningful way. The gatekeeper may prompt others to
provide information by saying something like "Let's each share one idea we have for a movie to show during
Black History Month." He or she may also help correct an imbalance between members who have provided
much information already and members who have been quiet by saying something like "Aretha, we've heard
a lot from you today. Let's hear from someone else. Beau, what are your thoughts on Aretha's suggestion?"
Gatekeepers should be cautious about "calling people out" or at least making them feel that way. Instead
of scolding someone for not participating, they should be invitational and ask a member to contribute to
something specific instead of just asking if they have anything to add. Since gatekeepers make group members
feel included, they also service the relational aspects of the group.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 554
RECORDER

The recorder takes notes on the discussion and activities that occur during a group meeting. The recorder is
the only role that is essentially limited to one person at a time since in most cases it wouldn't be necessary or
beneficial to have more than one person recording. At less formal meetings there may be no recorder, while
at formal meetings there is almost always a person who records meeting minutes, which are an overview of
what occurred at the meeting. Each committee will have different rules or norms regarding the level of detail
within and availability of the minutes. While some group's minutes are required by law to be public, others
may be strictly confidential. Even though a record of a group meeting may be valuable, the role of recorder is
often regarded as a low-status position, since the person in the role may feel or be viewed as subservient to the
other members who are able to more actively contribute to the group's functioning. Because of this, it may be
desirable to have the role of recorder rotate among members (Cragan & Wright, 1991).

555 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
          MAINTENANCE ROLES AND BEHAVIORS

Maintenance roles and their corresponding behaviors function to create and maintain social cohesion and
fulfill the interpersonal needs of group members. All these role behaviors require strong and sensitive
interpersonal skills. The maintenance roles we will discuss in this section include social-emotional leader,
supporter, tension releaser, harmonizer, and interpreter.

SOCIAL-EMOTIONAL LEADER

The social-emotional leader within a group may perform a variety of maintenance roles and is generally
someone who is well liked by the other group members and whose role behaviors complement but don't
compete with the task leader. The social-emotional leader may also reassure and support the task leader
when he or she becomes stressed. In general, the social-emotional leader is a reflective thinker who has
good perception skills that he or she uses to analyze the group dynamics and climate and then initiate the
appropriate role behaviors to maintain a positive climate. Unlike the role of task leader, this isn't a role that
typically shifts from one person to another. While all members of the group perform some maintenance
role behaviors at various times, the socioemotional leader reliably functions to support group members and
maintain a positive relational climate. Social-emotional leadership functions can actually become detrimental
to the group and lead to less satisfaction among members when the maintenance behaviors being performed
are seen as redundant or as too distracting from the task (Pavitt, 1999).

SUPPORTER

The role of supporter is characterized by communication behaviors that encourage other group members and
provide emotional support as needed. The supporter's work primarily occurs in one-on-one exchanges that
are more intimate and in-depth than the exchanges that take place during full group meetings. While many
group members may make supporting comments publicly at group meetings, these comments are typically
superficial and/or brief. A supporter uses active empathetic listening skills to connect with group members
who may seem down or frustrated by saying something like "Tayesha, you seemed kind of down today. Is there
anything you'd like to talk about?" Supporters also follow up on previous conversations with group members
to maintain the connections they've already established by saying things like "Alan, I remember you said your

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 556
mom is having surgery this weekend. I hope it goes well. Let me know if you need anything." The supporter's
communication behaviors are probably the least noticeable of any of the other maintenance roles, which may
make this group member's efforts seem overlooked. Leaders and other group members can help support the
supporter by acknowledging his or her contributions.

TENSION RELEASER

The tension releaser is someone who is naturally funny and sensitive to the personalities of the group and
the dynamics of any given situation and who uses these qualities to manage the frustration level of the
group. Being funny is not enough to fulfill this role, as jokes or comments could indeed be humorous to
other group members but be delivered at an inopportune time, which ultimately creates rather than releases
tension. The healthy use of humor by the tension releaser performs the same maintenance function as the
empathy employed by the harmonizer or the social-emotional leader, but it is less intimate and is typically
directed toward the whole group instead of just one person. The tension releaser may start serving his or her
function during the forming stage of group development when primary tensions are present due to the typical
uncertainties present during initial interactions. The tension releaser may help "break the ice" or make others
feel at ease during the group's more socially awkward first meetings. When people make a failed attempt to
release tension, they may be viewed as a joker, which is a self-centered role we will learn more about later.

HARMONIZER

The harmonizer role is played by group members who help manage the various types of group conflict that
emerge during group communication. They keep their eyes and ears open for signs of conflict among group
members and ideally intervene before it escalates. For example, the harmonizer may sense that one group
member's critique of another member's idea wasn't received positively, and he or she may be able to rephrase
the critique in a more constructive way, which can help diminish the other group member's defensiveness.
Harmonizers also deescalate conflict once it has already started--for example, by suggesting that the group
take a break and then mediating between group members in a side conversation. These actions can help
prevent conflict from spilling over into other group interactions. In cases where the whole group experiences
conflict, the harmonizer may help lead the group in perception-checking discussions that help members see
an issue from multiple perspectives. For a harmonizer to be effective, it's important that he or she be viewed
as impartial and committed to the group as a whole rather than to one side of an issue or one person or faction

557 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
within the larger group. A special kind of harmonizer that helps manage cultural differences within the group
is the interpreter.

INTERPRETER

An interpreter helps manage the diversity within a group by mediating intercultural conflict, articulating
common ground between different people, and generally creating a climate where difference is seen as an
opportunity rather than as something to be feared. Just as an interpreter at the United Nations acts as
a bridge between two different languages, the interpreter can bridge identity differences between group
members. Interpreters can help perform the other maintenance roles discussed with a special awareness of
and sensitivity toward cultural differences. While a literal interpreter would serve a task-related function
within a group, this type of interpreter may help support a person who feels left out of the group because he
or she has a different cultural identity than the majority of the group. Interpreters often act as allies to people
who are different even though the interpreter doesn't share the specific cultural identity. The interpreter may
help manage conflict that arises as a result of diversity, in this case, acting like an ambassador or mediator.
Interpreters, because of their cultural sensitivity, may also take a proactive role to help address conflict
before it emerges--for example, by taking a group member aside and explaining why his or her behavior or
comments may be perceived as offensive.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 558
             NEGATIVE ROLES AND BEHAVIORS

Group communication scholars began exploring the negative side of group member roles more than sixty
years ago (Benne & Sheats, 1948). Studying these negative roles can help us analyze group interactions and
potentially better understand why some groups are more successful than others. It's important to
acknowledge that we all perform some negative behaviors within groups but that those behaviors do not
necessarily constitute a role. A person may temporarily monopolize a discussion to bring attention to his
or her idea. If that behavior gets the attention of the group members and makes them realize they were
misinformed or headed in a negative direction, then that behavior may have been warranted. Negative
behaviors can be enacted with varying degrees of intensity and regularity, and their effects may range from
mild annoyance to group failure. In general, the effects grow increasingly negative as they increase in intensity
and frequency. While a single enactment of a negative role behavior may still harm the group, regular
enactment of such behaviors would constitute a role, and playing that role is guaranteed to negatively impact
the group. We will divide our discussion of negative roles into self-centered and unproductive roles.

559 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SELF-CENTERED ROLES

The behaviors associated with all the self-centered roles divert attention from the task to the group member
exhibiting the behavior. Although all these roles share in their quest to divert attention, they do it in different
ways and for different reasons. The self-centered roles we will discuss are the central negative, monopolizer,
self-confessor, insecure compliment seeker, and joker (Cragan & Wright, 1991).

CENTRAL NEGATIVE

The central negative argues against most of the ideas and proposals discussed in the group and often emerges
as a result of a leadership challenge during group formation. The failed attempt to lead the group can lead to
feelings of resentment toward the leader and/or the purpose of the group, which then manifest in negative
behaviors that delay, divert, or block the group's progress toward achieving its goal. This scenario is
unfortunate because the central negative is typically a motivated and intelligent group member who can
benefit the group if properly handled by the group leader or other members. Group communication scholars
suggest that the group leader or leaders actively incorporate central negatives into group tasks and
responsibilities to make them feel valued and to help diminish any residual anger, disappointment, or hurt
feelings from the leadership conflict (Bormann & Bormann, 1988). Otherwise the central negative will
continue to argue against the proposals and decisions of the group, even when they may be in agreement. In
some cases, the central negative may unintentionally serve a beneficial function if his or her criticisms prevent
groupthink.

MONOPOLIZER

The monopolizer is a group member who makes excessive verbal contributions, preventing equal participation
by other group members. In short, monopolizers like to hear the sound of their own voice and do not follow
typical norms for conversational turn taking. There are some people who are well informed, charismatic, and
competent communicators who can get away with impromptu lectures and long stories, but monopolizers do
not possess the magnetic qualities of such people. A group member's excessive verbal contributions are more
likely to be labeled as monopolizing when they are not related to the task or when they provide unnecessary
or redundant elaboration. Some monopolizers do not intentionally speak for longer than they should. Instead,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 560
they think they are making a genuine contribution to the group. These folks likely lack sensitivity to nonverbal
cues, or they would see that other group members are tired of listening or annoyed. Other monopolizers just
like to talk and don't care what others think. Some may be trying to make up for a lack of knowledge or
experience. This type of monopolizer is best described as a dilettante, or an amateur who tries to pass himself
or herself off as an expert.

   There are some subgroups of behaviors that fall under the monopolizer's role. The "stage hog" monopolizes
discussion with excessive verbal contributions and engages in one-upping and narcissistic listening. One-
upping is a spotlight-stealing strategy in which people try to verbally "out-do" others by saying something like
"You think that's bad? Listen to what happened to me!" They also listen to others in order to find something
they can connect back to themselves, not to understand the message. The stage hog is like the diva that
refuses to leave the stage to let the next performer begin. Unlike a monopolizer, who may engage in his or her
behaviors unknowingly, stage hogs are usually aware of what they're doing.

   The "egghead" monopolizes the discussion with excessive contributions that are based in actual knowledge
but that exceed the level of understanding of other group members or the needs of the group (Cragan &
Wright, 1999). The egghead is different from the dilettante monopolizer discussed earlier because this person
has genuine knowledge and expertise on a subject, which may be useful to the group. But like the monopolizer
and stage hog, the egghead's excessive contributions draw attention away from the task, slow the group
down, and may contribute to a negative group climate. The egghead may be like an absentminded professor
who is smart but lacks the social sensitivity to tell when he or she has said enough and is now starting to
annoy other group members. This type of egghead naively believes that other group members care as much
about the subject as he or she does. The second type of egghead is more pompous and monopolizes the
discussion to flaunt his or her intellectual superiority. While the first type of egghead may be tolerated to a
point by the group and seen as eccentric but valuable, the second type of egghead is perceived more negatively
and more quickly hurts the group. In general, the egghead's advanced knowledge of a subject and excessive
contributions can hurt the group's potential for synergy, since other group members may defer to the egghead
expert, which can diminish the creativity that comes from outside and nonexpert perspectives.

561 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
SELF-CONFESSOR

The self-confessor is a group member who tries to use group meetings as therapy sessions for issues not
related to the group's task. Self-confessors tend to make personal self-disclosures that are unnecessarily
intimate. While it is reasonable to expect that someone experiencing a personal problem may want to consult
with the group, especially if that person has formed close relationships with other group members, a self-
confessor consistently comes to meetings with drama or a personal problem. A supporter or gatekeeper
may be able to manage some degree of self-confessor behavior, but a chronic self-confessor is likely to build
frustration among other group members that can lead to interpersonal conflict and a lack of cohesion and
productivity. Most groups develop a norm regarding how much personal information is discussed during
group meetings, and some limit such disclosures to time before or after the meeting, which may help deter the
self-confessor.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 562
INSECURE COMPLIMENT SEEKER

The insecure compliment seeker wants to know that he or she is valued by the group and seeks recognition
that is often not task related. For example, they don't want to be told they did a good job compiling a report;
they want to know that they're a good person or attractive or smart--even though they might not be any of
those things. In short, they try to get validation from their relationships with group members--validation that
they may be lacking in relationships outside the group. Or they may be someone who continually seeks the
approval of others or tries to overcompensate for insecurity through excessive behaviors aimed at eliciting
compliments. For example, if a group member wears a tight-fitting t-shirt in hopes of drawing attention to his
physique but doesn't receive any compliments from the group, he may say, "My girlfriend said she could tell
I've been working out. What do you think?"

JOKER

The joker is a person who consistently uses sarcasm, plays pranks, or tells jokes, which distracts from the
overall functioning of the group. In short, the joker is an incompetent tension releaser. Rather than being
seen as the witty group member with good timing, the joker is seen as the "class clown." Like the insecure
compliment seeker, the joker usually seeks attention and approval because of an underlying insecurity. A
group's leader may have to intervene and privately meet with a person engaging in joker behavior to help
prevent a toxic or unsafe climate from forming. This may be ineffective, though, if a joker's behaviors are
targeted toward the group leader, which could indicate that the joker has a general problem with authority. In
the worst-case scenario, a joker may have to be expelled from the group if his or her behavior becomes violent,
offensive, illegal, or otherwise unethical.

563 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
UNPRODUCTIVE ROLES

There are some negative roles in group communication that do not primarily function to divert attention away
from the group's task to a specific group member. Instead, these unproductive roles just prevent or make it
more difficult for the group to make progress. These roles include the blocker, withdrawer, aggressor, and
doormat.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 564
BLOCKER

The blocker intentionally or unintentionally keeps things from getting done in the group. Intentionally, a
person may suggest that the group look into a matter further or explore another option before making a final
decision even though the group has already thoroughly considered the matter. They may cite a procedural rule
or suggest that input be sought from additional people in order to delay progress. Behaviors that lead to more
information gathering can be good for the group, but when they are unnecessary they are blocking behaviors.
Unintentionally, a group member may set blocking behaviors into motion by missing a meeting or not getting
his or her work done on time. People can also block progress by playing the airhead role, which is the opposite
of the egghead role discussed earlier. An airhead skirts his or her responsibilities by claiming ignorance
when he or she actually understands or intentionally performs poorly on a task so the other group members
question his or her intellectual abilities to handle other tasks (Cragan & Wright, 1999). Since exhibiting airhead
behaviors gets a person out of performing tasks, they can also be a tactic of a withdrawer, which we will discuss
next.

Withdrawer
A withdrawer mentally and/or physically removes herself or himself from group activities and only
participates when forced to. When groups exceed five members, the likelihood of having a member exhibit
withdrawer behaviors increases. For example, a member may attend meetings and seemingly pay attention
but not contribute to discussions or not volunteer to take on tasks, instead waiting on other members to
volunteer first. Withdrawers are often responsible for the social loafing that makes other group members
dread group work. A member may also avoid eye contact with other group members, sit apart from the group,
or orient his or her body away from the group to avoid participation. Withdrawers generally do not exhibit
active listening behaviors. At the extreme, a group member may stop attending group meetings completely.
Adopting a problem-solving model that requires equal participation, starting to build social cohesion early,
and choosing a meeting space and seating arrangement that encourages interactivity can help minimize
withdrawing behaviors. Gatekeepers, supporters, and group leaders can also intervene after early signs of
withdrawing to try to reengage the group member.

AGGRESSOR

An aggressor exhibits negative behaviors such as putting others' ideas down, attacking others personally
when they feel confronted or insecure, competing unnecessarily to "win" at the expense of others within the
group, and being outspoken to the point of distraction. An aggressor's behaviors can quickly cross the fine
line between being abrasive or dominant and being unethical. For example, a person vigorously defending
a position that is relevant and valid is different from a person who claims others' ideas are stupid but has
nothing to contribute. As with most behaviors, the aggressor's fall into a continuum based on their intensity.
On the more benign end of the continuum is assertive behavior, toward the middle is aggressive behavior,

565 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
and on the unethical side is bullying behavior. At their worst, an aggressor's behaviors can lead to shouting
matches or even physical violence within a group. Establishing group rules and norms that set up a safe
climate for discussion and include mechanisms for temporarily or permanently removing a group member
who violates that safe space may proactively prevent such behaviors.

DOORMAT

While we all need to take one for the team sometimes or compromise for the sake of the group, the doormat is
a person who is chronically submissive to the point that it hurts the group's progress (Cragan & Wright, 1999).
Doormat behaviors include quickly giving in when challenged, self-criticism, and claims of inadequacy. Some
people who exhibit doormat behaviors may have difficulty being self-assured and assertive, may be conflict
avoidant, or may even feel that their behaviors will make other group members like them. Other people play
the martyr and make sure to publicly note their "sacrifices" for the group, hoping to elicit praise or attention.
If their sacrifices aren't recognized, they may engage in further negative behaviors such as whining and/or
insecure compliment seeking.

                                             References

Benne, K. D., and Paul Sheats, "Functional Roles of Group Members," Journal of Social Issues 4, no. 2 (1948): 41-49.
   Bormann, E. G., and Nancy C. Bormann, Effective Small Group Communication, 4th ed. (Santa Rosa, CA:

Burgess CA, 1988).
   Cragan, J. F., and David W. Wright, Communication in Small Group Discussions: An Integrated Approach, 3rd ed.

(St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1991), 147.
   Pavitt, C., "Theorizing about the Group Communication-Leadership Relationship," in The Handbook of Group

Communication Theory and Research, ed. Lawrence R. Frey (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1999), 317.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 566
   16.4 Problem Solving and Decision Making in
                         Groups

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

   Part 1:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1791#audio-1791-1

Part 2:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1791#audio-1791-2

Part 3:

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1791#audio-1791-3

567 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
               "Alone we are smart. Together, we are brilliant." -Steven Anderson

Although the steps of problem solving and decision making that we will discuss next may seem obvious, we
often don't think to or choose not to use them. Instead, we start working on a problem and later realize we
are lost and have to backtrack. I'm sure we've all reached a point in a project or task and had the "OK, now
what?" moment. I've recently taken up some carpentry projects as a functional hobby, and I have developed a
great respect for the importance of advanced planning. It's frustrating to get to a crucial point in building or
fixing something only to realize that you have to unscrew a support board that you already screwed in, have
to drive back to the hardware store to get something that you didn't think to get earlier, or have to completely
start over. In this section, we will discuss the group problem-solving process, methods of decision making, and
influences on these processes.

                  GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING

The problem-solving process involves thoughts, discussions, actions, and decisions that occur from the first
consideration of a problematic situation to the goal. The problems that groups face are varied, but some

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 568
common problems include budgeting funds, raising funds, planning events, addressing customer or citizen
complaints, creating or adapting products or services to fit needs, supporting members, and raising
awareness about issues or causes.

   Problems of all sorts have three common components (Adams & Galanes, 2009):

    1. An undesirable situation. When conditions are desirable, there isn't a problem.

    2. A desired situation. Even though it may only be a vague idea, there is a drive to better the undesirable
         situation. The vague idea may develop into a more precise goal that can be achieved, although
         solutions are not yet generated.

    3. Obstacles between undesirable and desirable situation. These are things that stand in the way
         between the current situation and the group's goal of addressing it. This component of a problem
         requires the most work, and it is the part where decision making occurs. Some examples of obstacles
         include limited funding, resources, personnel, time, or information. Obstacles can also take the form
         of people who are working against the group, including people resistant to change or people who
         disagree.

Discussion of these three elements of a problem helps the group tailor its problem-solving process, as each
problem will vary. While these three general elements are present in each problem, the group should also
address specific characteristics of the problem. Five common and important characteristics to consider are
task difficulty, number of possible solutions, group member interest in problem, group member familiarity
with problem, and the need for solution acceptance (Adams & Galanes, 2009).

    1. Task difficulty. Difficult tasks are also typically more complex. Groups should be prepared to spend
         time researching and discussing a difficult and complex task in order to develop a shared
         foundational knowledge. This typically requires individual work outside of the group and frequent
         group meetings to share information.

    2. Number of possible solutions. There are usually multiple ways to solve a problem or complete a task,
         but some problems have more potential solutions than others. Figuring out how to prepare a beach
         house for an approaching hurricane is fairly complex and difficult, but there are still a limited number
         of things to do--for example, taping and boarding up windows; turning off water, electricity, and gas;
         trimming trees; and securing loose outside objects. Other problems may be more creatively based. For
         example, designing a new restaurant may entail using some standard solutions but could also entail
         many different types of innovation with layout and design.

    3. Group member interest in problem. When group members are interested in the problem, they will be
         more engaged with the problem-solving process and invested in finding a quality solution. Groups
         with high interest in and knowledge about the problem may want more freedom to develop and
         implement solutions, while groups with low interest may prefer a leader who provides structure and
         direction.

    4. Group familiarity with problem. Some groups encounter a problem regularly, while other problems
         are more unique or unexpected. A family who has lived in hurricane alley for decades probably has a
         better idea of how to prepare its house for a hurricane than does a family that just recently moved
         from the Midwest. Many groups that rely on funding have to revisit a budget every year, and in recent
         years, groups have had to get more creative with budgets as funding has been cut in nearly every
         sector. When group members aren't familiar with a problem, they will need to do background

569 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         research on what similar groups have done and may also need to bring in outside experts.
    5. Need for solution acceptance. In this step, groups must consider how many people the decision will

         affect and how much "buy-in" from others the group needs in order for their solution to be
         successfully implemented. Some small groups have many stakeholders on whom the success of a
         solution depends. Other groups are answerable only to themselves. When a small group is planning
         on building a new park in a crowded neighborhood or implementing a new policy in a large business,
         it can be very difficult to develop solutions that will be accepted by all. In such cases, groups will want
         to poll those who will be affected by the solution and may want to do a pilot implementation to see
         how people react. Imposing an excellent solution that doesn't have buy-in from stakeholders can still
         lead to failure.

            GROUP PROBLEM-SOLVING PROCESS

There are several variations of similar problem-solving models based on US American scholar John Dewey's
reflective thinking process (Bormann & Bormann, 1988). As you read through the steps in the process, think
about how you can apply what we learned regarding the general and specific elements of problems. Some of
the following steps are straightforward, and they are things we would logically do when faced with a problem.
However, taking a deliberate and systematic approach to problem solving has been shown to benefit group
functioning and performance. A deliberate approach is especially beneficial for groups that do not have an
established history of working together and will only be able to meet occasionally. Although a group should
attend to each step of the process, group leaders or other group members who facilitate problem solving
should be cautious not to dogmatically follow each element of the process or force a group along. Such a lack
of flexibility could limit group member input and negatively affect the group's cohesion and climate.

STEP 1: DEFINE THE PROBLEM

Define the problem by considering the three elements shared by every problem: the current undesirable
situation, the goal or more desirable situation, and obstacles in the way (Adams & Galanes, 2009). At this stage,
group members share what they know about the current situation, without proposing solutions or evaluating
the information. Here are some good questions to ask during this stage: What is the current difficulty? How
did we come to know that the difficulty exists? Who/what is involved? Why is it meaningful/urgent/important?
What have the effects been so far? What, if any, elements of the difficulty require clarification? At the end

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 570
of this stage, the group should be able to compose a single sentence that summarizes the problem called a
problem statement. Avoid wording in the problem statement or question that hints at potential solutions. A
small group formed to investigate ethical violations of city officials could use the following problem statement:
"Our state does not currently have a mechanism for citizens to report suspected ethical violations by city
officials."

STEP 2: ANALYZE THE PROBLEM

During this step a group should analyze the problem and the group's relationship to the problem. Whereas the
first step involved exploring the "what" related to the problem, this step focuses on the "why." At this stage,
group members can discuss the potential causes of the difficulty. Group members may also want to begin
setting out an agenda or timeline for the group's problem-solving process, looking forward to the other steps.
To fully analyze the problem, the group can discuss the five common problem variables discussed before. Here
are two examples of questions that the group formed to address ethics violations might ask: Why doesn't our
city have an ethics reporting mechanism? Do cities of similar size have such a mechanism? Once the problem
has been analyzed, the group can pose a problem question that will guide the group as it generates possible
solutions. "How can citizens report suspected ethical violations of city officials and how will such reports be
processed and addressed?" As you can see, the problem question is more complex than the problem statement,
since the group has moved on to more in-depth discussion of the problem during step 2.

STEP 3: GENERATE POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS

During this step, group members generate possible solutions to the problem. Again, solutions should not be
evaluated at this point, only proposed and clarified. The question should be what could we do to address this
problem, not what should we do to address it. It is perfectly OK for a group member to question another
person's idea by asking something like "What do you mean?" or "Could you explain your reasoning more?"
Discussions at this stage may reveal a need to return to previous steps to better define or more fully analyze
a problem. Since many problems are multifaceted, it is necessary for group members to generate solutions
for each part of the problem separately, making sure to have multiple solutions for each part. Stopping the
solution-generating process prematurely can lead to groupthink. For the problem question previously posed,
the group would need to generate solutions for all three parts of the problem included in the question. Possible
solutions for the first part of the problem (How can citizens report ethical violations?) may include "online

571 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
reporting system, e-mail, in-person, anonymously, on-the-record," and so on. Possible solutions for the second
part of the problem (How will reports be processed?) may include "daily by a newly appointed ethics officer,
weekly by a nonpartisan nongovernment employee," and so on. Possible solutions for the third part of the
problem (How will reports be addressed?) may include "by a newly appointed ethics commission, by the
accused's supervisor, by the city manager," and so on.

STEP 4: EVALUATE SOLUTIONS

During this step, solutions can be critically evaluated based on their credibility, completeness, and worth.
Once the potential solutions have been narrowed based on more obvious differences in relevance and/or
merit, the group should analyze each solution based on its potential effects--especially negative effects.
Groups that are required to report the rationale for their decision or whose decisions may be subject to public
scrutiny would be wise to make a set list of criteria for evaluating each solution. Additionally, solutions can
be evaluated based on how well they fit with the group's charge and the abilities of the group. To do this,
group members may ask, "Does this solution live up to the original purpose or mission of the group?" and
"Can the solution actually be implemented with our current resources and connections?" and "How will this
solution be supported, funded, enforced, and assessed?" Secondary tensions and substantive conflict, two
concepts discussed earlier, emerge during this step of problem solving, and group members will need to
employ effective critical thinking and listening skills.

   Decision making is part of the larger process of problem solving and it plays a prominent role in this
step. While there are several fairly similar models for problem solving, there are many varied decision-
making techniques that groups can use. For example, to narrow the list of proposed solutions, group members
may decide by majority vote, by weighing the pros and cons, or by discussing them until a consensus is
reached. Once the final decision is reached, the group leader or facilitator should confirm that the group is in
agreement. It may be beneficial to let the group break for a while or even to delay the final decision until a later
meeting to allow people time to evaluate it outside of the group context.

STEP 5: IMPLEMENT AND ASSESS THE SOLUTION

Implementing the solution requires some advanced planning, and it should not be rushed unless the group is
operating under strict time restraints or delay may lead to some kind of harm. Although some solutions can be
implemented immediately, others may take days, months, or years. As was noted earlier, it may be beneficial

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 572
for groups to poll those who will be affected by the solution as to their opinion of it or even to do a pilot test
to observe the effectiveness of the solution and how people react to it. Before implementation, groups should
also determine how and when they would assess the effectiveness of the solution by asking, "How will we know
if the solution is working or not?" Since solution assessment will vary based on whether or not the group is
disbanded, groups should also consider the following questions: If the group disbands after implementation,
who will be responsible for assessing the solution? If the solution fails, will the same group reconvene or will a
new group be formed?

  Certain elements of the solution may need to be delegated out to various people
inside and outside the group. Group members may also be assigned to implement a
particular part of the solution based on their role in the decision making or because
it connects to their area of expertise. Likewise, group members may be tasked with
publicizing the solution or "selling" it to a particular group of stakeholders. Last, the
group should consider its future. In some cases, the group will get to decide if it will
stay together and continue working on other tasks or if it will disband. In other cases,
outside forces determine the group's fate.

573 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                       "None of us is as smart as all of us." -Ken Blanchard

                DECISION MAKING IN GROUPS

We all engage in personal decision making daily, and we all know that some decisions are more difficult than
others. When we make decisions in groups, we face some challenges that we do not face in our personal
decision making, but we also stand to benefit from some advantages of group decision making (Napier &
Gershenfeld, 2004). Group decision making can appear fair and democratic but really only be a gesture that
covers up the fact that certain group members or the group leader have already decided. Group decision
making also takes more time than individual decisions and can be burdensome if some group members
do not do their assigned work, divert the group with self-centered or unproductive role behaviors, or miss
meetings. Conversely, though, group decisions are often more informed, since all group members develop a
shared understanding of a problem through discussion and debate. The shared understanding may also be
more complex and deep than what an individual would develop, because the group members are exposed to
a variety of viewpoints that can broaden their own perspectives. Group decisions also benefit from synergy,
one of the key advantages of group communication that we discussed earlier. Most groups do not use a

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 574
specific method of decision making, perhaps thinking that they'll work things out as they go. This can lead to
unequal participation, social loafing, premature decisions, prolonged discussion, and a host of other negative
consequences. So in this section we will learn some practices that will prepare us for good decision making
and some specific techniques we can use to help us reach a final decision.

BRAINSTORMING BEFORE DECISION MAKING

Before groups can make a decision, they need to generate possible solutions to their problem. The most
commonly used method is brainstorming, although most people don't follow the recommended steps of
brainstorming. As you'll recall, brainstorming refers to the quick generation of ideas free of evaluation. The
originator of the term brainstorming said the following four rules must be followed for the technique to be
effective (Osborn, 1959):

    1. Evaluation of ideas is forbidden.
    2. Wild and crazy ideas are encouraged.
    3. Quantity of ideas, not quality, is the goal.
    4. New combinations of ideas presented are encouraged.

To make brainstorming more of a decision-making method rather than an idea-generating method, group
communication scholars have suggested additional steps that precede and follow brainstorming (Cragan &
Wright, 1991).

    1. Do a warm-up brainstorming session. Some people are more apprehensive about publicly
         communicating their ideas than others are, and a warm-up session can help ease apprehension and
         prime group members for task-related idea generation. The warm-up can be initiated by anyone in
         the group and should only go on for a few minutes. To get things started, a person could ask, "If our
         group formed a band, what would we be called?" or "What other purposes could a mailbox serve?" In
         the previous examples, the first warm up gets the group's more abstract creative juices flowing, while
         the second focuses more on practical and concrete ideas.

    2. Do the actual brainstorming session. This session shouldn't last more than thirty minutes and should
         follow the four rules of brainstorming mentioned previously. To ensure that the fourth rule is
         realized, the facilitator could encourage people to piggyback off each other's ideas.

    3. Eliminate duplicate ideas. After the brainstorming session is over, group members can eliminate
         (without evaluating) ideas that are the same or very similar.

    4. Clarify, organize, and evaluate ideas. Before evaluation, see if any ideas need clarification. Then try to
         theme or group ideas together in some orderly fashion. Since "wild and crazy" ideas are encouraged,
         some suggestions may need clarification. If it becomes clear that there isn't really a foundation to an

575 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         idea and that it is too vague or abstract and can't be clarified, it may be eliminated. As a caution
         though, it may be wise to not throw out off-the-wall ideas that are hard to categorize and to instead
         put them in a miscellaneous or "wild and crazy" category.

DISCUSSION BEFORE DECISION MAKING

The nominal group technique guides decision making through a four-step process that includes idea
generation and evaluation and seeks to elicit equal contributions from all group members (Delbecq & Ven de
Ven, 1971). This method is useful because the procedure involves all group members systematically, which fixes
the problem of uneven participation during discussions. Since everyone contributes to the discussion, this
method can also help reduce instances of social loafing. To use the nominal group technique, do the following:

    1. Silently and individually list ideas.
    2. Create a master list of ideas.
    3. Clarify ideas as needed.
    4. Take a secret vote to rank group members' acceptance of ideas.

During the first step, have group members work quietly, in the same space, to write down every idea they have
to address the task or problem they face. This shouldn't take more than twenty minutes. Whoever is facilitating
the discussion should remind group members to use brainstorming techniques, which means they shouldn't
evaluate ideas as they are generated. Ask group members to remain silent once they've finished their list so
they do not distract others.

   During the second step, the facilitator goes around the group in a consistent order asking each person to
share one idea at a time. As the idea is shared, the facilitator records it on a master list that everyone can see.
Keep track of how many times each idea comes up, as that could be an idea that warrants more discussion.
Continue this process until all the ideas have been shared. As a note to facilitators, some group members may
begin to edit their list or self-censor when asked to provide one of their ideas. To limit a person's apprehension
with sharing his or her ideas and to ensure that each idea is shared, I have asked group members to exchange
lists with someone else so they can share ideas from the list they receive without fear of being personally
judged.

   During step three, the facilitator should note that group members can now ask for clarification on ideas on
the master list. Do not let this discussion stray into evaluation of ideas. To help avoid an unnecessarily long
discussion, it may be useful to go from one person to the next to ask which ideas need clarifying and then go
to the originator(s) of the idea in question for clarification.

   During the fourth step, members use a voting ballot to rank the acceptability of the ideas on the master list.
If the list is long, you may ask group members to rank only their top five or so choices. The facilitator then takes
up the secret ballots and reviews them in a random order, noting the rankings of each idea. Ideally, the highest
ranked idea can then be discussed and decided on. The nominal group technique does not carry a group all the

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 576
way through to the point of decision; rather, it sets the group up for a roundtable discussion or use of some
other method to evaluate the merits of the top ideas.

SPECIFIC DECISION-MAKING TECHNIQUES

Some decision-making techniques involve determining a course of action based on the level of agreement
among the group members. These methods include majority, expert, authority, and consensus rule. Table 16.1
"Pros and Cons of Agreement-Based Decision-Making Techniques" reviews the pros and cons of each of these
methods.
Majority rule is a commonly used decision-making technique in which a majority (one-half plus one) must
agree before a decision is made. A show-of-hands vote, a paper ballot, or an electronic voting system can
determine the majority choice. Many decision-making bodies, including the US House of Representatives,
Senate, and Supreme Court, use majority rule to make decisions, which shows that it is often associated with
democratic decision making, since each person gets one vote and each vote counts equally. Of course, other
individuals and mediated messages can influence a person's vote, but since the voting power is spread out
over all group members, it is not easy for one person or party to take control of the decision-making process.
In some cases--for example, to override a presidential veto or to amend the constitution--a super majority of
two-thirds may be required to make a decision.

   Minority rule is a decision-making technique in which a designated authority or expert has final say over
a decision and may or may not consider the input of other group members. When a designated expert makes
a decision by minority rule, there may be buy-in from others in the group, especially if the members of the
group didn't have relevant knowledge or expertise. When a designated authority makes decisions, buy-in will
vary based on group members' level of respect for the authority. For example, decisions made by an elected
authority may be more accepted by those who elected him or her than by those who didn't. As with majority
rule, this technique can be time saving. Unlike majority rule, one person or party can have control over the
decision-making process. This type of decision making is more similar to that used by monarchs and dictators.
An obvious negative consequence of this method is that the needs or wants of one person can override the
needs and wants of the majority. A minority deciding for the majority has led to negative consequences
throughout history. The white Afrikaner minority that ruled South Africa for decades instituted apartheid,
which was a system of racial segregation that disenfranchised and oppressed the majority population. The
quality of the decision and its fairness really depends on the designated expert or authority.

   Consensus rule is a decision-making technique in which all members of the group must agree on the same
decision. On rare occasions, a decision may be ideal for all group members, which can lead to unanimous
agreement without further debate and discussion. Although this can be positive, be cautious that this isn't
a sign of groupthink. More typically, consensus is reached only after lengthy discussion. On the plus side,
consensus often leads to high-quality decisions due to the time and effort it takes to get everyone in
agreement. Group members are also more likely to be committed to the decision because of their investment
in reaching it. On the negative side, the ultimate decision is often one that all group members can live with but

577 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
not one that's ideal for all members. Additionally, the process of arriving at consensus also includes conflict,
as people debate ideas and negotiate the interpersonal tensions that may result.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 578
             INFLUENCES ON DECISION MAKING

Many factors influence the decision-making process. For example, how might a group's independence or
access to resources affect the decisions they make? What potential advantages and disadvantages come with
decisions made by groups that are more or less similar in terms of personality and cultural identities? In this
section, we will explore how situational, personality, and cultural influences affect decision making in groups.

SITUATIONAL INFLUENCES ON DECISION MAKING

A group's situational context affects decision making. One key situational element is the degree of freedom
that the group has to make its own decisions, secure its own resources, and initiate its own actions. Some
groups have to go through multiple approval processes before they can do anything, while others are self-
directed, self-governing, and self-sustaining. Another situational influence is uncertainty. In general, groups
deal with more uncertainty in decision making than do individuals because of the increased number of
variables that comes with adding more people to a situation. Individual group members can't know what other
group members are thinking, whether or not they are doing their work, and how committed they are to the
group. So the size of a group is a powerful situational influence, as it adds to uncertainty and complicates
communication.

   Access to information also influences a group. First, the nature of the group's task or problem affects its
ability to get information. Group members can more easily make decisions about a problem when other
groups have similarly experienced it. Even if the problem is complex and serious, the group can learn from
other situations and apply what it learns. Second, the group must have access to flows of information. Access
to archives, electronic databases, and individuals with relevant experience is necessary to obtain any relevant
information about similar problems or to do research on a new or unique problem. In this regard, group
members' formal and information network connections also become important situational influences.

The origin and urgency of a problem are also situational factors
that influence decision making. In terms of origin, problems usually
occur in one of four ways:

    1. Something goes wrong. Group members must decide how to fix or stop something. Example--a
         firehouse crew finds out that half of the building is contaminated with mold and must be closed
         down.

    2. Expectations change or increase. Group members must innovate more efficient or effective ways of
         doing something. Example--a firehouse crew finds out that the district they are responsible for is
         being expanded.

    3. Something goes wrong and expectations change or increase. Group members must fix/stop and

579 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         become more efficient/effective. Example--the firehouse crew has to close half the building and must
         start responding to more calls due to the expanding district.
    4. The problem existed from the beginning. Group members must go back to the origins of the situation
         and walk through and analyze the steps again to decide what can be done differently. Example--a
         firehouse crew has consistently had to work with minimal resources in terms of building space and
         firefighting tools.

In each of the cases, the need for a decision may be more or less urgent depending on how badly something
is going wrong, how high the expectations have been raised, or the degree to which people are fed up with a
broken system. Decisions must be made in situations ranging from crisis level to mundane.

PERSONALITY INFLUENCES ON DECISION MAKING

A long-studied typology of value orientations that affect decision making consists of the following types
of decision maker: the economic, the aesthetic, the theoretical, the social, the political, and the religious
(Spranger, 1928).

   The economic decision maker makes decisions based on what is practical and useful.
   The aesthetic decision maker makes decisions based on form and harmony, desiring a solution that is

      elegant and in sync with the surroundings.
   The theoretical decision maker wants to discover the truth through rationality.
   The social decision maker emphasizes the personal impact of a decision and sympathizes with those who

      may be affected by it.
   The political decision maker is interested in power and influence and views people and/or property as

      divided into groups that have different value.
   The religious decision maker seeks to identify with a larger purpose, works to unify others under that

      goal, and commits to a viewpoint, often denying one side and being dedicated to the other.

In the United States, economic, political, and theoretical decision making tend to be more prevalent decision-
making orientations, which likely corresponds to the individualistic cultural orientation with its emphasis on
competition and efficiency. But situational context, as we discussed before, can also influence our decision
making.

   The personalities of group members, especially leaders and other active members, affect the climate of the
group. Group member personalities can be categorized based on where they fall on a continuum anchored by
the following descriptors: dominant/submissive, friendly/unfriendly, and instrumental/emotional (Cragan &
Wright, 1999). The more group members there are in any extreme of these categories, the more likely that the
group climate will also shift to resemble those characteristics.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 580
   Dominant versus submissive. Group members that are more dominant act more independently and
      directly, initiate conversations, take up more space, make more direct eye contact, seek leadership
      positions, and take control over decision-making processes. More submissive members are reserved,
      contribute to the group only when asked to, avoid eye contact, and leave their personal needs and
      thoughts unvoiced or give into the suggestions of others.

   Friendly versus unfriendly. Group members on the friendly side of the continuum find a balance
      between talking and listening, don't try to win at the expense of other group members, are flexible but
      not weak, and value democratic decision making. Unfriendly group members are disagreeable,
      indifferent, withdrawn, and selfish, which leads them to either not invest in decision making or direct it
      in their own interest rather than in the interest of the group.

   Instrumental versus emotional. Instrumental group members are emotionally neutral, objective,
      analytical, task-oriented, and committed followers, which leads them to work hard and contribute to the
      group's decision making as long as it is orderly and follows agreed-on rules. Emotional group members
      are creative, playful, independent, unpredictable, and expressive, which leads them to make rash
      decisions, resist group norms or decision-making structures, and switch often from relational to task
      focus.

581 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
       CULTURAL CONTEXT AND DECISION MAKING

Just like neighborhoods, schools, and countries, small groups vary in terms of their degree of similarity and
difference. Demographic changes in the United States and increases in technology that can bring different
people together make it more likely that we will be interacting in more and more heterogeneous groups
(Allen, 2011). Some small groups are more homogenous, meaning the members are more similar, and some
are more heterogeneous, meaning the members are more different. Diversity and difference within groups
has advantages and disadvantages. In terms of advantages, research finds that, in general, groups that are
culturally heterogeneous have better overall performance than more homogenous groups (Haslett & Ruebush,
1999). Additionally, when group members have time to get to know each other and competently communicate
across their differences, the advantages of diversity include better decision making due to different
perspectives (Thomas, 1999). Unfortunately, groups often operate under time constraints and other pressures
that make the possibility for intercultural dialogue and understanding difficult. The main disadvantage of
heterogeneous groups is the possibility for conflict, but given that all groups experience conflict, this isn't
solely due to the presence of diversity. We will now look more specifically at how some of the cultural value

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 582
orientations we've learned about already in this book can play out in groups with international diversity and
how domestic diversity in terms of demographics can also influence group decision making.

INTERNATIONAL DIVERSITY IN GROUP INTERACTIONS

Cultural value orientations such as individualism/collectivism, power distance, and high-/low-context
communication styles all manifest on a continuum of communication behaviors and can influence group
decision making. Group members from individualistic cultures are more likely to value task-oriented,
efficient, and direct communication. This could manifest in behaviors such as dividing up tasks into individual
projects before collaboration begins and then openly debating ideas during discussion and decision making.
Additionally, people from cultures that value individualism are more likely to openly express dissent from
a decision, essentially expressing their disagreement with the group. Group members from collectivistic
cultures are more likely to value relationships over the task at hand. Because of this, they also tend to value
conformity and face-saving (often indirect) communication. This could manifest in behaviors such as
establishing norms that include periods of socializing to build relationships before task-oriented
communication like negotiations begin or norms that limit public disagreement in favor of more indirect
communication that doesn't challenge the face of other group members or the group's leader. In a group
composed of people from a collectivistic culture, each member would likely play harmonizing roles, looking
for signs of conflict and resolving them before they become public.

   Power distance can also affect group interactions. Some cultures rank higher on power-distance scales,
meaning they value hierarchy, make decisions based on status, and believe that people have a set place
in society that is fairly unchangeable. Group members from high-power-distance cultures would likely
appreciate a strong designated leader who exhibits a more directive leadership style and prefer groups in
which members have clear and assigned roles. In a group that is homogenous in terms of having a high-power-
distance orientation, members with higher status would be able to openly provide information, and those
with lower status may not provide information unless a higher status member explicitly seeks it from them.
Low-power-distance cultures do not place as much value and meaning on status and believe that all group
members can participate in decision making. Group members from low-power-distance cultures would likely
freely speak their mind during a group meeting and prefer a participative leadership style.

   How much meaning is conveyed through the context surrounding verbal communication can also affect
group communication. Some cultures have a high-context communication style in which much of the
meaning in an interaction is conveyed through context such as nonverbal cues and silence. Group members
from high-context cultures may avoid saying something directly, assuming that other group members will
understand the intended meaning even if the message is indirect. So if someone disagrees with a proposed
course of action, he or she may say, "Let's discuss this tomorrow," and mean, "I don't think we should do this."
Such indirect communication is also a face-saving strategy that is common in collectivistic cultures. Other
cultures have a low-context communication style that places more importance on the meaning conveyed
through words than through context or nonverbal cues. Group members from low-context cultures often say

583 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
what they mean and mean what they say. For example, if someone doesn't like an idea, they might say, "I think
we should consider more options. This one doesn't seem like the best we can do."

   In any of these cases, an individual from one culture operating in a group with people of a different
cultural orientation could adapt to the expectations of the host culture, especially if that person possesses
a high degree of intercultural communication competence (ICC). Additionally, people with high ICC can
also adapt to a group member with a different cultural orientation than the host culture. Even though these
cultural orientations connect to values that affect our communication in fairly consistent ways, individuals
may exhibit different communication behaviors depending on their own individual communication style and
the situation.

DOMESTIC DIVERSITY AND GROUP COMMUNICATION

While it is becoming more likely that we will interact in small groups with international diversity, we are
guaranteed to interact in groups that are diverse in terms of the cultural identities found within a single
country or the subcultures found within a larger cultural group.

   Gender stereotypes sometimes influence the roles that people play within a group. For example, the
stereotype that women are more nurturing than men may lead group members (both male and female) to
expect that women will play the role of supporters or harmonizers within the group. Since women have
primarily performed secretarial work since the 1900s, it may also be expected that women will play the role
of recorder. In both of these cases, stereotypical notions of gender place women in roles that are typically
not as valued in group communication. The opposite is true for men. In terms of leadership, despite notable
exceptions, research shows that men fill an overwhelmingly disproportionate amount of leadership positions.
We are socialized to see certain behaviors by men as indicative of leadership abilities, even though they may
not be. For example, men are often perceived to contribute more to a group because they tend to speak
first when asked a question or to fill a silence and are perceived to talk more about task-related matters
than relationally oriented matters. Both of these tendencies create a perception that men are more engaged
with the task. Men are also socialized to be more competitive and self-congratulatory, meaning that their
communication may be seen as dedicated and their behaviors seen as powerful, and that when their work isn't
noticed they will be more likely to make it known to the group rather than take silent credit. Even though we
know that the relational elements of a group are crucial for success, even in high-performance teams, that
work is not as valued in our society as the task-related work.

   Despite the fact that some communication patterns and behaviors related to our typical (and stereotypical)
gender socialization affect how we interact in and form perceptions of others in groups, the differences in
group communication that used to be attributed to gender in early group communication research seem
to be diminishing. This is likely due to the changing organizational cultures from which much group work
emerges, which have now had more than sixty years to adjust to women in the workplace. It is also due to
a more nuanced understanding of gender-based research, which doesn't take a stereotypical view from the
beginning as many of the early male researchers did. Now, instead of biological sex being assumed as a factor
that creates inherent communication differences, group communication scholars see that men and women

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 584
both exhibit a range of behaviors that are more or less feminine or masculine. It is these gendered behaviors,
and not a person's gender, that seem to have more of an influence on perceptions of group communication.
Interestingly, group interactions are still masculinist in that male and female group members prefer a more
masculine communication style for task leaders and that both males and females in this role are more likely
to adapt to a more masculine communication style. Conversely, men who take on social-emotional leadership
behaviors adopt a more feminine communication style. In short, it seems that although masculine
communication traits are more often associated with high status positions in groups, both men and women
adapt to this expectation and are evaluated similarly (Haslett & Ruebush, 1999).

   Other demographic categories are also influential in group communication and decision making. In
general, group members have an easier time communicating when they are more similar than different in
terms of race and age. This ease of communication can make group work more efficient, but the homogeneity
may sacrifice some creativity. As we learned earlier, groups that are diverse (e.g., they have members of
different races and generations) benefit from the diversity of perspectives in terms of the quality of decision
making and creativity of output.

   In terms of age, for the first time since industrialization began, it is common to have three generations
of people (and sometimes four) working side by side in an organizational setting. Although four generations
often worked together in early factories, they were segregated based on their age group, and a hierarchy
existed with older workers at the top and younger workers at the bottom. Today, however, generations interact
regularly, and it is not uncommon for an older person to have a leader or supervisor who is younger than
him or her (Allen, 2011). The current generations in the US workplace and consequently in work-based groups
include the following:

   The Silent Generation. Born between 1925 and 1942, currently in their mid-sixties to mid-eighties, this is
      the smallest generation in the workforce right now, as many have retired or left for other reasons. This
      generation includes people who were born during the Great Depression or the early part of World War
      II, many of whom later fought in the Korean War (Clarke, 1970).

   The Baby Boomers. Born between 1946 and 1964, currently in their late forties to mid-sixties, this is the
      largest generation in the workforce right now. Baby boomers are the most populous generation born in
      US history, and they are working longer than previous generations, which means they will remain the
      predominant force in organizations for ten to twenty more years.

   Generation X. Born between 1965 and 1981, currently in their early thirties to mid-forties, this
      generation was the first to see technology like cell phones and the Internet make its way into classrooms
      and our daily lives. Compared to previous generations, "Gen-Xers" are more diverse in terms of race,
      religious beliefs, and sexual orientation and also have a greater appreciation for and understanding of
      diversity.

   Generation Y. Born between 1982 and 2000, "Millennials" as they are also called are currently in their
      late teens up to about thirty years old. This generation is not as likely to remember a time without
      technology such as computers and cell phones. They are just starting to enter into the workforce and
      have been greatly affected by the economic crisis of the late 2000s, experiencing significantly high
      unemployment rates.

The benefits and challenges that come with diversity of group members are important to consider. Since we
will all work in diverse groups, we should be prepared to address potential challenges in order to reap the
benefits. Diverse groups may be wise to coordinate social interactions outside of group time in order to find
common ground that can help facilitate interaction and increase group cohesion. We should be sensitive

585 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
but not let sensitivity create fear of "doing something wrong" that then prevents us from having meaningful
interactions.

                                             References

Adams, K., and Gloria G. Galanes, Communicating in Groups: Applications and Skills, 7th ed. (Boston, MA:
McGraw-Hill, 2009), 220-21.

   Allen, B. J., Difference Matters: Communicating Social Identity, 2nd ed. (Long Grove, IL: Waveland, 2011), 5.
   Bormann, E. G., and Nancy C. Bormann, Effective Small Group Communication, 4th ed. (Santa Rosa, CA:
Burgess CA, 1988), 112-13.
   Clarke, G., "The Silent Generation Revisited," Time, June 29, 1970, 46.
   Cragan, J. F., and David W. Wright, Communication in Small Group Discussions: An Integrated Approach, 3rd ed.
(St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1991), 77-78.
   de Bono, E., Six Thinking Hats (Boston, MA: Little, Brown, 1985).
   Delbecq, A. L., and Andrew H. Ven de Ven, "A Group Process Model for Problem Identification and Program
Planning," The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science 7, no. 4 (1971): 466-92.
   Haslett, B. B., and Jenn Ruebush, "What Differences Do Individual Differences in Groups Make?: The Effects
of Individuals, Culture, and Group Composition," in The Handbook of Group Communication Theory and Research,
ed. Lawrence R. Frey (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1999), 133.
   Napier, R. W., and Matti K. Gershenfeld, Groups: Theory and Experience, 7th ed. (Boston, MA: Houghton
Mifflin, 2004), 292.
   Osborn, A. F., Applied Imagination (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1959).
   Spranger, E., Types of Men (New York: Steckert, 1928).
   Stanton, C., "How to Deliver Group Presentations: The Unified Team Approach," Six Minutes Speaking and
Presentation Skills, November 3, 2009, accessed August 28, 2012, http://sixminutes.dlugan.com/group-
presentations-unified-team-approach.
   Thomas, D. C., "Cultural Diversity and Work Group Effectiveness: An Experimental Study," Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology 30, no. 2 (1999): 242-63.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 586
                    16.5 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. What do you believe to be the major drawbacks and benefits to working with groups?
            2. What advice would you give to a friend who was placed in an in-class group that was extremely adversarial and

                 full of conflict?
            3. In what situations would a designated leader be better than an emergent leader, and vice versa? Why?
            4. Think of a leader that you currently work with or have worked with who made a strong (positive or negative)

                 impression on you. Which leadership style did he or she use most frequently? Cite specific communication
                 behaviors to back up your analysis.
            5. Which of the task-related roles do you think has the greatest potential of going wrong and causing conflict within
                 the group and why?
            6. Which maintenance role do think you've performed the best in previous group experiences? How did your
                 communication and behaviors help you perform the role's functions? Which maintenance role have you had the
                 most difficulty or least interest in performing? Why?
            7. Describe a situation in which you have witnessed a person playing one of the self-centered roles in a group. How
                 did the person communicate? What were the effects? Now describe a situation in which you have witnessed a
                 person playing one of the unproductive roles in a group. How did the person communicate? What were the
                 effects?
            8. Group communication researchers have found that heterogeneous groups (composed of diverse members) have
                 advantages over homogenous (more similar) groups. Discuss a group situation you have been in where diversity
                 enhanced your and/or the group's experience.
            9. Why do you think people tasked with a group presentation (especially students) prefer to divide the parts up and
                 have members work on them independently before coming back together and integrating each part? What
                 problems emerge from this method? In what ways might developing a main presentation and then assigning
                 parts to different speakers be better than the more divided method? What are the drawbacks to the main
                 presentation method?

587 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                           Activities

1. With your assigned small group members, use the small group problem-solving sequence to prepare a three to
     four minute speech to solve what the group perceives as a current problem at OSU. Begin by identifying a
     problem from your perspective, specifically focusing on how OSU could improve. As a group, (1) define the
     problem, (2) analyze the problem and define criteria, (3) generate possible solutions, (4) select what the group
     considers the best solution using the established criteria, and (5) provide information on how your group suggests
     implementing and assessing the solution. Explain why the group felt that the selected solution is better than the
     other possible solutions. Groups will have the opportunity to present their speech to the class.

2. In class, move to your problem-solving groups. Using the Nominal Group Technique described in section 16.4,
     come up with solutions to the problem of "roommate conflict." Your group can specify if it's over cleanliness,
     boundaries, communication difficulties, shared tasks, etc.

3. Write a few paragraphs summarizing your responses to the following questions and submit it to your instructor:
       What communication competencies do you think are most important for a leader to have and why? How are men and
          women judged differently in regard to competencies? How do YOU rate in terms of the competencies you ranked as most
          important?
       Who do you know who would be able to give you constructive feedback on your leadership skills? What do you think this
          person would say? You may want to consider actually asking the person for feedback.

4. With your assigned small group, identify the decision-making technique that would be best for each of the
     following scenarios. Explain your reasoning as well.
       A professor asks her class to decide whether the final exam should be a notable presentation given in class or a
          comprehensive exam taken online.
       A family needs to decide who will care for their aging father who is battling dementia or how they will pay for a nursing
          home with memory care.
       A group of co-workers must decide which person in their department should be nominated for Employee of the Year
          award, which includes an extra week of paid vacation as well as an all-expenses paid trip to Hawaii.

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 588
Chapter 17: Persuasive Speaking

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Define persuasion.
 Define ethos, logos, and pathos.
 Explain the barriers to persuading an audience.
 Construct a clear, reasonable proposition for a short classroom speech.
 Compose an outline for a well-supported persuasive speech using an appropriate organizational pattern such as Monroe's

   Motivated Sequence.
 Analyze the audience to determine appropriate emotional and personal appeals.

                               Key Terms

 Cognitive Dissonance
 Ethos
 Logos
 Mental Dialogue
 Monroe's Motivated Sequence
 Pathos
 Persuasion
 Proposition
 Selective Exposure
 Target Audience
 Two-Tailed Arguments

589 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                  17.1 Why Persuade?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1795#audio-1795-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 590
 "Speech is power. Speech is to persuade, to convert, to compel. It is to bring another out of his
                     bad sense into your good sense." -Ralph Waldo Emerson

When your instructor announced on the syllabus or in class that you would be required to give a persuasive
speech for this class, what was your reaction? "Oh, good, I've got a great idea," or, "Oh, no!"? For many
people, there is something a little uncomfortable about the word "persuasion." It often gets paired with ideas
of seduction, manipulation, force, lack of choice, or inducement as well as more positive concepts such as
encouragement, influence, urging, or logical arguments. You might get suspicious if you think someone is
trying to persuade you. You might not appreciate someone telling you to change your viewpoints. On the other
hand, you might not think you have any beliefs, attitudes, values, or positions that are worth advocating for in
front of an audience.

   However, if you think of persuasion simply as a formal speech with a purpose of getting people to do
something they do not want to do, then you will miss the value of learning persuasion and its accompanying
skills of appeal, argument, and logic. Persuasion is something you do every day, in various forms. Convincing
a friend to go see the latest movie instead of staying in to watch TV; giving your instructor a reason to give you
an extension on an assignment (do not try that for this speech, though!); writing a cover letter and resume and
going through an interview for a job--all of these and so many more are examples of persuasion. In fact, it is
hard to think of life without the everyday give-and-take of persuasion.

   You may also be thinking, "I've given an informative speech. What's the difference?" While this chapter
will refer to all of the content of the preceding chapters as it walks you through the steps of composing your
persuasive speech, there is a difference. Although your persuasive speech will involve information--probably
even as much as in your informative speech--the key difference is the word "change." Think of it like this:

   INFORMATION + CHANGE = PERSUASION

You will be using the information for the purpose of changing something. First, we try to change the
audience's beliefs, attitudes, and actions, and second, possibly the context they act upon. In the next section
we will investigate the persuasive act and then move on to the barriers to persuasion.

591 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
As Pistol Pete sat at his desk, he began to contemplate the rhetorical techniques he could use to make his
upcoming speech on strengthening the OSU community more persuasive. He understood the power of well-
placed rhetoric in swaying an audience, and he was determined to use this to his advantage.

   First, he thought about ethos, or establishing credibility and trust. He planned to draw on his role as the
university's mascot to establish common ground with his audience. He would remind them of the times
they've celebrated together, the victories they've shared, and the challenges they've faced, reinforcing his
investment and dedication to the OSU community.

   Next, he pondered on logos, the appeal to logic and reason. Here, he would include facts and statistics about
the impact of a strong community on individuals and the university as a whole. He would cite studies showing
the correlation between a sense of community and student success, both academically and personally.

   Then, he considered pathos, which involves invoking emotions. Pistol Pete decided to share heartfelt stories
of times when the OSU community came together in the face of adversity. He would speak of the resilience
and unity he had witnessed, hoping to stir feelings of pride and a sense of belonging among his audience.

   He also thought about employing the rhetorical technique of repetition for emphasis. He would repeatedly
refer back to the idea of the "Cowboy spirit," reinforcing this central theme throughout his speech. He hoped
this would underscore his message and make it more memorable.

   Finally, Pete decided he would use a call to action as his conclusion. He wanted to empower his audience to
contribute to strengthening the community. By giving them concrete steps they could take--like participating

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 592
in university events, volunteering, or even simply checking in on their peers--he aimed to inspire active
participation.

   As he considered these rhetorical techniques, Pistol Pete felt more confident about crafting his speech. He
understood that effective persuasion involves more than just presenting an argument; it requires building
trust, appealing to both logic and emotion, emphasizing key points, and inspiring action. Armed with these
techniques, he was ready to make a compelling case for the importance of a strong OSU community. What do
you think of Pete's persuasion plans?
*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by

                                                 Speech Communication faculty.
                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

593 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            17.2 A Definition of Persuasion

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1798#audio-1798-1

Persuasion can be defined in two ways, for two purposes. The first (Lucas, 2015) is "the process of creating,
reinforcing, or changing people's beliefs or actions" (p. 306). This is a good, simple straightforward definition
to start with, although it does not encompass the complexity of persuasion. This definition does introduce us
to what could be called a "scaled" way of thinking about persuasion and change.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 594
   Think of persuasion as a continuum or line going both directions (see Figure 13.1). Your audience members,
either as a group or individually, are sitting somewhere on that line in reference to your central idea statement,
or what we are going to call a proposition in this chapter. In your speech you are proposing the truth or validity
of an idea, one which the audience may not find true or acceptable. Sometimes the word "claim" is used for
proposition or central idea statement in a persuasive speech, because you are claiming an idea is true or an
action is valuable.

   For example, your proposition might be, "The main cause of climate change is human activity." In this case
you are not denying that natural forces, such as volcanoes, can affect the climate, but you are claiming that
climate change is mainly due to pollution and other harmful things humans have done to the environment. To
be an effective persuasive speaker, one of your first jobs after coming up with this topic would be to determine
where your audience "sits" on the continuum described below.

   +3 means strongly agree to the point of making lifestyle choices to lessen climate change (such as riding a bike instead
   of driving a car, recycling, eating certain kinds of foods, and advocating for government policy changes).

      +2 means agree but not to the point of acting upon it or only acting on it in small ways.
      +1 as mildly in favor of your proposition; that is, they think it's probably true but the issue doesn't affect them
   personally.
      0 means neutral, no opinion, or feeling too uninformed to make a decision.
      -1 means mildly opposed to the proposition but willing to listen to those with whom they disagree.
      -2 means disagreement to the point of dismissing the idea pretty quickly.
      -3 means strong opposition to the point that the concept of climate change itself is not even listened to or
   acknowledged as a valid subject .

Since everyone in the audience is somewhere on this line or continuum, persuasion in this case means moving
them to the right, somewhere closer to +3. Thinking about persuasion this way has three values:

   You can visualize and quantify where your audience "sits."

   You can accept the fact that any movement toward +3 or to the right is a win.

   You can see that trying to change an audience from -3 to +3 in one speech is just about impossible.
      Therefore, you will be able to take a reasonable approach. In this case, if you knew most of the audience
      was at -2 or -3, your speech would be about the science behind climate change in order to open their
      minds to its possible existence. However, that audience is not ready to hear about its being caused
      mainly by humans or what action should be taken to reverse it.

Your instructor may have the class engage in some activity about your proposed topics in order for you to write
your proposition in a way that it is more applicable to your audience. For example, you might have a group
discussion on the topics or administer surveys to your fellow students. Some topics are so controversial and
divisive that trying to persuade about them in class is inappropriate. Your instructor may forbid some topics
or steer you in the direction of others.

   You might also ask if it is possible to persuade to the negative, for example, to argue against something or
try to move the audience to be opposed to something. In this case you would be trying to move your audience
to the left on the continuum rather than to the right. Yes, it is possible to do so, but it might confuse the
audience. Also, you might want to think in terms of phrasing your proposition so that it is favorable as well as
reasonable. For example, "Elderly people should not be licensed to drive" could be replaced with "Drivers over
the age of 75 in our state of should be required to pass a vision and health test every two years to renew their

595 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
drivers' licenses." The first one is not clear (what is "elderly?"), reasonable (no license at all?), or positive (based
on restriction) in approach. The second is specific, reasonable, doable, and positive.

   It should also be added that the proposition is assumed to be controversial. By that is meant that some
people in the audience disagree with your proposition or at least have no opinion; they are not "on your side."
It would be foolish to give a speech when everyone in the audience totally agrees with you at the beginning of
the speech. For example, trying to convince your classroom audience that attending college is a good idea is
a waste of everyone's time since, for one reason or another, everyone in your audience has already made that
decision. That is not persuasive.

   Those who disagree with your proposition but are willing to listen could be called the target audience.
These are the members of your audience on whom you are truly focusing your persuasion. At the same time,
another cluster of your audience that is not part of your target audience are those who are extremely opposed
to your position to the point that they probably will not give you a fair hearing. Finally, some members of your
audience may already agree with you, although they don't know why.

   To go back to our original definition, "the process of creating, reinforcing, or changing people's beliefs or
actions," and each of these purposes implies a different approach. You can think of creating as moving an
audience from 0 to +1, +2, or +3. You only really "create" something when it does not already exist, meaning the
audience's attitude will be a 0 since they have no opinion. In creating, you have to first engage the audience
that there is a vital issue at stake. Then you must provide arguments in favor of your claim to give the audience
a basis for belief.

   Reinforcing is moving the audience from +1 toward +3 in the hope that they take action (since the real test
of belief is whether people act on it). In reinforcing, the audience already agrees with you but need steps and
pushes (nudges) to make it action. Changing is moving from -1 or -2 to +1 or higher. In changing, you must
first be credible, provide evidence for your side but also show why the audience's current beliefs are mistaken
or wrong in some way.

   However, this simple definition from Lucas, while it gets to the core of "change" that is inherent in
persuasion, could be improved with some attention to the ethical component and the "how" of persuasion. For
that purpose, let's look at Perloff's (2003) definition of persuasion:

   A symbolic process in which communicators try to convince other people to change their attitudes or behavior regarding
   an issue through the transmission of a message, in an atmosphere of free choice. (p. 8)

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 596
   There are several important factors about this definition. First, notice that persuasion is symbolic, that is,
uses language or other symbols (even graphics can be symbols), rather than force or other means. Second,
notice that it is an attempt, not always fully successful. Third, there is an "atmosphere of free choice," in
that the persons being persuaded can choose not to believe or act. And fourth, notice that the persuader
is "trying to convince others to change." Modern psychological research has confirmed that the persuader
does not change the audience directly. The processes that the human mind goes through while it listens to
a persuasive message is like a silent, mental dialogue the audience is having with the speaker's ideas. The
audience members as individuals eventually convince themselves to change based on the "symbols" used by
the speaker.

   Some of this may sound like splitting hairs, but these are important points. The fact that an audience has
free choice means that they are active participants in their own persuasion and that they can choose whether
the speaker is successful. This factor calls on the student speaker to be ethical and truthful. Sometimes
students will say, "It is just a class assignment, I can lie in this speech," but that is not a fair or respectful way
to treat your classmates.

   Further, the basis of your persuasion is language; even though "a picture is worth a thousand words" and can
help add emotional appeal to your speech, you want to focus on communicating through words. Also, Perloff's
definition distinguishes between "attitude" and "behavior," meaning that an audience may be persuaded to
think, to feel, or to act. Finally, persuasion is a process. Successful persuasion actually takes a while. One
speech can be effective, but usually other messages influence the listener in the long run.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

597 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
             17.3 Why is Persuasion Hard?

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1800#audio-1800-1

Persuasion is hard mainly because we have a bias against change. As much as we hear statements like "The
only constant is change" or "Variety is the spice of life," the evidence from research and from our personal
experience shows that, in reality, we do not like change. Recent research, for example, in risk aversion, points
to how we are more concerned about keeping from losing something than with gaining something. Change is

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 598
often seen as a loss of something rather than a gain of something else. Change is a step into the unknown, a
gamble (Vedantam & Greene, 2013).

   In the 1960s psychiatrists Thomas Holmes and Richard Rahe wanted to investigate the effect of stress on life
and health. As explained on the Mindtools website:

   They surveyed more than 5,000 medical patients and asked them to say whether they had experience any of a series of
   43 life events in the previous two years. Each event, called a Life Change Unit (LCU), had a different "weight" for stress. The
   more events the patient added up, the higher the score. The higher the score, and the larger the weight of each event,
   the more likely the patient was to become ill. (The Holmes and Rahe Stress Scale, 2015)

You can find the Holmes-Rahe stress scale on many websites. What you will find is that the stressful events
almost all have to do with change in some life situations--death of a close family member (which might rate
100 LCUs), loss of a job, even some good changes like the Christmas holidays(12 LCUs). Change is stressful. We
do not generally embrace things that bring us stress.

   Additionally, psychologists have pointed to how we go out of our way to protect our beliefs, attitudes, and
values. First, we selectively expose ourselves to messages that we already agree with, rather than those that
confront or challenge us. This selective exposure is especially seen in choices of mass media that individuals
listen to and read, whether TV, radio, or Internet sites. Not only do we selectively expose ourselves to
information, we selectively attend to, perceive, and recall information that supports our existing viewpoints
(referred to as selective attention, selective perception, and selective recall).

   This principle led Leon Festinger (1957) to form the theory of cognitive dissonance, which states, among
other ideas, that when we are confronted with conflicting information or viewpoints, we reach a state of
dissonance. This state can be very uncomfortable, and we will do things to get rid of the dissonance and
maintain "consonance." Ideally, at least for a public speaker, the dissonance is relieved or resolved by being
persuaded (changed) to a new belief, attitude, or behavior. However, the easiest way to avoid dissonance is to
not expose oneself to conflicting messages in the first place.

   Additionally, as mentioned before, during a persuasive speech the audience members are holding a mental
dialogue with the speaker or at least the speaker's content. They are putting up rebuttals or counter-
arguments. These have been called reservations (as in the audience member would like to believe the speaker
but has reservations about doing so). They could be called the "yeah-buts"--the audience members are saying
in their minds, "Yeah, I see what you are arguing, but--". Reservations can be very strong, since, again, the
bias is to be loss averse and not to change our actions or beliefs.

   In a sense, the reasons not to change can be stronger than even very logical reasons to change. For example,
you probably know a friend who will not wear a seatbelt in a car. You can say to your friend, "Don't you know
that the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (2009) says, and I quote, `1,652 lives could be saved
and 22,372 serious injuries avoided each year on America's roadways if seat belt use rates rose to 90 percent in
every state'?" What will your friend probably say, even though you have cited a credible source?

   They will come up with some reason for not wearing it, even something as dramatic as "I knew a guy who
had a cousin who was in an accident and the cop said he died because he was wearing his seatbelt." You may
have had this conversation, or one like it. Their arguments may be less dramatic, such as "I don't like how
it feels" or "I don't like the government telling me what to do in my car." For your friend, the argument for
wearing a seat belt is not as strong as the argument against it, at least at this moment. If they are open-minded
and can listen to evidence, they might experience cognitive dissonance and then be persuaded.

599 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                             Solutions to the Difficulty of Persuasion

With these reasons for the resistance audience members would have to persuasion, what is a speaker to do?
Here are some strategies.

   Since change is resisted, we do not make many large or major changes in our lives. We do, however, make
smaller, concrete, step-by-step or incremental changes in our lives every day. Going back to our scale in Figure
13.1, trying to move an audience from -3 to +2 or +3 is too big a move. Having reasonable persuasive goals is the
first way to meet resistance. Even moving someone from -3 to -2 is progress, and over time these small shifts
can eventually result in a significant amount of persuasion.

   Secondly, a speaker must "deal with the reservations." First, the speaker must acknowledge they exist,
which shows audience awareness, but then the speaker must attempt to rebut or refute them. In reality,
since persuasion involves a mental dialogue, your audience is more than likely thinking of counter-arguments
in their minds. Therefore, including a refutation section in your speech, usually after your presentation of
arguments in favor of your proposition, is a required and important strategy.

   However, there are some techniques for rebuttal or refutation that work better than others. You would not
want to say, "One argument against my proposition is . . . , and that is wrong" or "If you are one of the people
who believe this about my proposition, you are wrong." On the other hand, you could say that the reservations
are "misconceptions," "myths," or "mistaken ideas" that are commonly held about the proposition.

   Generally, strong persuasive speeches offer the audience what are called two-tailed arguments, which bring
up a valid issue against your argument which you, as the speaker, must then refute. After acknowledging them

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 600
and seeking to refute or rebut the reservations, you must also provide evidence for your refutation. Ultimately,
this will show your audience that you are aware of both sides of the issue you are presenting and make you a
more credible speaker. However, you cannot just say something like this:

   One common misconception about wearing seatbelts is that if the car goes off a bridge and is sinking in water, you
   would not be able to release the belt and get out. First, that rarely happens. Second, if it did, getting the seat belt
   unbuckled would be the least of your worries. You would have to know how to get out of the car, not just the seat belt.
   Third, the seat belt would have protected you from any head injuries in such a crash, therefore keeping you conscious
   and able to help anyone else in the car.

This is a good start, but there are some assertions in here that would need support from a reliable source, such
as the argument that the "submerging in water" scenario is rare. If it has happened to someone you know, you
probably would not think it is rare.

   The third strategy is to keep in mind that since you are asking the audience to change something, they
must view the benefits of the change as worth the stress of the change. If you do good audience analysis, you
know they are asking, "What's in it for me?" What benefit or advantage or improvement would happen for the
audience members?

   If the audience is being persuaded to sign an organ donor card, which is an altruistic action that cannot
benefit them in any way because they will be dead, what would be the benefit? Knowing others would have
better lives, feeling a sense of contribution to the good of humanity, and helping medical science might be
examples. The point is that a speaker should be able to engage the audience at the level of needs, wants, and
values as well as logic and evidence.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

601 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
         17.4 Traditional Views of Persuasion

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1802#audio-1802-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 602
603 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   In the fourth century BCE, Aristotle took up the study of the public speaking practices of the ruling class in
Athenian society. For two years he observed the rhetoric of the men who spoke in the assembly and the courts.
In the end, he wrote Rhetoric to explain his theories about what he saw. Among his many conclusions, which
have formed the basis of communication study for centuries, was the classification of persuasive appeals into
ethos, logos, and pathos. Over the years, Aristotle's original understanding and definition of these terms have
been refined as more research has been done.

                                                Ethos

Ethos has come to mean the influence of speaker credentials and character in a speech. Ethos is one of the
more studied aspects of public speaking. During the speech, a speaker should seek to utilize their existing
credibility, based on the favorable things an audience already knows or believes about the speaker, such as
education, expertise, background, and good character. The speaker should also improve or enhance credibility
through citing reliable, authoritative sources, strong arguments, showing awareness of the audience, and
effective delivery.

   The word "ethos" looks very much like the word "ethics," and there are many close parallels to the trust an
audience has in a speaker and their honesty and ethical stance. In terms of ethics, it goes without saying that
your speech will be truthful. Another matter to consider is your own personal involvement in the topic. Ideally
you have chosen the topic because it means something to you personally.

   For example, perhaps your speech is designed to motivate audience members to take action against bullying
in schools, and it is important to you because you work with the Boys and Girls Club organization and have
seen how anti-bullying programs can have positive results. Sharing your own involvement and commitment
is key to the credibility and emotional appeal (ethos and pathos) of the speech, added to the logos (evidence
showing the success of the programs and the damage caused by bullying that goes unchecked). However, it
would be wrong to manufacture stories of personal involvement that are untrue, even if the proposition is a
socially valuable one.

                                                Logos

Aristotle's original meaning for logos had philosophical meanings tied to the Greek worldview that the
universe is a place ruled by logic and reason. Logos in a speech was related to standard forms of arguments
that the audience would find acceptable. Today we think of logos as both logical and organized arguments and
the credible evidence to support the arguments.

                                                Pathos

In words like "empathy," "sympathy," and "compassion" we see the root word behind pathos. Pathos, to
Aristotle, was using the emotions such as anger, joy, hate, desire for community, and love to persuade the
audience of the rightness of a proposition. One example of emotional appeals is using strong visual aids and
engaging stories to get the attention of the audience. Someone's just asking you to donate money to help
homeless pets may not have a strong effect, but seeing the ASPCA's commercials that feature emaciated and
mistreated animals is probably much more likely to persuade you to donate (add the music for full emotional
effect).

   Emotions are also engaged by showing the audience that the proposition relates to their needs. However,
we recognize that emotions are complex and that they also can be used to create a smokescreen to logic.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 604
Emotional appeals that use inflammatory language--name-calling--are often unethical or at least
counterproductive. Some emotions are more appropriate for persuasive speeches than others. Anger and
guilt, for example, do have effectiveness but they can backfire. Positive emotions such as pride, sympathy, and
contentment are usually more productive.

   One negative emotion that is useful and that can be used ethically is fear. When you think about it, we do a
number of things in life to avoid negative consequences, and thus, out of fear. Why don't we drive 100 miles
an hour on the interstate? Fear of getting a ticket, fear of paying more for insurance, fear of a crash, fear of
hurting ourselves or others. Fear is not always applicable to a specific topic, but research shows that mild fear
appeals, under certain circumstances, are very useful. When using fear appeals, the speaker must:

   Prove the fear appeal is valid.

   Prove that it applies to the audience

   Prove that the solution can work

   Prove the solution is available to the audience

Without these "proofs," the audience may dismiss the fear appeal as not being real or not applying to them
(O'Keefe, 2002). Mild and reasonable are the keys here. Intense, over-the-top fear appeals, especially showing
gory photos, are often dismissed by the audience.

   For example, a student gave a speech in one of our classes about flossing teeth. This may seem like an
overdone subject, but in this case it wasn't. He used dramatic and disturbing photos of dental and gum
problems but also proved that these photos of gum disease really did come from lack of flossing. He also
showed the link between lack of flossing and heart disease. The solution to avoid the gum disease and
other effects was readily available, and the student proved through his evidence that the solution of flossing
regularly did work to avoid the disease. Fear appeals can be overdone, but mild ones supported by evidence are
very useful.

   Because we feel positive emotions when our needs are met and negative ones when our needs are not met,
aligning your proposition with strong audience needs is part of pathos. One way to better understand human
needs is by examining Maslow's hierarchy of needs. Students are often so familiar with it that they do not
see its connection to real-life experiences. For example, safety and security needs, the second level on the
hierarchy, is much broader than what many of us initially think. It includes:

   supporting the military and homeland security;

   buying insurance for oneself and one's family;

   having investments and a will;

   personal protection such as taking self-defense classes;

   policies on crime and criminal justice in our communities;

   buying a security system for your car or home; seat belts and automotive safety; or even

   having the right kind of tires on one's car (which is actually a viable topic for a speech).

The third level up in Maslow's hierarchy of needs, love and belongingness, deals with a whole range of human
experiences, such as connection with others and friendship; involvement in communities, groups, and clubs;
prioritizing family time; worship and connection to a faith community; being involved in children's lives;
patriotism; loyalty; and fulfilling personal commitments.

605 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   In the speech outline at the end of the chapter about eliminating Facebook time, the speaker appeals to
the three central levels of the hierarchy in her three points: safety and security from online threats, spending
more time with family and friends in real time rather than online (love and belonging), and having more time
to devote to schoolwork rather than on Facebook (esteem and achievement). Therefore, utilizing Maslow's
hierarchy of needs works as a guide for finding those key needs that relate to your proposition, and by doing
so, allows you to incorporate emotional appeals based on needs.

   Up to this point in the chapter, we have looked at the goals of persuasion, why it is hard, and how to think
about the traditional modes of persuasion based on Aristotle's theories. In the last section of this chapter, we
will look at generating an overall organizational approach to your speech based on your persuasive goals.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 606
    17.5 Theories of Persuasive Communication

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=2116#audio-2116-1

607 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   There are many theories of persuasion in communication studies. Three of the main theories that are often
associated with persuasion are the social judgment theory, cognitive dissonance theory, and the elaboration
likelihood model.

                                    Social Judgment Theory

Muzafer Sherif and Carl Hovland created social judgment theory in an attempt to determine what types
of communicative messages and under what conditions communicated messages will lead to a change in
someone's behavior (Sherif & Hovland, 1961). In essence, Sherif and Hovland found that people's perceptions
of attitudes, values, beliefs, and behaviors exist on a continuum including latitude of rejection, latitude of
noncommitment, and latitude of acceptance.

   Latitudes of Judgments
   Imagine that you are planning to persuade your peers to major in a foreign language in college. Some of
the students in your class may disagree with you right off the bat, representing the latitude of rejection. Other
students may think majoring in a foreign language is a great idea, representing the latitude of acceptance. Still
others are really going to have no opinion either way, representing the latitude of noncommitment. Within
each of these different latitudes there is a range of possibilities. For example, one of your listeners may be
perfectly willing to accept the idea of minoring in a foreign language, but when asked to major or even double
major in a foreign language, he or she may end up in the latitude of noncommitment or even rejection.
   Not surprisingly, Sherif and Hovland found that persuasive messages are the most likely to succeed when
they fall into an individual's latitude of acceptance. For example, if you are giving your speech on majoring
in a foreign language, people who are in favor of majoring in a foreign language are more likely to positively
evaluate your message, assimilate your advice into their own ideas, and engage in desired behavior. On the
other hand, people who reject your message are more likely to negatively evaluate your message, not assimilate
your advice, and not engage in desired behavior.
   In an ideal world, we would always be persuading people who agree with our opinions, but that is not reality.
Instead, we often find ourselves in situations where we are trying to persuade others to accept attitudes,
values, beliefs, and behaviors with which they may not agree. To help us persuade others, what we need to
think about is the range of possible attitudes, values, beliefs, and behaviors that exist. For example, in our
foreign language case, we may see the following possible opinions from our audience members:

    1. Complete agreement. All of us should major in foreign languages.

    2. Strong agreement. I will not major in a foreign language, but I will double major in a foreign
         language.

    3. Agreement in part. I will not major in a foreign language, but I will minor in a foreign language.

    4. Neutral. While I think studying a foreign language can be worthwhile, I also think a college education
         can be complete without it. I really do not feel strongly one way or the other.

    5. Disagreement in part. I will only take the foreign language classes required by my major.

    6. Strong disagreement. I do not think I should have to take any foreign language classes.

    7. Complete disagreement. Majoring in a foreign language is a complete waste of a college education.

These seven possible opinions on the subject do not represent the full spectrum of choices, but give us various
degrees of agreement with the general topic. Sherif and Hovland theorized that persuasion is a matter of

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 608
knowing how great the discrepancy or difference is between the speaker's viewpoint and that of the audience.
If the speaker's point of view is similar to that of audience members, then persuasion is more likely. If the
discrepancy between the idea proposed by the speaker and the audience's viewpoint is too great, then the
likelihood of persuasion decreases dramatically.

   Discrepancy and Attitude Change
   Furthermore, Sherif and Hovland (1961) predicted that there was a threshold for most people where attitude
change was not possible and people slipped from the latitude of acceptance into the latitude of
noncommitment or rejection. Figure 17.2 "Discrepancy and Attitude Change" represents this process. All the
area covered by the left side of the curve represents options a person would agree with, even if there is an
initial discrepancy between the speaker and audience member at the start of the speech. However, there comes
a point where the discrepancy between the speaker and audience member becomes too large, which moves
into the options that will be automatically rejected by the audience member. In essence, it becomes essential
for you to know which options you can realistically persuade your audience to and which options will never
happen. Maybe there is no way for you to persuade your audience to major or double major in a foreign
language, but perhaps you can get them to minor in a foreign language.

                                 Cognitive Dissonance Theory

In 1957, Leon Festinger proposed another theory for understanding how persuasion functions: cognitive
dissonance theory (Festinger, 1957). Cognitive dissonance is an aversive motivational state that occurs when
an individual entertains two or more contradictory attitudes, values, beliefs, or behaviors simultaneously. For
example, maybe you know you should be working on your speech, but you really want to go to a movie with
a friend. In this case, practicing your speech and going to the movie are two cognitions that are inconsistent
with one another. The goal of persuasion is to induce enough dissonance in listeners that they will change
their attitudes, values, beliefs, or behaviors.

   Frymier and Nadler (2007) noted that for cognitive dissonance to work effectively there are three necessary
conditions: aversive consequences, freedom of choice, and insufficient external justification. First, for
cognitive dissonance to work, there needs to be a strong enough aversive consequence, or punishment, for
not changing one's attitudes, values, beliefs, or behaviors. For example, maybe you are giving a speech on
why people need to eat more apples. If your aversive consequence for not eating apples is that your audience
will not get enough fiber, most people will simply not be persuaded, because the punishment is not severe
enough. Instead, for cognitive dissonance to work, the punishment associated with not eating apples needs
to be significant enough to change behaviors. If you convince your audience that without enough fiber in
their diets they are at higher risk for heart disease or colon cancer, they might fear the aversive consequences
enough to change their behavior.

   The second condition necessary for cognitive dissonance to work is that people must have a freedom of
choice. If listeners feel they are being coerced into doing something, then dissonance will not be aroused.
They may alter their behavior in the short term, but as soon as the coercion is gone, the original behavior will
reemerge. It is like the person who drives more slowly when a police officer is nearby but ignores speed limits
once officers are no longer present. As a speaker, if you want to increase cognitive dissonance, you need to
make sure that your audience does not feel coerced or manipulated, but rather that they can clearly see that
they have a choice of whether to be persuaded.

   The final condition necessary for cognitive dissonance to work has to do with external and internal
justifications. External justification refers to the process of identifying reasons outside of one's own control

609 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
to support one's behaviors, beliefs, and attitudes. Internal justification occurs when someone voluntarily
changes a behavior, belief, or attitude to reduce cognitive dissonance. When it comes to creating change
through persuasion, external justifications are less likely to result in change than internal justifications
(Festinger & Carlsmith, 1959).

                                 Elaboration Likelihood Model

The elaboration likelihood model created by Petty and Cacioppo (1986) has a continuum from high elaboration
or thought to low elaboration or thought. For the purposes of Petty and Cacioppo's model, the term elaboration
refers to the amount of thought or cognitive energy someone uses for analyzing the content of a message.
High elaboration uses the central route and is designed for analyzing the content of a message. As such,
when people truly analyze a message, they use cognitive energy to examine the arguments set forth within
the message. In an ideal world, everyone would process information through this central route and actually
analyze arguments presented to them. Unfortunately, many people often use the peripheral route for
attending to persuasive messages, which results in low elaboration or thought. Low elaboration occurs when
people attend to messages but do not analyze the message or use cognitive energy to ascertain the arguments
set forth in a message.

   For researchers of persuasion, the question then becomes: how do people select one route or the other when
attending to persuasive messages? Petty and Cacioppo noted that there are two basic factors for determining
whether someone centrally processes a persuasive message: ability and motivation. First, audience members
must be able to process the persuasive message. If the language or message is too complicated, then people
will not highly elaborate on it because they will not understand the persuasive message. Motivation, on the
other hand, refers to whether the audience member chooses to elaborate on the message. Frymier and Nadler
discussed five basic factors that can lead to high elaboration: personal relevance and personal involvement,
accountability, personal responsibility, incongruent information, and need for cognition (Frymier & Nadler,
2007).

   Personal Relevance and Personal Involvement
   The first reason people are motivated to take the central route or use high elaboration when listening to
a persuasive message involves personal relevance and involvement. Personal relevance refers to whether the
audience member feels that he or she is actually directly affected by the speech topic. For example, if someone
is listening to a speech on why cigarette smoking is harmful, and that listener has never smoked cigarettes, he
or she may think the speech topic simply is not relevant. Obviously, as a speaker you should always think about
how your topic is relevant to your listeners and make sure to drive this home throughout your speech. Personal
involvement, on the other hand, asks whether the individual is actively engaged with the issue at hand: sends
letters of support, gives speeches on the topic, has a bumper sticker, and so forth. If an audience member
is an advocate who is constantly denouncing tobacco companies for the harm they do to society, then he or
she would be highly involved (i.e., would engage in high elaboration) in a speech that attempts to persuade
listeners that smoking is harmful.
   Accountability
   The second condition under which people are likely to process information using the central route is when
they feel that they will be held accountable for the information after the fact. With accountability, there is
the perception that someone, or a group of people, will be watching to see if the receiver remembers the
information later on. We have all witnessed this phenomenon when one student asks the question "will this
be on the test?" If the teacher says "no," you can almost immediately see the glazed eyes in the classroom as

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 610
students tune out the information. As a speaker, it is often hard to hold your audience accountable for the
information given within a speech.

   Personal Responsibility
   When people feel that they are going to be held responsible, without a clear external accounting, for the
evaluation of a message or the outcome of a message, they are more likely to critically think through the
message using the central route. For example, maybe you are asked to evaluate fellow students in your public
speaking class. Research has shown that if only one or two students are asked to evaluate any one speaker at
a time, the quality of the evaluations for that speaker will be better than if everyone in the class is asked to
evaluate every speaker. When people feel that their evaluation is important, they take more responsibility and,
therefore, are more critical of the message delivered.
   Incongruent Information
   Some people are motivated to centrally process information when it does not adhere to their own ideas.
Maybe you are a highly progressive liberal, and one of your peers delivers a speech on the importance of
the Tea Party movement in American politics. The information presented during the speech will most likely
be in direct contrast to your personal ideology, which causes incongruence because the Tea Party ideology
is opposed to a progressive liberal ideology. As such, you are more likely to pay attention to the speech,
specifically looking for flaws in the speaker's argument.
   Need for Cognition
   The final reason some people centrally process information is because they have a personality characteristic
called need for cognition. Need for cognition refers to a personality trait characterized by an internal drive
or need to engage in critical thinking and information processing. People who are high in need for cognition
simply enjoy thinking about complex ideas and issues. Even if the idea or issue being presented has no
personal relevance, high need for cognition people are more likely to process information using the central
route.

                                            References

Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. Row, Peterson, & Company.
   Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive consequences of forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal and

Social Psychology, 58, 203-210.
   Frymier, A. B., & Nadler, M. K. (2007). Persuasion: Integrating theory, research, and practice. Kendall/Hunt.
   Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in Experimental

Social Psychology, 19, 123-205.
   Sherif, M., & Hovland, C. I. (1961). Social judgment: Assimilation and contrast effects in communication and attitude

change. Yale University Press.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

611 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
        17.6 Constructing a Persuasive Speech

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1804#audio-1804-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 612
   In a sense, constructing your persuasive speech is the culmination of the skills you have learned already. In
another sense, you are challenged to think somewhat differently. While the steps of analyzing your audience,
formulating your purpose and central idea, applying evidence, considering ethics, framing the ideas in
appropriate language, and then practicing delivery will of course apply, you will need to consider some
expanded options about each of these steps.

                                    Formulating a Proposition

As mentioned before, when thinking about a central idea statement in a persuasive speech, we use the terms
"proposition" or claim. Persuasive speeches have one of four types of propositions or claims, which determine
your overall approach. Before you move on, you need to determine what type of proposition you should have
(based on the audience, context, issues involved in the topic, and assignment for the class).

613 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Proposition of Fact

Speeches with this type of proposition attempt to establish the truth of a statement. The core of the
proposition (or claim) is not whether something is morally right and wrong or what should be done about
the topic, only that a statement is supported by evidence or not. These propositions are not facts such as
"the chemical symbol for water is H20" or "Barack Obama won the presidency in 2008 with 53% of the vote."
Propositions or claims of fact are statements over which persons disagree and there is evidence on both sides,
although probably more on one than the other. Some examples of propositions of fact are:

   Converting to solar energy can save homeowners money.
      John F. Kennedy was assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald working alone.
      Experiments using animals are essential to the development of many life-saving medical procedures.
      Climate change has been caused by human activity.
      Granting tuition tax credits to the parents of children who attend private schools will perpetuate educational

   inequality.
      Watching violence on television causes violent behavior in children.
      William Shakespeare did not write most of the plays attributed to him.
      John Doe committed the crime of which he is accused.

Notice that in none of these are any values--good or bad--mentioned. Perpetuating segregation is not
portrayed as good or bad, only as an effect of a policy. Of course, most people view educational inequality
negatively, just as they view life-saving medical procedures positively. But the point of these propositions is to
prove with evidence the truth of a statement, not its inherent value or what the audience should do about it.
In fact, in some propositions of fact no action response would even be possible, such as the proposition listed
above that Lee Harvey Oswald acted alone in the assassination of President Kennedy.

Propositions of Definition

This is probably not one that you will use in your class, but it bears mentioning here because it is used in legal
and scholarly arguments. Propositions of definitions argue that a word, phrase, or concept has a particular
meaning. There are various ways to define words, such as by negation, operationalizing, and classification and
division. It may be important for you to define your terms, especially if you have a value proposition. Lawyers,
legislators, and scholars often write briefs, present speeches, or compose articles to define terms that are vital
to defendants, citizens, or disciplines. We saw a proposition of definition defended in the Supreme Court's
2015 decision to redefine marriage laws as applying to same-sex couples, based on arguments presented in
court. Other examples might be:

   The Second Amendment to the Constitution does not include possession of automatic weapons for private use.
      Alcoholism should be considered a disease because...
      The action committed by Mary Smith did not meet the standard for first-degree murder.
      Thomas Jefferson's definition of inalienable rights did not include a right to privacy.

In each of these examples, the proposition is that the definition of these things (the Second Amendment,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 614
alcoholism, crime, and inalienable rights) needs to be changed or viewed differently, but the audience is not
asked to change an attitude or action.

Propositions of Value

It is likely that you or some of your classmates will give speeches with propositions of value. When the
proposition has a word such as "good," "bad," "best," "worst," "just," "unjust," "ethical," "unethical," "moral,"
"immoral," "beneficial," "harmful," "advantageous," or "disadvantageous," it is a proposition of value. Some
examples include:

   Hybrid cars are the best form of automobile transportation available today.
      Homeschooling is more beneficial for children than traditional schooling.
      The War in Iraq was not justified.
      Capital punishment is morally wrong.
      Mascots that involve Native American names, characters, and symbols are demeaning.
      A vegan diet is the healthiest one for adults.

Propositions of value require a first step: defining the "value" word. If a war is unjustified, what makes a
war "just" or "justified" in the first place? That is a fairly philosophical question. What makes a form of
transportation "best" or "better" than another? Isn't that a matter of personal approach? For different people,
"best" might mean "safest," "least expensive," "most environmentally responsible," "stylish," "powerful," or
"prestigious." Obviously, in the case of the first proposition above, it means "environmentally responsible."
It would be the first job of the speaker, after introducing the speech and stating the proposition, to explain
what "best form of automobile transportation" means. Then the proposition would be defended with separate
arguments.

Propositions of Policy

These propositions are easy to identify because they almost always have the word "should" in them. These
propositions call for a change in policy or practice (including those in a government, community, or school),
or they can call for the audience to adopt a certain behavior. Speeches with propositions of policy can be those
that call for passive acceptance and agreement from the audience and those that try to instigate the audience
to action, to actually do something immediately or in the long-term.

   Our state should require mandatory recertification of lawyers every ten years.
      The federal government should act to ensure clean water standards for all citizens.
      The federal government should not allow the use of technology to choose the sex of an unborn child.
      The state of Georgia should require drivers over the age of 75 to take a vision test and present a certificate of good

   health from a doctor before renewing their licenses.
      Wyeth Daniels should be the next governor of the state.
      Young people should monitor their blood pressure regularly to avoid health problems later in life.

As mentioned before, the proposition determines the approach to the speech, especially the organization.
Also as mentioned earlier in this chapter, the exact phrasing of the proposition should be carefully done to

615 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
be reasonable, positive, and appropriate for the context and audience. In the next section we will examine
organizational factors for speeches with propositions of fact, value, and policy.

                           Organization Based on Type of Proposition

Organization for a Proposition of Fact

If your proposition is one of fact, you will do best to use a topical organization. Essentially that means that you
will have two to four discrete, separate arguments in support of the proposition. For example:

   Proposition: Converting to solar energy can save homeowners money
I. Solar energy can be economical to install.

           A. The government awards grants.
           B. The government gives tax credits.

  II. Solar energy reduces power bills.
  III. Solar energy requires less money for maintenance.
  IV. Solar energy works when the power grid goes down.

   Here is a first draft of another outline for a proposition of fact:
   Proposition: Experiments using animals are essential to the development of many life-saving medical
procedures.

    1. Research of the past shows many successes from animal experimentation.
    2. Research on humans is limited for ethical and legal reasons.
    3. Computer models for research have limitations.

However, these outlines are just preliminary drafts because preparing a speech of fact requires a great deal
of research and understanding of the issues. A speech with a proposition of fact will almost always need an
argument or section related to the "reservations," refuting the arguments that the audience may be preparing
in their minds, their mental dialogue. So the second example needs revision, such as:

   I. The first argument in favor of animal experimentation is the record
    of successful discoveries from animal research.
II. A second reason to support animal experimentation is that research on humans is limited
    for ethical and legal reasons.
III. Animal experimentation is needed because computer models for
    research have limitations.
IV. Many people today have concerns about animal experimentation.
    A. Some believe that all experimentation is equal.

         1. There is experimentation for legitimate medical research.
         2. There is experimentation for cosmetics or shampoos.
    B. Others argue that the animals are mistreated.
         1. There are protocols for the treatment of animals in experimentation.
         2. Legitimate medical experimentation follows the protocols.
    C. Some believe the persuasion of certain advocacy groups like PETA.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 616
         1. Many of the groups that protest animal experimentation have extreme views.
         2. Some give untrue representations.
   To complete this outline, along with introduction and conclusion, there would need to be quotations,
statistics, and facts with sources provided to support both the pro-arguments in Main Points I-III and the
refutation to the misconceptions about animal experimentation in Subpoints A-C under Point IV.

Organization for a Proposition of Value

A persuasive speech that incorporates a proposition of value will have a slightly different structure. As
mentioned earlier, a proposition of value must first define the "value" word for clarity and provide a basis for
the other arguments of the speech. The second or middle section would present the defense or "pro"
arguments for the proposition based on the definition. The third section would include refutation of the
counter arguments or "reservations." The following outline draft shows a student trying to structure a speech
with a value proposition. Keep in mind it is abbreviated for illustrative purposes, and thus incomplete as an
example of what you would submit to your instructor, who will expect more detailed outlines for your
speeches.

   Proposition: Hybrid cars are the best form of automotive transportation available today.
I. Automotive transportation that is best meets three standards. (Definition)

    A. It is reliable and durable.
    B. It is fuel efficient and thus cost efficient.
    C. It is therefore environmentally responsible.
II. Studies show that hybrid cars are durable and reliable. (Pro-Argument 1)
    A. Hybrid cars have 99 problems per 100 cars versus 133 problem per 100 conventional
    cars, according to TrueDelta, a car analysis website much like Consumer Reports.
    B. J.D. Powers reports hybrids also experience 11 fewer engine and transmission issues
    than gas-powered vehicles, per 100 vehicles.
III. Hybrid cars are fuel-efficient. (Pro-Argument 2)
    A. The Toyota Prius gets 48 mpg on the highway and 51 mpg in the city.
    B. The Ford Fusion hybrid gets 47 mpg in the city and in the country.
IV. Hybrid cars are environmentally responsible. (Pro-Argument 3)
    A. They only emit 51.6 gallons of carbon dioxide every 100 miles.
    B. Conventional cars emit 74.9 gallons of carbon dioxide every 100 miles.
    C. The hybrid produces 69% of the harmful gas exhaust that a conventional car does.
V. Of course, hybrid cars are relatively new to the market and some have questions about them. (Reservations)
    A. Don't the batteries wear out and aren't they expensive to replace?

         1. Evidence to address this misconception.
         2. Evidence to address this misconception.
    B. Aren't hybrid cars only good for certain types of driving and drivers?
         1. Evidence to address this misconception.
         2. Evidence to address this misconception.
    C. Aren't electric cars better?
         1. Evidence to address this misconception.
         2. Evidence to address this misconception.

617 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
Organization for a Proposition of Policy

The most common type of outline organizations for speeches with propositions of policy is problem-solution
or problem-cause-solution. Typically we do not feel any motivation to change unless we are convinced that
some harm, problem, need, or deficiency exists, and even more, that it affects us personally. As the saying
goes, "If it ain't broke, why fix it?" As mentioned before, some policy speeches look for passive agreement
or acceptance of the proposition. Some instructors call this type of policy speech a "think" speech since the
persuasion is just about changing the way your audience thinks about a policy.

   On the other hand, other policy speeches seek to move the audience to do something to change a situation
or to get involved in a cause, and these are sometimes called a "do" speech since the audience is asked to
do something. This second type of policy speech (the "do" speech) is sometimes called a "speech to actuate."
Although a simple problem-solution organization with only two main points is permissible for a speech of
actuation, you will probably do well to utilize the more detailed format called Monroe's Motivated Sequence.

   This format, designed by Alan Monroe (1951), who wrote a popular speaking textbook for many years,
is based on John Dewey's reflective thinking process. It seeks to go in-depth with the many questions an
audience would have in the process of listening to a persuasive speech. Monroe's Motivated Sequence involves
five steps, which should not be confused with the main points of the outline. Some steps in Monroe's
Motivated Sequence may take two points.

                                    Monroe's Motivated Sequence

    1. Attention. This is the introduction, where the speaker brings attention to the importance of the topic
         as well as his or her own credibility and connection to the topic. This step will include the thesis and
         preview. More specifically, sub steps under "Attention" are: the attention getter, the orientation
         (which includes background information, self introduction, and thesis), the establishment of
         credibility, and the preview statement. The attention getter should be just that, a statement that pulls
         the audience into the presentation and makes them want to listen. The orientation serves to establish
         the topic and tone of the presentation. It includes any relevant background information, a self
         introduction, and a thesis statement. Establishing credibility can be done verbally or nonverbally. If
         the speaker has specific credentials or experience with the topic, they should tell the audience about it
         in the introduction. If they do not have specific credentials, speakers may establish credibility by
         dressing nice, making good eye contact, properly citing sources, and demonstrating confidence. The
         preview statement is the roadmap for the presentation. The preview will indicate the problem, that it
         has negative impacts, and the speaker has a solution. It is not recommended for speakers to give
         away the solution in most cases in the preview statement. Usually it's best to let the curiosity build in
         the audience and introduce it for the first time in the Satisfaction step.

    2. Need. Here, the problem is defined and established with evidence. It is important to make the
         audience see the severity of the problem, and how it affects them, their family, or their community.
         The harm or need can be physical, financial, psychological, legal, emotional, educational, social, or a
         combination. Specific sub steps for "Need" are: problem statement, illustration, ramifications (side
         effects), pointing, and establishing clear criteria (features that should be in an acceptable solution).
         The problem statement should be a direct statement that focuses on a specific concern or problem
         that exists. The illustration is a real life instance of the problem's existence. Ramifications are the side
         effects and harms of the problem. Ramifications may be a variety of supporting materials that
         underscore the significance of the problem and its effects. Pointing is a clear, direct statement that

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 618
         draws a clear connection between the audience and the topic. As obvious as it may be, speakers need
         to explicitly tell the audience why they should care about this problem. Establishing criteria is a
         persuasive tactic. Speakers outline a few vital features that must be in a solution in order for it to be
         effective. The speaker does not give away the solution yet, but outlines criteria that a good solution
         should meet.

    3. Satisfaction. A need calls for satisfaction in the same way a problem requires a solution. Not only does
         the speaker present the solution and describe it, but they must also defend that it works and will
         address the causes of the problem as well as the symptoms. Sub steps required for "Satisfaction" are:
         solution statement, explanation, theoretical demonstration, practical experience, and meeting
         objections. The solution statement is when the solution or advocated behavior is introduced. The
         explanation will detail the solution and how it will work. The theoretical demonstration shows or
         explains how the solution meets the criteria from the Need step or has the necessary features.
         Practical experience presents an opportunity to show where the solution has proven successful. This
         may be in the form of a success story or specific instance where the solution made a difference.
         Meeting objections gives speakers an opportunity to respond to the potential reservations the
         audience may ben thinking while listening. It gives the speaker an opportunity to acknowledge what
         critics might be thinking and refute those concerns.

    4. Visualization. This step looks to the future either positively or negatively. The speaker creates a
         hypothetical scenario that places each audience member in their own future. If positive, the benefits
         from enacting or choosing the solution are shown. If negative, the disadvantages of not doing
         anything to solve the problem are shown. There may be times when it is acceptable to skip this step,
         especially if time is limited. If a speaker wishes to use both positive and negative scenarios, it is
         known as the method of contrast. The purpose of visualization is to motivate the audience by
         revealing future benefits or through fear appeals by showing future harms. The conditions in this
         situation should be probable and must be a personalized scenario for the audience members. This
         step requires imagery and vivid language.

    5. Action. The action step serves as the conclusion. In the action step, the goal is to give specific steps
         for the audience to take as soon as possible to move toward solving the problem. Whereas the
         satisfaction step explains the solution overall, the action step gives concrete, individual ways to begin
         making the solution happen. The sub steps of the "Action" step are: brakelight, summary, challenge/
         appeal, and note of finality. The brake light is the indication that a speaker is nearing the end. It is
         usually demonstrated by phrases like, "In conclusion,..." or "In summary,..." The summary statement
         should be a restatement of the preview statement, but in past tense. Instead of being vague about the
         solution, it is emphasized in the summary statement. The challenge or appeal is why this step is called
         Action. Speakers tell the audience what they should do individually as a result of hearing the speech.
         The note of finality serves as a strong closing statement. It leaves the audience reflecting on the
         presentation.

The more concrete you can make the action step, the better. Research shows that people are more likely to act
if they know how accessible the action can be. For example, if you want students to be vaccinated against the
chicken pox virus (which can cause a serious disease called shingles in adults), you can give them directions to
and hours for a clinic or health center where vaccinations at a free or discounted price can be obtained.

   In some cases for speeches of policy, no huge problem needs solving. Or, there is a problem, but the audience
already knows about it and is convinced that the problem exists and is important. In those cases, a format

619 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
called "comparative advantages" is used, which focuses on how one possible solution is better than other
possible ones. The organizational pattern for this kind of proposition might be topical:

   I. This policy is better because...
   II. This policy is better because...
   III. This policy is better because...
If this sounds a little like a commercial that is because advertisements often use comparative advantages to
show that one product is better than another. Here is an example:
   Proposition: Owning the Barnes and Noble Nook is more advantageous than owning the Amazon Kindle.
I. The Nook allows owners to trade and loan books to other owners or people who have downloaded the Nook
software, while the Kindle does not.
II. The Nook has a color-touch screen, while the Kindle's screen is black and grey and non-interactive.
III. The Nook's memory can be expanded through microSD, while the Kindle's memory cannot be upgraded.

                      Building Upon Your Persuasive Speech's Arguments

Once you have constructed the key arguments and order of points (remembering that if you use topical order,
to put your strongest or most persuasive point last), it is time to be sure your points are well supported. In a
persuasive speech, there are some things to consider about evidence.

   First, your evidence should be from sources that the audience will find credible. If you can find the same

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 620
essential information from two sources but know that the audience will find the information more credible
from one source than another, use and cite the information from the more credible one. For example, if
you find the same statistical data on Wikipedia and the U.S. Department of Labor's website, cite the U.S.
Department of Labor (your instructor will probably not accept the Wikipedia site anyway). Audiences also
accept information from sources they consider unbiased or indifferent. Gallup polls, for example, have been
considered reliable sources of survey data because unlike some organizations, Gallup does not have a cause
(political or otherwise) it is supporting.

   Secondly, your evidence should be new to the audience. In other words, the best evidence is that which is
from credible sources and the audience has not heard before (Reinard, 1988; McCroskey, 1969). If they have
heard it before and discounted it, they will not consider your argument well supported. An example is telling
people who smoke that smoking will cause lung cancer. Everyone in the U.S. has heard that thousands of
times, but 14% of the population still smokes, which is about one in seven (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2017)). Many of those who smoke have not heard the information that really motivates them to
quit yet, and of course quitting is very difficult. Additionally, new evidence is more attention-getting, and you
will appear more credible if you tell the audience something new (as long as you cite it well) than if you use the
"same old, same old" evidence they have heard before.

   Third, in order to be effective and ethical, your supporting evidence should be relevant and not used out of
context, and fourth, it should be timely and not out of date.

   After choosing the evidence and apportioning it to the correct parts of the speech, you will want to consider
use of metaphors, quotations, rhetorical devices, and narratives that will enhance the language and
"listenability" of your speech. Narratives are especially good for introduction and conclusions, to get attention
and to leave the audience with something dramatic. You might refer to the narrative in the introduction again
in the conclusion to give the speech a sense of finality.

   Next you will want to decide if you should use any type of presentation aid for the speech. The decision
to use visuals such as PowerPoint slides or a video clip in a persuasive speech should take into consideration
the effect of the visuals on the audience and the time allotted for the speech (as well as your instructor's
specifications). The charts, graphs, or photographs you use should be focused and credibly done.

   One of your authors remembers a speech by a student about using seat belts (which is, by the way, an
overdone topic). What made the speech effective in this case were photographs of two totaled cars, both of
which the student had been driving when they crashed. The devastation of the wrecks and his ability to stand
before us and give the speech because he had worn his seat belt was effective (although it didn't say much
for his driving ability). If you wanted an audience to donate to disaster relief after an earthquake in a foreign
country, a few photographs of the destruction would be effective, and perhaps a map of the area would be
helpful. But in this case, less is more. Too many visual aids will likely distract from your overall speech claim.

   Finally, since you've already had experience in class giving at least one major speech prior to this one, your
delivery for the persuasive speech should be especially strong. Since delivery does affect credibility (Burgoon,
Birk, & Pfau, 1990), you want to be able to connect visually as you make your appeals. You want to be physically
involved and have vocal variety when you tell dramatic narratives that emphasize the human angle on your
topic. If you do use presentation slides, you want them to work in seamlessly, using black screens when the
visuals are not necessary.

                                            Conclusion

Your persuasive speech in class, as well as in real life, is an opportunity to share a passion or cause that you
believe will matter to society and help the audience live a better life. Even if you are initially uncomfortable

621 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
with the idea of persuasion, we use it all the time in different ways. Choose your topic based on your own
commitment and experience, look for quality evidence, craft your proposition so that it will be clear and
audience appropriate, and put the finishing touches on it with an eye toward enhancing your logos, ethos, and
pathos.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 622
       17.7 Sample Persuasive Speech Outline

623 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                17.8 Enrichment

                                    Discussion Questions

1. How might your audience respond to your upcoming persuasive presentation? How will you adapt to their
     response?

2. What kind of misinformation exists about your persuasive topic? How will you clarify the truth in your
     presentation?

3. What does it mean to have strong ethos with your audience? What are some of the characteristics of ethos? How
     can you ensure the audience views you as someone with good character?

4. What did Aristotle mean by logos? What happens when there are logical missteps or fallacies in a speaker's
     message? Why might a speaker rely on faulty reasoning?

5. We know that pathos, according to Aristotle, is utilizing emotion to persuade the audience. While we know that
     emotions are involved in every decision we make, can you think of examples of speakers who are over-reliant on
     emotional appeals? How are their messages helped or hindered by the emotional appeals they choose?

                                           Activities

1. With a group, decide on an app that is beneficial. As a group, create and present a persuasive sales pitch as to why
     your classmates should buy/download this app. After all the presentations, survey the class to see which apps they
     are most likely to download.

2. Choose a current TED Talk to watch and to analyze. Which rhetorical devices (ethos, logos, and pathos) did the
     speaker use to persuade the audience? Which one(s) seemed the most effectively used? In what ways could the
     speaker have improved their use of ethos, logos, and/or pathos?

3. In groups, your instructor will pass out a couple of different newspapers (O'Colly, Stillwater News Press, etc.). Each
     member should thumb through the newspaper and pay attention to articles they would be most likely to read
     outside of class. Have each group member share which articles stuck out and why. Each group should create a list
     of the article titles/subject matter. After the discussion, the group should go back to the newspaper and note
     which articles no one mentioned and which topics were most often stated by group members. Group members
     should then discuss how this may impact their viewing selections, news gathering, social media feeds, etc. Each

                                            THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 624
                 member should think about how selective exposure affects them personally.

625 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   Chapter 18: Special Occasion Speaking

                                                    Learning Objectives

 Recognize the differences between research-based speeches (informative and persuasive) and special occasion speeches.
 Identify the types of special occasion speeches.
 Use language to create emotional and evocative phrases.
 Describe the proper techniques for delivering a special occasion speech.

                                                         Key Terms

 After Dinner Speeches
 Console
 Eulogy
 Hero Speech
 Lament
 Motivational Speech
 Religious Speech
 Roast
 Special Occasion Speech
 Speech of Acceptance
 Speech of Commencement
 Speech of Dedication
 Speech of Farewell
 Speech of Introduction
 Speech of Presentation
 Success Speech
 Survivor Speech

                                                    THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 626
     Toast

627 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   18.1 Understanding Special Occasion Speaking

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1811#audio-1811-1

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 628
   "That's the second best introduction I ever received. The best was when the emcee didn't
                     arrive and I had to do it myself." -Westside Toastmasters

Often the speaking opportunities life brings our way have nothing to do with specifically informing or
persuading an audience; instead, we are commonly asked to speak during special occasions in our lives.
Whether you are standing up to give a speech at an awards ceremony or a toast at a wedding, knowing how
to deliver speeches in a variety of different contexts is the nature of special occasion speaking. In this chapter,
we are going to explore what special occasion speeches are as well as a number of types of special occasion
speeches ranging from humorous to somber.

   In broad terms, a special occasion speech is a speech designed to designed to address and engage the
context and audience's emotions on a specific occasion. Like informative or persuasive speeches, special
occasion speeches should communicate a clear message, but the manner of speaking used is typically
different. The word "special" in the term "special occasion speeches" is somewhat subjective in that while some
speaking occasions truly are special occasions (e.g., a toast at a wedding, an acceptance speech at an awards
banquet, a eulogy for a loved one), they can also be given at more mundane events, such as the hundreds of
public relations speeches that big companies give every day. The goal of a special occasion speech is ultimately
to stir an audience's emotions and make them feel a certain way in response to the situation or occasion.

   Of all the types of speeches we are most likely to have to give during our lives, many of them will fall
into the special occasion category. These often include speeches that are designed to inspire or motivate an

629 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
audience to do something. These are, however, different from a traditional persuasive speech. Let's say you're
the coach of your child's Little League team or a project leader at your work. In both cases you might find
yourself delivering a speech to motivate and inspire your teams to do their best. You can imagine how giving
a motivational speech like that would be different from a traditional persuasive speech, focusing on why a
group of 50-somethings should change their investment strategy or a group of your peers to vote for a certain
candidate for Student Senate.

   To help us think through how to be effective in delivering special occasion speeches, let's look at four key
ingredients: preparation, adaptation to the occasion, adaptation to the audience, and mindfulness about the
time.

                                             Be Prepared

First, and foremost, the biggest mistake you can make when standing to deliver a special occasion speech is to
underprepare or simply not prepare at all. We've stressed the need for preparation throughout this text, so just
because you're giving a wedding toast or a eulogy doesn't mean you shouldn't think through the speech before
you stand up and speak out. If the situation is impromptu, even jotting some basic notes on a napkin is better
than not having any plan for what you are going to say.

                                       Adapt to the Occasion

Not all content is appropriate for all occasions. If you are asked to deliver a speech commemorating the first

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 630
anniversary of a school shooting, then obviously using humor and telling jokes wouldn't be appropriate. But
some decisions about adapting to the occasion are less obvious. Consider the following examples:

   You are the maid of honor giving a toast at the wedding of your younger sister.
   You are receiving a Most Valuable Player award in your favorite sport.
   You are a sales representative speaking to a group of clients after a mistake has been discovered.
   You are a cancer survivor speaking at a high school student assembly.
   You are giving an after-dinner speech to the members of your fraternity.

How might you adapt your message and speaking style to successfully convey your message to these various
audiences?

   Remember that being a competent speaker is about being both personally effective and socially appropriate.
Different occasions will call for different levels of social appropriateness. One of the biggest mistakes
entertaining speakers can make is to deliver one generic speech to different groups without adapting the
speech to the specific occasion. In fact, professional speakers always make sure that their speeches are tailored
for different occasions by getting information about the occasion from their hosts. When we tailor speeches
for special occasions, people are more likely to remember those speeches than if we give a generic speech.

                                      Adapt to Your Audience

Once again, we cannot stress the importance of audience adaptation enough in this text. Different audiences
will respond differently to speech material, so the more you know about your audience, the more likely
you'll succeed in your speech. One of our coauthors was once at a conference for teachers of public speaking.
The keynote speaker stood and delivered a speech on the importance of public speaking. While the speaker was
good and funny, the speech really fell flat. The keynote speaker basically told the public speaking teachers that
they should take public speaking courses because public speaking is important. Right speech, wrong audience!

                                      Be Mindful of the Time

The last major consideration for delivering special occasion speeches successfully is to be mindful of your time.
Different speech situations have their own conventions and rules with regard to time. Acceptance speeches
and toasts, for example, should be relatively short (typically under two minutes). A speech of introduction
should be extremely brief--just long enough to tell the audience what they need to know about the person
being introduced in a style that prepares them to appreciate that person's remarks. In contrast,
commencement speeches, eulogies, and speeches to commemorate events can run ten to twenty minutes in
length, depending on the context.

   It's also important to recognize that audiences on different occasions will expect speeches of various
lengths. For example, although it's true that graduation commencement speakers generally speak for ten to
twenty minutes, the closer that speaker heads toward twenty minutes the more fidgety the audience becomes.
To hold the audience's attention, a commencement speaker would do well to make the closing minutes of
the speech the most engaging and inspiring portion of the speech. If you're not sure about the expected time
frame for a speech, ask the person who has invited you to speak.

631 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 632
633 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
   The text message came in as a complete surprise to Pistol Pete: "Hey Pete, our best man has lost his voice!
We'd be honored if you could step in and give a toast at our wedding tonight."

   Pete stared at his phone in disbelief. It was his good friend's wedding day, a momentous occasion, and he
was being asked to give an impromptu speech with no preparation. The initial wave of panic washed over him,
but as he took a deep breath, he realized that he needed to harness that cowboy spirit and take on the challenge.

   Firstly, Pete focused on calming his nerves. He reminded himself that he wasn't there to impress anyone but
to honor his friend's special day. This realization helped put things into perspective, allowing him to approach
the task with a sense of calm.

   Next, he brainstormed some key points he wanted to include in his toast. He thought about his friend, their
shared memories, the friend's qualities, and the love between the couple. He noted these points down, making
sure to include anecdotes and moments that reflected these aspects.

   Understanding the importance of brevity in toasts, he decided to structure his speech simply: an
introduction where he would express his honor at being asked to toast, a body where he'd share a short
anecdote about his friend and the couple, and a conclusion that would contain his well-wishes and a toast to
their future.

   While content was key, Pete also knew that delivery mattered. He practiced his speech a few times, focusing
on speaking clearly, maintaining a steady pace, and ensuring his voice conveyed the warmth and sincerity of
his words. He made mental notes to make eye contact with his friend and the spouse, making the speech more
personal and engaging.

   Even though he was stepping in at the last minute, Pete was determined to add a touch of personalization
to his toast. He decided to weave in a few friendly jokes and a quote about love that he knew would resonate
with the couple.

   As the wedding hour approached, Pete reminded himself that the most important thing was to speak from
the heart. After all, he wasn't just Pistol Pete, the OSU mascot, but also a friend who was truly happy for the
couple.

   As he rose to his feet when the moment came, he took one last deep breath, reminded himself of the cowboy
spirit within him, and delivered a heartfelt, charming toast that not only honored his friend's most important
day but also brought smiles, laughter, and even a few joyful tears to the wedding party.

   How would you respond if you were asked at the last minute to give a wedding toast?

*Pistol Pete scenarios are all based on hypothetical events and were written with the use of Chatgpt and careful editing by
                                                 Speech Communication faculty.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 634
      18.2 Types of Special Occasion Speeches

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1813#audio-1813-1

635 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 636
   Unlike the informative and persuasive speeches you were required to give, special occasion speeches are
much broader and allow for a wider range of topics, events, and approaches to be employed. However,
while the following list of special occasion speeches is long, your instructor will have specific types of special
occasion speeches that you will be allowed (or required) to do for class. Since you are like to give many special
occasion speeches in your life, we want to cover everything you might need to know to give a good one.

                                     Speeches of Introduction

The first type of special occasion speech is the speech of introduction, which is a mini-speech given by
the host of a ceremony that introduces another speaker and their speech. Few things are worse than when
the introducer of a speaker stands up and says, "This is Wyatt Ford. He's going to talk about stress." While we
did learn the speaker's name and the topic, the introduction falls flat. Audiences won't be the least bit excited
about listening to Wyatt's speech.

   Just like any other speech, a speech of introduction should be a complete speech and have a clear
introduction, body, and conclusion--and you should try to do it all in under two minutes. This brings up
another "few things are worse" scenario: an introductory speaker who rambles on for too long or who talks
about himself or herself instead of focusing on the person being introduced.

   For an introduction, think of a hook that will make your audience interested in the upcoming speaker.
Did you read a news article related to the speaker's topic? Have you been impressed by a presentation you've
heard the speaker give in the past? You need to find something that can grab the audience's attention and
make them excited about hearing the main speaker.

   The body of your speech of introduction should be devoted to telling the audience about the speaker's
topic, why the speaker is qualified, and why the audience should listen (notice we now have our three main
points).First, tell your audience in general terms about the overarching topic of the speech. Most of the time
as an introducer, you'll only have a speech title and maybe a paragraph of information to help guide this part
of your speech. That's all right. You don't need to know all the ins and outs of the main speaker's speech; you
just need to know enough to whet the audience's appetite. Next, you need to tell the audience why the speaker
is a credible presenter on the topic. Has the speaker written books or articles on the subject? Has the speaker
had special life events that make him or her qualified? Lastly, you need to briefly explain to the audience
why they should care about the upcoming speech. The outline can be adjusted; for example, you can give the
biographical information first, but these three areas should be covered.

   The final part of a good introduction is the conclusion, which is generally designed to welcome the speaker
to the platform. Many introducers will conclude by saying something like, "I am looking forward to hearing
how Wyatt Ford's advice and wisdom can help all of us today, so please join me in welcoming Dr. Wyatt Ford."
At this point, you as the person introducing the speaker are "handing off" the speaking duties to someone
else, so it is not uncommon to end your speech of introduction by clapping as the speaker comes on stage or
shaking the speaker's hand.

                                     Speeches of Presentation

The second type of special occasion speech is the speech of presentation. A speech of presentation is a brief
speech given to accompany a prize or honor. Speeches of presentation can be as simple as saying, "This
year's recipient of the Lavache Public Speaking prize is Ryann Curley," or could last up to five minutes as the

637 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
speaker explains why the honoree was chosen for the award. An interesting example of a speech presenting an
award is this one by Zoe Saldana for J.J. Abrams (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x03cGSszr8Q).

   When preparing a speech of presentation, it's always important to ask how long the speech should be. Once
you know the time limit, then you can set out to create the speech itself. First, you should explain what the
award or honor is and why the presentation is important. Second, you can explain what the recipient has
accomplished in order for the award to be bestowed. Did the person win a race? Did the person write an
important piece of literature? Did the person mediate conflict? Whatever the recipient has done, you need
to clearly highlight his or her work. Lastly, if the race or competition was conducted in a public forum and
numerous people didn't win, you may want to recognize those people for their efforts as well. While you don't
want to steal the show away from winner, you may want to highlight the work of the other competitors or
nominees.

                                      Speeches of Acceptance

The complement to a speech of presentation is the speech of acceptance. The speech of acceptance is a speech
given by the recipient of a prize or honor. There are three typical components of a speech of acceptance: 1)
thank the givers of the award or honor, 2) thank those who helped you achieve your goal, and 3) put the award
or honor into perspective. First, you want to thank the people who have given you the award or honor and
possibly those who voted for you. We see this done every year during the Oscars, "First, I'd like to thank the
Academy and all the Academy voters."

   Second, you want to give credit to those who helped you achieve the award or honor. No person
accomplishes things in life on his or her own. We all have family members, friends, and colleagues who
support us and help us achieve what we do in life, and a speech of acceptance is a great time to graciously
recognize those individuals. Lastly, put the award in perspective. Tell the people listening to your speech why
the award is meaningful to you. If you know you are up for an award, the odds of your winning are high.
In order to avoid blubbering through an acceptance speech, have one ready. A good rule to remember is: Be
thankful, be gracious, be short.

                                      Speeches of Dedication

A fourth special occasion speech is the speech of dedication. A speech of dedication is delivered when a new
store opens, a building is named after someone, a plaque is placed on a wall, a new library is completed, and
so on. These speeches are designed to highlight the importance of the project and possibly those to whom the
project has been dedicated.

   When preparing a speech of dedication, start by explaining how you are involved in the dedication. If the
person to whom the dedication is being made is a relative, tell the audience about your relationship and your
relative's accomplishments. Second, you want to explain what is being dedicated. If the dedication is a new
building or a pre-existing building, you want to explain the importance of the structure. You should then
explain who was involved in the project.

   If the project is a new structure, talk about the people who built the structure or designed it. If the project
is a pre-existing structure, talk about the people who put together and decided on the dedication. Lastly,
explain why the structure is important for the community in which it is located. If the dedication is for a new
store, talk about how the store will bring in new jobs and new shopping opportunities. If the dedication is for
a new wing of a hospital, talk about how patients will be served and the advances in medicine the new wing
will provide the community.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 638
                                                Toasts

At one time or another, almost everyone is going to be asked to deliver a toast. A toast is a speech designed
to congratulate, appreciate, or remember. First, toasts can be delivered for the purpose of congratulating
someone for an honor, a new job, or getting married. You can also toast someone to show your appreciation
for something he or she has done. Lastly, we toast people to remember them and what they have accomplished.

   When preparing a toast, the first goal is always to keep your remarks brief. Toasts are generally given during
the middle of some kind of festivities (e.g., wedding, retirement party, farewell party), and you don't want your
toast to take away from those festivities for too long. Second, the goal of a toast is to focus attention on the
person or persons being toasted--not on the speaker.

   As such, while you are speaking, you need to focus your attention toward the people being toasted, both by
physically looking at them and by keeping your message about them. You should also avoid any inside jokes
between you and the people being toasted because toasts are public and should be accessible for everyone
who hears them. To conclude a toast, simply say something like, "Please join me in recognizing Gina for her
achievement" and lift your glass. When you lift your glass, this will signal to others to do the same and then
you can all take a drink, which is the end of your speech.

                                                Roasts

A roast is a very interesting and peculiar speech because it is designed to both praise and good-naturedly
insult a person being honored. Because of this combination of purposes, it is not hard to argue that the roast
is probably a challenging type of speeches to write given the difficult task of simultaneously praising and
insulting the person. Generally, roasts are given at the conclusion of a banquet in honor of someone's life
achievements. The television station Comedy Central has been conducting roasts of various celebrities for
a few years, and if you've ever watched one, you know that the "roasters" say some harsh things about the
"roastees" even though they are friends.

   During a roast, the roaster will stand behind a lectern while the roastee is seated somewhere where he or she
is clearly on display for the audience to see, thus allowing the audience to take in his or her reactions. Since half
the fun of a good roast is watching the roastee's reactions during the roast, it's important to have the roastee
clearly visible to the audience.

   How does one prepare for a roast? First, you want to really think about the person who is being roasted.
Does he or she have any strange habits or amusing stories in their past that you can discuss? When you think
through these questions, you want to make sure that you cross anything off your list that is truly private
information or will really hurt the person. The goal of a roast is to poke at him, not massacre him.

   Second, when selecting which aspects to poke fun at, you need to make sure that the items you choose are
widely known by your audience. Roasts work when the majority of people in the audience can relate to the
jokes being made. If you have an inside joke with the roastee, bringing it up during roast may be great fun for
the two of you, but it will leave your audience unimpressed. Lastly, end on a positive note. While the jokes are
definitely the fun part of a roast, you should leave the roastee and the audience knowing that you truly do care
about and appreciate the person.

                                               Eulogies

A eulogy is a speech given in honor of someone who has died (Don't confuse "eulogy" with "elegy," a poem or
song of mourning). Not to sound depressing, but since everyone who is alive will someday die, the chance of

639 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
your being asked to give a eulogy someday for a friend or family member is significant. However, when the
time comes to deliver a eulogy, it's good to know what you're doing and to adequately prepare your remarks.

   When preparing a eulogy, first you need to know as much information about the deceased as possible. The
more information you have about the person, the more personal you can make the eulogy. While you can rely
on your own information if you were close to the deceased, it is always a good idea to ask friends and relatives
of the deceased for their memories, as these may add important facets that may not have occurred to you. Of
course, if you were not very close to the deceased, you will need to ask friends and family for information.
Second, although eulogies are delivered on the serious and sad occasion of a funeral or memorial service for
the deceased, it is very helpful to look for at least one point to be lighter or humorous. In some cultures, in fact,
the friends and family attending the funeral expect the eulogy to be highly entertaining and amusing.

   Take, for example, Tom Arnold's eulogy of Saturday Night Live actor Chris Farley. During his speech at
Farley's funeral, Arnold noted, "Chris was concerned about his size, and so he made sure that all of us who
knew him well saw him naked at least once" (Glionna, 1998). Picturing the heavy-set comedian naked surely
brought some humor to the somber proceedings, but Arnold knew Farley (and his audience) well enough to
know that the story would be appropriate.

   Knowing the deceased and the audience is vital when deciding on the type and amount of humor to use in
a eulogy. It's doubtful statements like Tom Arnold's would fit many eulogies. But it would be appropriate to
tell a funny story about Uncle Joe's love for his rattletrap car or Aunt Mary's love of tacky Christmas sweaters.
Ultimately, the goal of the humor or lighter aspects of a eulogy is to relieve the tension that is created by the
serious nature of the occasion.

   If you are ever asked to give a eulogy, that means you were probably close to the deceased and are
experiencing shock, sadness, and disbelief at your loved one's passing. The last thing that you will want to do
(or be in a mental state to do) is figure out how to structure your eulogy. To that end, here are three parts of
a eulogy (i.e. main points) you can use to write one without worrying about being original with structure or
organizational patterns: praise, lament, and consolation.

Praise

The first thing you want to do when remembering someone who has passed away is remind the audience what
made that person so special. So you will want to praise them and their accomplishments. This can include
notable achievements (being an award winner; helping with charities), personal qualities ("she was always
willing to listen to your problems and help in any way she could"), or anecdotes and stories (being a great
mother; how she drove to college to visit you when you were homesick).

Lament

The second thing you want to do in a eulogy is to lament the loss. To lament means to express grief or sorrow,
which is what everyone at a funeral has gathered to do. You will want to acknowledge that everyone is sad and
that the deceased's passing will be difficult to get through. Here you might mention all the things that will no
longer happen as a result of the death. "Now that Grandpa is gone, there won't be any more Sunday dinners
where he cooks chicken on the grill or bakes his famous macaroni and cheese."

Console

The final step (or main point) in a eulogy is to console the audience, or to offer comfort in a time of grief. What
you must remember (and many people often forget) is that a eulogy is not a speech for the person who has

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 640
died; it is a speech for the people who are still living to try to help them deal with the loss. You will want to
end your eulogy on a positive note. Offer some hope that someday, things will get better. If the deceased was
a religious person, this is where you might want to incorporate elements of that belief system. Some examples
would include ideas like:

   "Jim has gone home to be with the Lord and is looking down on us fondly today."
      "We may miss Aunt Linda deeply, but our memories of her will live on forever, and her impact on this world will not

   soon be forgotten."

Using the Praise-Lament-Console format for eulogies gives you a simple system where you can fill in the
sections with 1) why was the person good, 2) why you will miss him or her, and 3) how you and the audience
will get through this loss. It sometimes also helps to think of the three points in terms of Past-Present-Future:
you will praise the deceased for what he did when he was alive (the past), lament the loss you are feeling now
(the present), and console your audience by letting them know that things will be all right (the future).

   With regard to a eulogy you might give in class, you generally have two options for how to proceed: you
can eulogize a real person who has passed away, or you can eulogize a fictional character (if your instructor
permits that). If you give a eulogy in class on someone in your life who has actually passed away, be aware
that it is very common for students to become emotional and have difficulty giving their speech. Even though
you may have been fine practicing at home and feel good about giving it, the emotional impact of speaking
about a deceased loved one in front of others can be surprisingly powerful. Conversely, if you give a eulogy on a
fictional character, you must treat your classroom assignment eulogy as you would a real eulogy. You wouldn't
make fun of or trivialize someone's life at an actual funeral, so don't do that in your eulogy for a serious speech
assignment either.

                                        Speeches of Farewell

A speech of farewell allows someone to say good-bye to one part of his or her life as he or she is moving on to
the next part of life. Maybe you've accepted a new job and are leaving your current job, or you're graduating
from college and entering the work force. Periods of transition are often marked by speeches of farewell.
When preparing a speech of farewell, the goal should be to thank the people in your current position and let
them know how much you appreciate them as you make the move to your next position in life. Second, you
want to express to your audience how much the experience has meant to you. A farewell speech is a time to
commemorate and think about the good times you've had. As such, you should avoid negativity during this
speech. Lastly, you want to make sure that you end on a high note.

641 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                                  Speeches for Commencements

A speech of commencement (or, as it is more commonly known, a "commencement speech") is designed to
recognize and celebrate the achievements of a graduating class or other group of people. These typically take
place at graduation ceremonies. Nearly every one of us has sat through commencement speeches at some
point in our lives. And if you're like us, you've heard good ones and bad ones. Numerous celebrities and
politicians have been asked to deliver commencement speeches at colleges and universities. A famous and
well-thought-out commencement speech was given by famed Harry Potter author J. K. Rowling at Harvard
University in 2008 (found at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nkREt4ZB-ck). Rowling's speech has the
perfect balance of humor and inspiration, which are two of the main ingredients of a great commencement
speech.

   If you're ever asked to deliver a commencement speech, there are some key points to think through when
deciding on your speech's content.

   If there is a specific theme for the graduation, make sure that your commencement speech addresses
      that theme. If there is no specific theme, come up with one for your speech. Some common
      commencement speech themes are commitment, competitiveness, competence, confidence, decision
      making, discipline, ethics, failure (and overcoming failure), faith, generosity, integrity, involvement,
      leadership, learning, persistence, personal improvement, professionalism, reality, responsibility, and
      self-respect.

   Talk about your life and how graduates can learn from your experiences to avoid pitfalls or take
      advantages of life. How can your life

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 642
      inspire the graduates in their future endeavors?

   Make the speech humorous. Commencement speeches should be entertaining and make an audience
      laugh.

   Be brief! Nothing is more painful than a commencement speaker who drones on and on. Remember, the
      graduates are there to get their diplomas; their families are there to watch the graduates walk across the
      stage.

   Remember, while you may be the speaker, you've been asked to impart wisdom and advice for the people
      graduating and moving on
      with their lives, so keep it focused on them.

   Place the commencement speech into the broader context of the graduates' lives. Show the graduates
      how the advice and wisdom you are offering can be utilized to make their own lives better.

Overall, it's important to make sure that you have fun when delivering a commencement speech. Remember,
it's a huge honor and responsibility to be asked to deliver a commencement speech, so take the time to really
think through and prepare your speech.

                                       After-Dinner Speeches

After-dinner speeches are humorous speeches that make a serious point. These speeches get their name from
the fact that they historically follow a meal of some kind. After-dinner speakers are generally asked to speak
(or hired to speak) because they have the ability both to speak effectively and to make people laugh. First and
foremost, after-dinner speeches are speeches and not stand-up comedy routines. All the basic conventions of
public speaking previously discussed in this text apply to after-dinner speeches, but the overarching goal of
these speeches is to be entertaining and to create an atmosphere of amusement.

   After-dinner speaking is an extremely difficult type of speaking to do well because it is an entertaining
speech that depends on the successful delivery of humor. People train for years to develop comic timing, or the
verbal and nonverbal delivery used to enhance the comedic value of a message. But after-dinner speaking is
difficult, not impossible. What follows is the method we recommend for developing a successful after-dinner
speech.

   First, use all that you have learned about informative or persuasive speeches to prepare a real informative or
persuasive speech roughly two-thirds the length of what the final speech will become. That is, if you're going
to be giving a ten-minute speech, then your "real" informative or persuasive speech should be six or seven
minutes in length. This is the "serious message" portion of the speech where you will try to make a point of
educating your audience.

   Next, go back through the speech and look for opportunities to insert humorous remarks. Once you've
looked through your speech and examined places for verbal humor, think about any physical humor or props
that would enhance your speech. Physical humor is great if you can pull it off without being self-conscious.
One of the biggest mistakes any humorist makes is to become too aware of what his or her body is doing
because it's then harder to be free and funny. As for props, after-dinner speakers have been known to use
everything from oversized inflatable baseball bats to rubber clown noses. The goal for a funny prop is that it
adds to the humor of the speech without distracting from its message.

   Last, and probably most important, try the humor out on real, live people. This is important for three
reasons. First, the success of humor depends heavily on delivery, and especially timing in delivery. You will
need practice to polish your delivery so that your humor comes across. If you can't make it through one of your

643 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
jokes without cracking up, you will need to either incorporate the self-crackup into your delivery or forgo using
that joke.

   Just because you find something unbelievably funny in your head doesn't mean that it will make anyone
else laugh. Often, humor that we have written down on paper just doesn't translate when orally presented. You
may have a humorous story that you love reading on paper, but find that it just seems to drone on once you
start telling it out loud. Furthermore, remember there is a difference between written and verbal language,
and this also translates to how humor is interpreted. Third, you need to make sure the humor you choose will
be appropriate for a specific audience. What one audience finds funny another may find offensive. Humor is
the double-edged sword of public speaking. On one side, it is an amazing and powerful speaking tool, but on
the other side, few things will alienate an audience more than offensive humor. If you're ever uncertain about
whether a piece of humor will offend your audience, don't use it.

   So you may now be asking, "What kind of topics are serious that I can joke about?" The answer to that, like
the answer to most everything else in the book, is dependent on your audience and the speaking situation,
which is to say any topic will work, while at the same time you need to be very careful about how you choose
your topic.

   Take, for example, the experience one of your authors had while he was attending a large university. One of
the major problems that any large university faces is parking: the ratio of parking spaces to students at some
of these schools can be 1:7 (one parking space for every seven students). In addressing this topic at a banquet,
a student gave an after- dinner speech that addressed the problem of the lack of student parking. To do so, he
camouflaged his speech as a faux-eulogy (fake eulogy) for the yellow and black board on the parking lot gates
(see Image 15.1) that was constantly and consistently driven through by students wanting to access restricted
parking. The student personified the board by noting how well it had done its job and lamented that it would
never get to see its little toothpick children grow up to guard the White House. But underneath the humor
incorporated into the speech was a serious message: this wouldn't keep happening if adequate parking was
provided for students on campus.

                                      Motivational Speeches

A motivational speech is designed not only to make an audience experience emotional arousal (fear, sadness,
joy, excitement) but also to motivate the audience to do something with that emotional arousal. Whereas a
traditional persuasive speech may want listeners to purchase product X or agree with idea Y, a motivational
speech helps to inspire people in a broader fashion, often without a clearly articulated end result in mind.
As such, motivational speaking is a highly specialized form of persuasive speaking commonly delivered in
schools, businesses, religious houses of worship, and club or group contexts. The Toastmasters International
Guide to Successful Speaking (Slutsky & Aun, 1997) lists four types of motivational speeches: hero, survivor,
religious, and success.

   The hero speech is a motivational speech given by someone who is considered a hero in society (e.g., military
speakers, political figures, and professional athletes). Just type "motivational speech" into YouTube and you'll
find many motivational speeches given by individuals who can be considered heroes or role models.

   The survivor speech is a speech given by someone who has survived a personal tragedy or who has faced
and overcome serious adversity. In the following clip, cancer survivor Becky M. Olsen discusses being a cancer
survivor (http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zuo1u_C9_3g). Becky Olsen goes all over the country talking with
and motivating cancer survivors to beat the odds.

   The religious speech is fairly self-explanatory; it is designed to incorporate religious ideals into a
motivational package to inspire an audience into thinking about or changing aspects of their religious lives.

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 644
The final type of motivational speech is the success speech, which is given by someone who has succeeded in
some aspect of life and is giving back by telling others how they too can be successful.

                                              Summary

As stated at the beginning of this section, you will almost certainly be limited by your professor with regards to
which of these types of speeches you can give for your special occasion speech in class, but it is not unrealistic
to think that you will be called upon at various points in your life to give one or more of these speeches.
Knowing the types and basic structures will help when those moments arise.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

645 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
           18.3 Special Occasion Language

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1815#audio-1815-1

   Special occasion speaking is so firmly rooted in the use of good language that it makes sense to address it
here. More than any other category of speech, the special occasion speech is arguably one where the majority
of your preparation time will be specifically allocated towards the words you choose. This isn't to say you
shouldn't have used good language in your informative and persuasive speeches, but that the emphasis shifts
slightly in a special occasion speech.

   For example, for your informative and persuasive speeches you were required to conduct research and
cite your sources in a bibliography or references/works cited page, which took you some time to look up and
format. In most cases, that will not be necessary in a special occasion speech, although there may be reasons
to consult sources or other persons for information in crafting your speech. So for special occasion speeches,

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 646
there is a trade-off. The time you don't spend doing research is now going to be reallocated towards crafting
emotional and evocative phrases that convey the sentiment your speech is meant to impart.

   The important thing to remember about using language effectively is that we are not talking about using
big words just to sound smart. Do not touch a thesaurus! Good language isn't about trying to impress us with
fancy words. It's about taking the words you are already comfortable and familiar with and putting them in
the best possible order. Consider the following example from the then-president of the Ohio State University,
Gordon Gee, giving a commencement address at Florida State University in 1997:

   As you look back on your years at Florida State I hope you remember many good things that have happened. These
   experiences are,
   for the most part, events of the mind. The memories, ladies and gentlemen, however, are treasures of the heart.

Notice three things about his use of language: first, he doesn't try to use any fancy words, which he certainly
could if he wanted to. Every word in this portion of his speech is one that all of us knew by the time we left
elementary school, so again, don't mistake good language for big words. Using a five-syllable word when a two-
syllable word will work just as well often means a speaker is trying too hard to sound smart. And given that the
use of those big words often comes off sounding awkward or inappropriate, you're better off just sticking with
what you know.

   Second, notice how he uses those basic words to evoke emotion and wonderment. Putting the words you
know into the best possible order, when done well, will make your speech sound extremely eloquent and
emotional. Third, he uses parallelism in this brief snippet. The use of "events of the mind" and "treasures
of the heart" to compare what is truly important about the college experience is powerful. Indeed, Gee's
commencement address is full of various rhetorical devices, with the twelve-minute speech also containing
alliteration, assonance, and antithesis.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

647 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
            18.4 Special Occasion Delivery

Click below to play an audio file of this section of the chapter sponsored by the Women for OSU Partnering to
Impact grant.

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                      https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/?p=1817#audio-1817-1

   Just as the language for special occasion speaking is slightly different, so too are the ways in which you
will want to deliver your speech. First and foremost, since you will be spending so much time crafting the
perfect language to use and putting your words in the right order, it is imperative that you say exactly what you
have written; otherwise, what was the point? To that end, your delivery for a special occasion speech will skew

                                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 648
slightly more in favor of manuscript speaking. While it is still vital to establish eye contact with your audience
and to not sound like you are reading, it is also important to get the words exactly right.

   You will need to practice your special occasion speech as much as or even more than you did for your
informative or persuasive speeches. You need to know what you are going to say and feel comfortable knowing
what is coming next. This is not to say you should have your speech memorized, but you need to be able to
take your eyes off the page in order to establish and maintain a rapport with your audience, a vital element
in special occasion speaking because of the emotional component at the core of these speeches. Knowing
your speech will also allow you to counteract the flow of adrenaline into your system, something particularly
important given that special occasion speeches tend to be very emotional, not just for the audience, but for you
as well.

   Basically, knowing your speech well allows you to incorporate the emotion that a special occasion speech
is meant to convey, something that is hard to do when you read the entirety of your speech. In this way your
audience will sense the pride you feel for a graduating class during a commencement speech, the sorrow you
feel for the deceased during a eulogy, or the gratitude you have when accepting an award.

                                             Conclusion

Special occasion speaking is the most varied type of speaking to cover; however, there are some general rules
to keep in mind regardless of what type you are engaged in. Remember that using good, evocative language is
key, and that it is important that you deliver your speech in a way that both conveys the proper emotion for the
occasion as well as allows you to give the speech exactly as you wrote it.

                  This resource is available at no cost at https://open.library.okstate.edu/speech2713/

649 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
18.5 Sample Special Occasion Speech Script

                                          THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/ | 650
                    18.6 Enrichment

                                            Discussion Questions

            1. Which special occasion speech do you think will be one you will most likely give in the next 10-15 years? Why?
            2. How would you give a speech if you were giving an award versus receiving an award?
            3. Why should a special occasion speech be kept short?
            4. Imagine that you have been instructed to deliver a speech of introduction for a controversial figure (such as Lance

                 Armstrong, Eminem, Bill Maher, or Ann Coulter). How might you introduce someone whom the audience may
                 view unfavorably? How would you introduce someone whom you either do not like or do not respect?

                                                   Activities

            1. With a classmate write a speech of acceptance for a real or hypothetical award for each other. Present the speech
                 to the class.

            2. In a group, think of a guest speaker you would like to see visit the university, and write a two-minute speech of
                 introduction for them.

            3. Watch this video of a touching toast given by John Travolta to Oprah Winfrey on her birthday. As you're watching,
                 keep the following advice from Section 18.2: Types of Special Occasion Speeches in mind. Keep toasts brief and
                 focus the attention on the person being toasted, not the speaker.
                     What do you think about the length of Travolta's toast? Too fast? Too slow? Why?
                     How did Travolta make sure to keep the focus on Oprah?
                     How do you think Travolta did with his delivery of this toast? What are some suggestions for improvements?

            4. In class, students write a toast they could give while out to eat with friends to celebrate their friendships and
                 college experiences. Ask for a volunteer to share with the class.

651 | THIS RESOURCE IS AVAILABLE AT NO COST AT HTTPS://OPEN.LIBRARY.OKSTATE.EDU/SPEECH2713/
                            Glossary

"Breathe and Release"
      a short-cut version of systematic de-sensitization appropriate for public speaking preparation

Ableism
      the system of beliefs and practices that produces a physical and mental standard that is projected as
      normal for a human being and labels deviations from it abnormal, resulting in unequal treatment and
      access to resources

Abstract Language
      language that evokes many different visual images in the minds of your audience

Academic Books
      books that are primarily written for other academics for informational and research purposes

Acculturated
      learning and using a code that other group members will be able to recognize

Achievement-Oriented Leaders
      strive for excellence and set challenging goals, constantly seeking improvement and exhibiting
      confidence that group members can meet their high expectations

Action-Oriented Listeners
      primarily interested in finding out what the speaker wants

Adjourning
      this stage of group development occurs when a group dissolves because it has completed its purpose or
      goal, membership is declining and support for the group no longer exists, or it is dissolved because of
      some other internal or external cause

After Dinner Speeches
      a humorous speech that makes a serious point

Ageism
      prejudice or discrimination against a particular age-group and especially the elderly

Alliteration
      the repetition of initial consonant sounds in a sentence or passage

Analysis
      making the connection between your support and your argument

653 |
Anaphora
      the succession of sentences beginning with the same word or group of words

Antithesis
      the juxtaposition of contrasting ideas in balanced or parallel words, phrases, or grammatical structures

APA style
      style scholars in the various social science fields (e.g., psychology, human communication, business) are
      more likely to use

Appropriateness
      how persons and groups should be referred to and addressed based on inclusiveness and context

Argument
      set of logical premises leading to a clear conclusion

Ascribed Identity
      personal, social, or cultural identities that are placed on us by others

Assonance
      the repetition of vowel sounds in a sentence or passage

Assumptions
      are gaps in a logical sequence that listeners passively fill with their own ideas and opinions and may or
      may not be accurate

Attention-Getter
      first sentence of a speech that is meant to pull the audience's attention to the speaker and topic at hand

Audience Analysis
      the process of gathering information about the people in your audience so that you can understand their
      needs, expectations, beliefs, values, attitudes, and likely opinions

Avowed Identity
      personal, social, or cultural identities that we claim for ourselves

Backtracking
      after you've finished reading useful sources, see who those sources cited on their bibliographies or
      reference pages

Bar Graph
      a graph designed to show the differences between quantities

Best Example
      demonstrates the "best" way someone should behave within a specific context

Bias
      predisposition or preconception of a topic that prevents impartiality

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 654
Brakelight
      transitional phrase that lets the audience know the speech is coming to a close

Captive Audience
      audiences that are required to be present or feel obligated to do so

Causal Pattern
      organizational pattern that reasons from cause to effect or from effect to cause

Channel
      the speaker's use of verbal and nonverbal communication

Character
      a person's reputation in regards to trustworthiness and goodness

Chart
      a graphical representation of data (often numerical) or a sketch representing an ordered process

Chronocentrism
      the assumption that people today are superior to people who lived in earlier eras (Russell, 1991)

Chronological Pattern
      main points are delivered according to when they happened and could be traced on a calendar or clock

Cliches
      predictable and generally overused expressions; usually similes

Code-switching
      changing from one way of speaking to another between or within interactions; happens most frequently
      in interracial communication

Coercive Power
      comes from the ability of a group member to provide a negative incentive

Cognitive Dissonance
      a psychological phenomenon where people confronted with conflicting information or viewpoints reach
      a state of dissonance (generally the disagreement between conflicting thoughts and/or actions), which
      can be very uncomfortable, and results in actions to get rid of the dissonance and maintain consonance

Cognitive Restructuring (CR)
      an internal process through which individuals can deliberately adjust how they perceive an action or
      experience

Communication
      attempts to reproduce what is in our minds in the minds of our audience

Communication Apprehension
      an individual's level of fear or anxiety associated with either real or anticipated communication with
      another person or persons

655 |
Competence
      demonstrated skill or knowledge in a particular area or topic

Conclusion
      statement that can be clearly drawn from the provided premises

Connotative
      the subjective or personal meaning the word evokes in people together or individually

Consensus Rule
      a decision-making technique in which all members of the group must agree on the same decision

Console
      to offer comfort in a time of grief

content
      the stuff you add to the book

Content-Oriented Listeners
      are interested in the message itself, whether it makes sense, what it means, and whether it's accurate

Context
      considering the context of a public speech involves thinking about four dimensions: physical, temporal,
      social-psychological, and cultural (DeVito, 2009)

Conversant
      being conversant is the condition of being able to discuss an issue intelligently with others

Coordination
      all of the numbers or letters of points should represent the same idea

Credibility
      the perception the audience holds of you regarding your competence and character

Critical Listening
      using careful, systematic thinking and reasoning to see whether a message makes sense in light of factual
      evidence

Cultural Dimension
      final context dimension Joseph DeVito mentions; we interact with others from different cultures,
      misunderstandings can result from differing cultural beliefs, norms, and practices

Cultural Identity
      based on socially constructed categories that teach us a way of being and include expectations for social
      behavior or ways of acting

Culture
      the ongoing negotiation of learned and patterned beliefs, attitudes, values, and behaviors

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 656
Decoding
      "sensing (for example, hearing or seeing) a source's message, interpreting the source's message,
      evaluating the source's message, and responding to the source's message" (Wrench, McCroskey &
      Richmond, 2008)

Demographic Analysis
      compiling information, such as the gender, age range, marital status, race, and ethnicity of the people in
      your audience

Demographic Information
      information such as the gender, age range, marital status, race, and ethnicity of the people in your
      audience

Denotative
      the objective or literal meaning shared by most people using the word

Designated Leaders
      officially recognized in their leadership role and may be appointed or elected by people inside or outside
      the group

Diagram
      drawings or sketches that outline and explain the parts of an object, process, or phenomenon that cannot
      be readily seen

Dialectic
      a relationship between two opposing concepts that constantly push and pull one another

Dialogic Theory of Public Speaking
      based on three overarching principles that dialogue is more natural than monologue, meanings are in
      people not words, and contexts and social situations impact perceived meanings

Dialogue
      communication between two or more persons

Dichotomies
      dualistic ways of thinking that highlight opposites, reducing the ability to see gradations that exist in
      between concepts

Digital Divide
      refers to the unequal access to technology and related skills that exists in much of the world

Direct Quotation
      when you cite the actual words from a source with no changes

Directive Leaders
      provide psychological structure for their group members by clearly communicating expectations,
      keeping a schedule and agenda, providing specific guidance as group members work toward the
      completion of their task, and taking the lead on setting and communicating group rules and procedures

657 |
Distortion
      occurs when someone purposefully twists information in a way that detracts from its original meaning

Diversity
      a key dimension of audience membership and, therefore, of audience analysis; while the term "diversity"
      is often used to refer to racial and ethnic minorities, it is important to realize that audiences can be
      diverse in many other ways as well

Division
      if you have an A, then you need a B; if you have a 1, then you need a 2, and so on

Dominant Identities
      historically had and currently have more resources and influence

Elitism
      consciousness of being or belonging to an elite

Emergent Leaders
      gain status and respect through engagement with the group and its task and are turned to by others as a
      resource when leadership is needed

Encoding
      what a source does when "creating a message, adapting it to the receiver, and transmitting it across some
      source-selected channel" (Wrench, McCroskey & Richmond, 2008)

Encyclopedias
      information sources that provide short, very general information about a topic

Ends
      those outcomes that you desire to achieve

Entertaining Narratives
      stories designed purely to delight an audience and transport them from their daily concerns

Entertaining Speaking
      involves an array of speaking occasions ranging from introductions to wedding toasts, to presenting and
      accepting awards, to delivering eulogies at funerals and memorial services in addition to after-dinner
      speeches and motivational speeches

Essentialize
      reduce/overlook important variations within a group

Ethical Listening
      rests heavily on honest intentions; we should extend to speakers the same respect we want to receive
      when it's our turn to speak

Ethical Pyramid
      developed by Elspeth Tilley; involved three basic concepts: intent, means and ends

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 658
Ethnic Identity
      a group an individual identifies with based on a common culture

Ethnocentrism
      the attitude that one's own group, ethnicity, or nationality is superior to others

Ethos
      the term Aristotle used to refer to what we now call credibility: the perception that the speaker is honest,
      knowledgeable, and rightly motivated

Eulogy
      a speech given in honor of someone who has died

Euphemisms
      language devices often used to make something unpleasant sound more tolerable

Evaluating
      fourth stage of the listening process; judging the value of the message

Execution
      involves actually reading a quotation, paraphrasing a speaker or author's words, summarizing a speaker
      or author's ideas, providing numerical support, or showing pictographic support

Expediter
      a task-related role that functions to keep the group on track toward completing its task by managing the
      agenda and setting and assessing goals in order to monitor the group's progress

Expert Power
      comes from knowledge, skill, or expertise that a group member possesses and other group members do
      not

Expert Testimony
      expresses the attitudes, values, beliefs, or behaviors recommended by someone who is an acknowledged
      expert on a topic

Expertise
      Someone having considerable knowledge on a topic or considerable skill in accomplishing something

Extemporaneous Speaking
      the presentation of a carefully planned and rehearsed speech, spoken in a conversational manner using
      brief notes

Eyewitness Testimony
      given by someone who has direct contact with the phenomenon of your speech topic

Fact
      a truth that is arrived at through the scientific process

659 |
Feedback
      when a receiver sends a message back to a source

Feminism
      an intellectual and social movement advanced women's rights and our overall understanding of gender

Figurative Analogies
      compare two ideas or objects from two different classes, or a group that has common attributes,
      characteristics, qualities, or traits

Figurative Language
      language that does not use comparisons like similes and metaphors

Focus Group
      a small group of people who give you feedback about their perceptions

Forming
      group members begin to reduce uncertainty associated with new relationships and/or new tasks through
      initial interactions that lay the foundation for later group dynamics

Frame of Reference
      the unique set of perspectives, experience, knowledge, and values belonging to every individual

Free Speech
      according to Merriam Webster's Dictionary of Law, free speech entails "the right to express information,
      ideas, and opinions free of government restrictions based on content and subject only to reasonable
      limitations (as the power of the government to avoid a clear and present danger) esp. as guaranteed by
      the First and Fourteenth Amendments to the U.S. Constitution" (Freedom of speech)

Gatekeeper
      manages the flow of conversation in a group in order to achieve an appropriate balance so that all group
      members get to participate in a meaningful way

Gender
      an identity based on internalized cultural notions of masculinity and femininity that is constructed
      through communication and interaction.

General-Interest Periodicals
      magazines and newsletters published on a fairly systematic basis

Generalizability
      occurs when we attempt to survey a small number of people in the hopes of representing a much larger
      group of people

Globalization
      a complex system of interconnecting structural and cultural forces that aid the spread of ideas and
      technologies and influence the social and economic organization of societies

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 660
Graph
      a pictorial representation of the relationships of quantitative data using dots, lines, bars, pie slices, and
      the like

Group Climate
      the relatively enduring tone and quality of group interaction that is experienced similarly by group
      members

Group Cohesion
      the commitment of members to the purpose of the group and the degree of attraction among individuals
      within the group

Group Fantasies
      verbalized references to events outside the "here and now" of the group, including references to the
      group's past, predictions for the future, or other communication about people or events outside the group

Group Socialization
      the process of teaching and learning the norms, rules, and expectations associated with group interaction
      and group member behaviors

Groupthink
      a negative group phenomenon characterized by a lack of critical evaluation of proposed ideas or courses
      of action that results from high levels of cohesion and/or high conformity pressures

Gustatory
      of or relating to the sense of taste

Harmonizer
      group role played by members who help manage the various types of group conflict that emerge during
      group communication

Hearing
      an accidental and automatic brain response to sound that requires no effort

Hero Speech
      a motivational speech given by someone who is considered a hero in society

Heterosexism
      a system of attitudes, bias, and discrimination in favor of female-male sexuality and relationships

Heterosexist Language
      language that assumes the heterosexual orientation of a person or group of people

Hyperbole
      intentional exaggeration for effect

Idiom
      a word or phrase where the meaning cannot be predicted from normal, dictionary definitions

661 |
Imagery
      language that makes the recipient smell, taste, see, hear, and feel a sensation; also known as sensory
      language

Impromptu Speaking
      the presentation of a short message without advance preparation

Information Power
      comes from a person's ability to access information that comes through informal channels and well-
      established social and professional networks

Information Provider
      group role including behaviors that are more evenly shared than in other roles, as ideally, all group
      members present new ideas, initiate discussions of new topics, and contribute their own relevant
      knowledge and experiences

Information Seeker
      asks for more information, elaboration, or clarification on items relevant to the group's task

Informative Narratives
      provide information or explanations about a speaker's topic

Informative Speaking
      the primary purpose of informative presentations is to share one's knowledge of a subject with an
      audience

Informative Speech
      a speech based entirely and exclusively on facts and whose main purpose is to inform rather than
      persuade, amuse, or inspire

Intent
      to be an ethical listener or speaker, one must begin with ethical intentions; for example, if we agree that
      honesty is ethical, it follows that ethical speakers will prepare their remarks with the intention of telling
      the truth to their audiences

Interactional Model of Public Speaking
      a theory of public speaking that includes the source, channel, receiver, encoding, decoding, and feedback

Intercultural Communication
      communication between people with differing cultural identities

Intercultural Communication Competence
      he ability to communicate effectively and appropriately in various cultural contexts

Interdependence
      sharing a common purpose and a common fate

Interlibrary Loan
      a process where librarians are able to search other libraries to locate the book a researcher is trying to find

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 662
Interpersonal Conflict
      emerges from conflict between individual members of the group

Interpreter
      helps manage the diversity within a group by mediating intercultural conflict, articulating common
      ground between different people, and generally creating a climate where difference is seen as an
      opportunity rather than as something to be feared

Intersectionality
      asks us to acknowledge that we each have multiple cultures and identities that intersect with each other

Interview
      a one-on-one exchange in which you ask questions of a respondent

Irony
      the expression of one's meaning by using language that normally signifies the opposite, typically for
      humorous or emphatic effect

Irrefutable
      a statement or claim that cannot be argued

Jargon
      language used in a specific field that may or may not be understood by others

Lament
      to express grief or sorrow

Language
      any formal system of gestures, signs, sounds, and symbols used or conceived as a means of
      communicating thought, either through written, enacted, or spoken means

Leader
      a group role that is associated with a high-status position and may be formally or informally recognized
      by group members

Leadership
      a complex of beliefs, communication patterns, and behaviors that influence the functioning of a group
      and move a group toward the completion of its task

Lectern
      a small raised surface, usually with a slanted top, where a speaker can place notes during a speech

Legitimate Power
      power that flows from the officially recognized position, status, or title of a group member

Lexical Definition
      specifically states how a word is used within a specific language

663 |
Line Graph
      a graph designed to show trends over time

Linear Model of Public Speaking
      a model of public speaking that includes the source, channel, and receiver

Listening
      at its best, is active, focused, concentrated attention for the purpose of understanding the meanings
      expressed by a speaker

Listening or Receiver Apprehension
      the fear that you might be unable to understand the message or process the information correctly or be
      able to adapt your thinking to include the new information coherently

Literal Analogies
      compare two objects or ideas that clearly belong to the same class

Literal Language
      language that does not use comparisons like similes and metaphors

Logos
      logical and organized arguments and the credible evidence to support the arguments within a speech;
      arguments based on logic

Main Points
      the main ideas in the speech

Majority Rule
      a commonly used decision-making technique in which a majority (one-half plus one) must agree before a
      decision is made

Man-linked Terms
      Terms such as "fireman" or "policemen" that incorrectly identify a job as linked only to a male.

Manuscript Speaking
      the word-for-word iteration of a written message

Means
      the tools or behaviors we employ to achieve a desired outcome

Media Convergence
      refers to the merging of technologies that were previously developed and used separately

Media Imperialism
      the domination of other countries through exported media and the values and ideologies they contain

Media Literacy
      involves our ability to critique and analyze the potential impact of the media

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 664
Mediated
      visual images or items to help the speaker communicate or clarify their message

Memorized Speaking
      the rote recitation of a written message that the speaker has committed to memory

Mental Dialogue
      an imagined conversation the speaker has with a given audience in which the speaker tries to anticipate
      what questions, concerns, or issues the audience may have to the subject under discussion

Message
      the verbal and/or nonverbal communication conveyed by the speaker

Metaphors
      a figure of speech that identifies something as being the same as some unrelated thing for rhetorical
      effect, thus highlighting the similarities between the two

Minority Rule
      a decision-making technique in which a designated authority or expert has final say over a decision and
      may or may not consider the input of other group members

MLA style
      the style scholars in the various humanities fields (e.g., English, philosophy, rhetoric) are more likely to
      use

Monologue
      a prolonged speech by a single person

Monotone
      too little variation in pitch

Monroe's Motivated Sequence
      organizational pattern used for persuasive speeches involving five steps: attention, need, satisfaction,
      visualization, and action

Motivational Speech
      a speech designed not only to make an audience experience emotional arousal (fear, sadness, joy,
      excitement) but also to motivate the audience to do something with that emotional arousal

Narratives
      stories that help an audience understand the speaker's message

Negative Example
      used to illustrate what not to do

Noise
      a wide range of distractions that can inhibit an audience member from accurately attending to a
      speaker's speech

665 |
Nominal Group Technique
      guides decision making through a four-step process that includes idea generation and evaluation and
      seeks to elicit equal contributions from all group members

Non-Dominant Identities
      historically had and currently have less resources and influence

Nonexample
      used to explain what something is not

Nonverbal Communication
      the transfer of information through the use of body language including eye contact, facial expressions,
      gestures and more

Norming
      during this stage of group development, the practices and expectations of the group are solidified, which
      leads to more stability, productivity, and cohesion within the group

Note of Finality
      last statement that wraps up your entire presentation and lets the audience know the speech is finished

Numerical Support
      citing data and numbers within a speech

Olfactory
      of or relating to the sense of smell

Opinion
      a personal view, attitude, or belief about something

Parallelism
      the repetition of grammatical structures that correspond in sound, meter, or meaning

Paraphrase
      to take a source's basic idea and condense it using your own words

Participative Leaders
      work to include group members in the decision-making process by soliciting and considering their
      opinions and suggestions

Pathos
      the use of emotions such as anger, joy, hate, desire for community, and love to persuade the audience of
      the rightness of a proposition; arguments based on emotion

People-Oriented Listeners
      interested in the speaker; listens to the message in order to learn how the speaker thinks and how they
      feel about their message

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 666
Performing
      During this stage of group development, group members work relatively smoothly toward the completion
      of a task or achievement of a purpose

Personal Identity
      include the components of self that are primarily intrapersonal and connected to our life experiences

Persuade
      to convince, motivate, or otherwise persuade others to change their beliefs, take an action, or reconsider
      a decision

Persuasion
      symbolic process in which communicators try to convince other people to change their attitudes or
      behavior regarding an issue through the transmission of a message, in an atmosphere of free choice

Persuasive Definitions
      motivate an audience to think in a specific manner about the word or term

Persuasive Narratives
      stories used to persuade people to accept or reject a specific attitude, value, belief, or behavior

Persuasive Speaking
      the primary purpose of persuasive speaking is to convince, motivate, or otherwise persuade others to
      change their beliefs, take an action, or reconsider a decision

Physical Dimension
      involves the real or touchable environment where communication occurs

Physical Noise
      consists of various sounds in an environment that interfere with a source's ability to hear

Physiological Noise
      consists of distractions to a speaker's message caused by a listener's own body

Pictograph
      a graph using iconic symbols to dramatize differences in amounts

Pictographic Support
      any drawn or visual representation of an object or process

Pie Graph
      a graph designed to show proportional relationships within sets of data

Pitch
      the relative highness or lowness of your voice

Plagiarism
      using someone else's words or ideas without giving credit

667 |
Positive Example
      used to clarify or clearly illustrate a principle, method, or phenomenon

Premise
      statement that is designed to provide support or evidence

Preparation Outline
      used to work through the various components of your speech in an organized format

Presentation Aids
      the resources beyond the speech words and delivery that a speaker uses to enhance the message conveyed
      to the audience

Preview
      a sentence that provides a clear outline of the main points that will be discussed in the presentation

Preview Statement
      the part of the speech that literally tells the audience exactly what main points you will cover

Primary Groups
      long-lasting groups that are formed based on relationships and include significant others

Primary Research
      carried out to discover or revise facts, theories, and applications and is reported by the person conducting
      the research

Primary Tension
      tension (arising amongst group members) based on uncertainty that is a natural part of initial
      interactions

Problem Question
      a question that guides the group as it generates possible solutions

Problem Statement
      a single sentence that summarizes the problem a group is trying to solve

Procedural Conflict
      in this type of conflict, group members differ in their beliefs about how something should be done

Project Life Cycle
      The phases that connect the beginning of a project to its end

Proposition
      central idea statement in a persuasive speech; a statement made advancing a judgment or opinion

Psychographic Analysis
      compiling information on the beliefs, attitudes, and values that your audience members embrace

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 668
Psychographic Information
      involves the beliefs, attitudes, and values that your audience members embrace

Psychological Noise
      consists of distractions to a speaker's message caused by a receiver's internal thoughts

Purpose Statement
      clearly states what it is you would like to achieve

Qualifiers
      Powerless words such as "around" or "about" that make your sentences less definitive.

Race
      a socially constructed category based on differences in appearance that has been used to create
      hierarchies that privilege some and disadvantage others

Racism
      a belief that race is a fundamental determinant of human traits and capacities and that racial differences
      produce an inherent superiority of a particular race.

Rate
      how quickly or slowly you say the words of your speech

Receiver
      the audience members listening to the speech

Receiver Biases
      can refer to two things: biases with reference to the speaker and preconceived ideas and opinions about
      the topic or message

Receiving
      first stage of the listening process; the intentional focus on hearing a speaker's message, which happens
      when we filter out other sources so that we can isolate the message and avoid the confusing mixture of
      incoming stimuli

Recorder
      takes notes on the discussion and activities that occur during a group meeting

Referent Power
      comes from the attractiveness, likeability, and charisma of the group member

Regionalisms
      Customary words or phrases used in different geographic regions.

Relational-Oriented Groups
      formed to promote interpersonal connections and are more focused on quality interactions that
      contribute to the well-being of group members

669 |
Religious Speech
      a speech designed to incorporate religious ideals into a motivational package to inspire an audience into
      thinking about or changing aspects of their religious lives

Remembering
      third stage of the listening process; begins with listening; if you can't remember something that was said,
      you might not have been listening effectively

Research
      scholarly investigation into a topic in order to discover, revise, or report facts, theories, and applications

Research Log
      step-by-step account of the process of identifying, obtaining, and evaluating sources for a specific project,
      similar to a lab note-book in an experimental setting

Responding
      fifth and final stage of the listening process; also referred to as "feedback;" the stage at which you indicate
      your involvement; almost anything you do at this stage can be interpreted as feedback

Reverse Outline
      tool you can use to determine the adequacy of your speech's support by starting with your conclusion and
      logically working backward through your speech to determine if the support you provided is appropriate
      and comprehensive

Reward Power
      comes from the ability of a group member to provide a positive incentive as a compliance-gaining
      strategy

Roast
      a humorous speech designed to both praise and good-naturedly insult a person being honored

Salience
      the degree to which we are aware of our identities

Scrutiny Fear
      anxiety resulting from being in a situation where one is being watched or observed, or where one
      perceives themselves as being watched

Secondary Groups
      characterized by less frequent face-to-face interactions, less emotional and relational communication,
      and more task-related communication than primary groups

Secondary Research
      research carried out to discover or revise facts, theories, and applications--similar to primary
      research--but it is reported by someone not involved in conducting the actual research

Secondary Tension
      emerges after groups have passed the forming stage of group development and begin to have conflict over
      member roles, differing ideas, and personality conflicts

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 670
Selective Exposure
      the decision to expose ourselves to messages that we already agree with, rather than those that confront
      or challenge us

Self-Centered Roles
      group role behaviors that divert attention from the task to the group member exhibiting the behavior

Semantic Noise
      occurs when a receiver experiences confusion over the meaning of a source's word choice

Setup
      sentence or phrase in which you explain to your audience where the information you are using came from

Sex
      based on biological characteristics, including external genitalia, internal sex organs, chromosomes, and
      hormones (Wood, 2005)

Sexism
      prejudice or discrimination based on sex

Sexist Language
      language that unnecessarily identifies sex or linguistically erases females through the use of man-linked
      terms and/or the use of "he" or "man" as generics

Sexual Orientation
      refers to a person's primary physical and emotional sexual attraction and activity

Sign Post
      transition using just a word or short phrase

Similes
      a figure of speech involving the comparison of one thing with another thing of a different kind
      (specifically using the terms "like" or "as"), used to make a description more emphatic or vivid

Situational Analysis
      compiling information on characteristics related to the specific speaking situation

Slang
      a type of language that consists of words and phrases that are specific to a subculture or group that others
      may not understand

Small Group Communication
      interactions among three or more people who are connected through a common purpose, mutual
      influence, and a shared identity

Social Cohesion
      the attraction and liking among group members

671 |
Social constructionism
      a view that argues the self is formed through our interactions with others and in relationship to social,
      cultural, and political contexts (Allen, 2011)

Social Identity
      self that are derived from involvement in social groups with which we are interpersonally committed

Social Learning Theory
      claims that media portrayals influence our development of schemata or scripts, especially as children,
      about different groups of people

Social Loafing
      when one group member contributes less to the group than other members or than they would if working
      alone

Social-Psychological Dimension
      refers to "status relationships among participants, roles and games that people play, norms of the society
      or group, and the friendliness, formality, or gravity of the situation" (DeVito, 2009)

Socioeconomic Status
      refers to a combination of characteristics including income, wealth, level of education, and occupational
      prestige

Source
      the person who is giving the speech

Spatial Pattern
      useful organization pattern when the main point's importance is derived from its location or directional
      focus

Speaking Outline
      much more succinct than the preparation outline and includes brief phrases or words that remind the
      speakers of the points they need to make, plus supporting material and signposts

Special Occasion Speech
      a speech designed to address and engage the context and audience's emotions on a specific occasion

Special-Interest Periodicals
      magazines and newsletters that are published for a narrower audience

Specific Purpose Statement
      "expresses both the topic and the general speech purpose in action form and in terms of the specific
      objectives you hope to achieve" (O'Hair, Stewart, & Rubenstein, 2004)

Speech of Acceptance
      a speech given by the recipient of a prize or honor

                                                                                                                                                                                              | 672
Speech of Commencement
      a speech designed to recognize and celebrate the achievements of a graduating class or other group of
      people

Speech of Dedication
      a speech delivered to mark the unveiling, opening, or acknowledging of some landmark or structure

Speech of Farewell
      a speech allowing someone to say goodbye to one part of his or her life as he or she is moving on to the
      next part of life

Speech of Introduction
      a mini-speech given by the host of a ceremony that introduces another speaker and his or her speech

Speech of Presentation
      a brief speech given to accompany a prize or honor

Spotlighting
      Language such as "male nurse" that suggests a person is deviating from the "normal" person who
      would do a particular job and implies that someone's sex is relevant to a particular job.

State-Anxiety
      derived from the external situation within which individuals find themselves

Statistics
      mathematical subfield that gathers, analyzes, and makes inferences about collected data

Stereotyping
      taking for granted that people with a certain characteristic in common have the same likes, dislikes,
      values, and beliefs

Stipulative Definition
      assigned to a word or term by the person who coins that word or term for the first time

Storming
      during this stage of group development, conflict emerges as people begin to perform their various roles,
      have their ideas heard, and negotiate where they fit in the group's structure

Style
      components or features of a literary composition or oral presentation that have to do with the form of
      expression rather than the content expressed (e.g., language, punctuation, parenthetical citations, and
      endnotes)

Subordination
      a hierarchy to the order of the points of a speech

Substantive Conflict
      focuses on group members' differing beliefs, attitudes, values, or ideas related to the purpose or task of
      the group

673 |
Success Speech
      a speech given by someone who has succeeded in some aspect of life and is giving back by telling others
      how they too can be successful

Summary
      clear sentence that restates the preview statement in past tense, outlining the main points that were
      addressed in the speech

Summary of Support
      involves condensing or encapsulating the entire text as a form of support

Support
      range of strategies that are used to develop the central idea and specific purpose by providing
      corroborating evidence

Support-Manipulation
      when speakers attempt to find support that says exactly what they want it to say despite the fact that the
      overwhelming majority of evidence says the exact opposite

Supporter
      group role characterized by communication behaviors that encourage other group members and provide
      emotional support as needed

Supportive Leaders
      show concern for their followers' needs and emotions. They want to support group members' welfare
      through a positive and friendly group climate

Survey
      a set of questions administered to several--or, preferably, many--respondents

Survivor Speech
      a speech given by someone who has survived a personal tragedy or who has faced and overcame serious
      adversity

Symbolic Convergence
      the sense of community or group consciousness that develops in a group through non-task-related
      communication such as stories and jokes

Synergy
      the potential for gains in performance or heightened quality of interactions when complementary group
      members or member characteristics are added to existing ones

Systematic De-sensitization
      a multi-stage, therapeutic regimen to help patients deal with phobias through coping mechanisms

Tag Questions
      Powerless language exemplified by ending statements with questions such as "Don't you think?"
      or "Don't you agree?"

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 674
Target Audience
      the members of an audience the speaker most wants to persuade and who are likely to be receptive to
      persuasive messages

Task Cohesion
      the commitment of group members to the purpose and activities of the group

Task-Oriented Groups
      formed to solve a problem, promote a cause, or generate ideas or information

Teams
      task-oriented groups in which members are especially loyal and dedicated to the task and other group
      members

Temporal Dimension
      "has to do not only with the time of day and moment in history but also with where a particular message
      fits into the sequence of communication events" (DeVito, 2009)

Tension Releaser
      someone who is naturally funny and sensitive to the personalities of the group and the dynamics of any
      given situation and who uses these qualities to manage the frustration level of the group

Textbooks
      books that are written about a segment of content within a field of academic study and are written for
      undergraduate or graduate student audiences

Theoretical Definitions
      used to describe all parts related to a particular type of idea or object

Theory
      a proposed explanation for a phenomenon that can be tested scientifically

Thesis
      single, declarative sentence that captures the essence or main point of your entire presentation

Thought Leader
      individuals who contribute new ideas; to achieve thought leader status, individuals must communicate
      their ideas to others through both writing and public speaking

Time-Oriented Listeners
      prefer a message that gets to the point quickly

Toast
      a speech designed to congratulate, appreciate, or remember

Tone
      the attitude of a given artifact (humorous, serious, light-hearted, etc.)

675 |
Topical Pattern
      main points are developed according to the different aspects, subtopics or topics within an overall topic.

Trait-Anxiety
      anxiety that is aligned with, or a manifestation of, an individual's personality

Transactional Model of Public Speaking
      basic premise of the transactional model is that individuals are sending and receiving messages at the
      same time

Transgender
      an umbrella term for people whose gender identity and/or expression do not match the gender they were
      assigned by birth

Transitional Statements
      phrases or sentences that lead from one distinct- but-connected idea to another

Two-Tailed Arguments
      persuasive technique in which a speaker brings up a counter-argument to their own topic and then
      directly refutes the claim

Understanding
      second stage of the listening process; we attempt to learn the meaning of the message, which is not
      always easy

Unproductive Roles
      group role behaviors that prevent or make it more difficult for the group to make progress

Verbal Communication
      refers to the production of spoken language to send an intentional message to a listener

Virtual Groups
      meet exclusively or primarily online to achieve their purpose or goal

Virtual groups

Vividness
      speaker's ability to present information in a striking, exciting manner

Vocal Cue
      the subtle but meaningful variations in speech delivery, which can include the use of pitch, tone, volume,
      and pace

Vocalized Pauses
      sounds in pauses to make it appear that we haven't actually paused. Another term for them is "fillers" or
      "nonfluencies"

Volume
      the relative softness or loudness of your voice

                                                                                                                                                                                             | 676
Voluntary Audience
      gathers because they want to hear the speech, attend the event, or participate in an event

677 |
Links by Chapter

                                                                                                                       | 678
