Messages that Matter:
Public Speaking in the
Information Age - Third

           Edition
Contributors:
   Audry Bourne, M.S., M.A.
   Geoff Carr, M.A.
   John Jensen, M.A.
   Brenda Johns, M.A.
   Don Kinsey, M.A.
   Ashley Lockman, M.A.
   Teresa Runge, M.A.
   Sherry Simkins, Ph.D.
   Mikki Stevens, M.S.
   Tracy Struble, M.A.
   Faith Valente, Ph.D.
   Lewis Watkins
   Lee Wallace, M.A.
   Elizabeth Whiting, Ph.D.

   2nd Edition Author:
   Josh Misner, Ph.D.
   3rd Edition Editor and OER Creator:
   Geoff Carr, M.A.
   North Idaho College
   2023
   This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License
   Email geoffrey.carr@nic.edu with any comments, feedback,
or suggestions about this edition.
Messages that Matter: Public Speaking in the Information Age - Third Edition
Copyright  2023 by North Idaho College is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Acknowledgements                       xv

Part I. Part I - Chapter 1: What is
Communication?

What is Communication?                 3

Defining Communication                 5

Why Study Communication?               7

Writing                                10

The Printing Press                     15

Industrial/Electrochemical Revolution  17

The Information Age                    19

The Future of Communication            25

Basic Communication Theory             28

Advanced Communication Theory          37

Types of Communication                 40

Types of Public Speaking               46
The Secret to Success in Public Speaking  50

Chapter 1 Summary                         54

Part II. Chapter 2: The Dread of
the Podium

The Dread of the Podium                   59

Acknowledging Fear                        64

Talk About What You Love                  67

Practice, Practice, Practice              69

Positive Visualization                    72

Mindful Awareness and Authenticity        76

Plan Out The Details                      81

Anxiety Peaks                             83

Controlling Physical Activity             86

Nervous Symptoms Are Unseen               88

Chapter 2 Summary                         91
Part III. Chapter 3: Topic Selection
and Purpose

Topic Selection and Purpose           95

General Speaking Purpose              98

Topic Selection and Refinement        102

Topic Considerations                  110

Specific Purpose                      113

Central Idea                          115

Titling the Speech                    121

Chapter 3 Summary                     123

Part IV. Part II - Chapter 4:
Analyzing the Audience

Analyzing the Audience                127

Collecting Audience Data              131

Survey Research                       139

Designing Questions                   150

Maintaining Surprise                  155

Chapter 4 Summary                     160
Part V. Chapter 5: Gathering
Information

Gathering Information                      165

Where to Look                              169

Internet Sources                           178

Using Research in a Speech                 192

Thinking Critically About Information      198

Using Outside Information Ethically        201

Chapter 5 Summary                          203

Additional Resources                       205

Part VI. Chapter 6: Organizing the
Idea

Organizing the Idea                        209

The Purpose of the Introduction            217

Creating the Introduction, Step 1: Grab    219

Attention

Creating the Introduction, Step 2: Relate  228

to the Audience
Creating the Introduction, Step 3: Relate  230

to Self (Establish Credibility)

Creating the Introduction, Step 4: The     235

Core of the Speech

Composing the Body of the Speech           240

Transitions                                250

Signal the End                             254

Concluding the Speech                      256

Important Guidelines for Conclusions       262

Chapter 6 Summary                          265

Sample 1A: Speech to Inform                267

Sample 1B: Speech to Inform                273

Sample 2A: Speech to Inform with           278

Visuals

Sample 2B: Speech to Inform with           284

Visuals

Part VII. Chapter 7: Using
Language to Frame the Message

Using Language to Frame the Message        291

Know What to Avoid                         295
Varied Meanings                      297

Clarity                              302

Vivid Language                       309

Rhetorical Devices                   312

Chapter 7 Summary                    317

Part VIII. Chapter 8: Practice,
Preparation, and Delivery
Techniques

Practice, Preparation, and Delivery  321

Techniques

Why Practice?                        324

Getting Started                      326

Starting Tips for Practice           328

Practice Session #1                  334

Practice Session #2                  338

Practice Session #3                  344

Planning The Delivery                347

Vocal Quality                        355

Advanced Delivery Tips               363

More Advanced Delivery Tips          368
Question and Answer Period                373

Chapter 8 Summary                         377

Part IX. Chapter 9: Listening Skills
and Critical Evaluation

Listening Skills and Critical Evaluation  381

Hearing vs. Listening                     383

Preparing to Listen                       385

Strategies for Listening Well             389

Acting as a Respectful Listener           393

Peer Evaluations                          400

Chapter 9 Summary                         405

Completing In-Class Peer Evaluations      407

Sample 1: Good Peer Evaluation - Speech 409
to Inform

Sample 2: Poor Peer Evaluation - Speech   412

to Inform
Part X. Chapter 10: Designing and
Using Effective Visual Aids

Designing and Using Effective Visual  417

Aids

Types of Visual Aids                  421

PowerPoint/Prezi                      433

When/Where to Use Visual Aids         439

Plan Everything                       441

Chapter 10 Summary                    443

Additional Resources                  444

Part XI. Part III - Chapter 11:
Persuasion Theories

Persuasion Theories                   447

Specific Purpose and Persuasion       450

Persuasive Strategy                   453

Rhetorical Triangle                   463

Ethos                                 464

Pathos                                468

Logos                                 472
Addressing Objections              478

Blending Ethos-Pathos-Logos Together 486

Communication-Specific Persuasion  488

Theories

Chapter 11 Summary                 494

Additional Resources               496

Part XII. Chapter 12: Motivating
Others to Action

Motivating Others to Action        499

Planning the Topic                 503

Gain Attention                     514

Need Step                          518

Satisfaction Step                  523

Visualization Step                 528

Call to Action                     531

Chapter 12 Summary                 534

Sample 3A: Speech to Motivate to Action 537

Sample 3B: Speech to Motivate to Action 544

References                         551
Appendix A: Speech Grading Rubrics for  556

COMM-101

Appendix B: Communication Academic      567

Certificate

Appendix C: North Idaho College         569

Communication Course Offerings

Appendix D: Sample Demographic          574

Analysis

Appendix E: Sample Audience Analysis-- 577
Informative Speech

Appendix F: Sample Audience             579

Analysis--Persuasive Speech

Appendix G: Speech Topic Ideas          582

Appendix H: The CRAAP Test              595

Subject Index                           598
                                                     ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS | XV

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Josh Misner would like to thank the following individuals,
whose insightful and thorough peer review proved invaluable
and immensely helpful in the creation of the 2nd edition of
this textbook, which this edition used as its primary source:

   Scott Behson, Ph.D.
Professor of Management, Fairleigh-Dickinson University

   Craig Fischer, M.A.
Adjunct Instructor, Whitworth University

   Lisa Power, Ph.D.
Associate Professor of Marketing, Saint Martin's University

   S. Mitchell Walker, Ph.D.
Assistant Professor of Leadership, National University

   Levy Zamora, M.A.
Communication Instructor, De Anza College

   Geoff Carr would like to thank the following for their
contributions, feedback, and assistance in compiling this
edition:

   Theresa Huff, M.Ed.
Ashley Lockman, M.A.
Elizabeth Whiting, Ph.D.
XVI | ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Audry Bourne, M.A., M.S.
Lee Wallace, M.A.

   Cover image designed by NIC student Megan Hudlet
                    PART I - CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS COMMUNICATION? | 1

PART I

PART I - CHAPTER
1: WHAT IS
COMMUNICATION?

Source: Illustration by geralt via Pixabay

Chapters 1-3 outline the basics of communication.
2 | PART I - CHAPTER 1: WHAT IS COMMUNICATION?
                                                 WHAT IS COMMUNICATION? | 3

WHAT IS
COMMUNICATION?

          "The problem with communication is the
          illusion that it has been accomplished."
          --George Bernard Shaw, Irish author and
          playwright Source: Published on LIFE, G
          Bernard Shaw 2, marked as public domain,
          more details on Wikimedia Commons
4 | WHAT IS COMMUNICATION?

When reading George Bernard Shaw's words above, most
people can easily identify with this sentiment. Undoubtedly,
many individuals have experienced the pains and frustration
inherent with instances of miscommunication, which is likely
the reason people so easily recognize the humor inherent in his
statement.

   In fact, it may prove easier to identify and define elements
of miscommunication than to identify and define the process
of communication. Communicators can face many challenges,
like using the wrong word for the wrong audience, failing to
use the appropriate tone for the intended message, or leaving
out pertinent information. Sadly, individuals may find it easier
to miscommunicate than to simply get their message across to
their intended audience correctly and efficiently the first time.
                                                DEFINING COMMUNICATION | 5

DEFINING
COMMUNICATION

Source: Franz Marc creator QS:P170,Q44054 , Marc
zwei-frauen-am-berg, marked as public domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

So, what exactly is communication?
   In explaining a potentially complex term, scholars often

begin by examining the root or origin of the term, which, in
this case, comes from the Latin word communicare, meaning
"to share, divide out; communicate, impart, inform; join,
unite, participate in" (Harper, 2015). Roots like this reveal
6 | DEFINING COMMUNICATION

more about the term's original intention, giving clues as to
the subtle nuances of the term, even beyond what most
dictionaries or encyclopedias offer with their detailed
definitions and explanations. In this case, the original intent
of the term was not used to describe a novice learning about
public speaking, rather that the act of communication refers to
something much bigger and broader.

   To communicate means to share information via a process
of joining others together. Communication, in this sense,
defines the means by which people make sense of their life
experiences and provides a tool by which they can relate those
experiences with others.
                                           WHY STUDY COMMUNICATION? | 7

WHY STUDY
COMMUNICATION?

The         study   of

communication has vast

benefits in both personal

and professional contexts.

For example, the industry-

leading job search site

Indeed.com          listed      Source: Edmond J. Safra
                                Center for Ethics, Cynthia
"Communication Skills"          Dwork Public Lecture
                                (32247092978), CC BY 2.0
first in its 2023 article "Top

11 skills employers look for

in a job candidate." In addition, a study performed by the

American Association of Colleges and Universities, released on

January 20, 2015, surveyed 400 employers to determine what

skills they valued most in recent college graduates, and their

summary concluded:

The learning outcomes [employers] rate as most important
includes written and oral communication skills, teamwork
skills, ethical decision-making, critical thinking, and the
ability to apply knowledge in real-world settings.

Regardless of industry or occupation, employers throughout
8 | WHY STUDY COMMUNICATION?

the world still primarily value the ability to communicate
effectively, which transcends the boundaries of public
speaking. The ability to communicate includes interpersonal,
small group, and mass communication, as well as the ability to
communicate interculturally (communication between people
of vastly differing backgrounds, nationalities, ethnicities, etc.),
nonverbally (skilled in reading body language, understanding
environmental effects on communication, etc.), and the ability
to wield persuasion and/or argumentation (discussed at length
later in this book).

   Think about it: ten applicants apply for the same job, and
all ten have similarly qualified backgrounds, training, and
education, but one of them also provides evidence of
proficiency in communication through a certificate program
or award. Who among those candidates is more likely to be
hired? According to surveys such as the one performed by the
American Association of Colleges and Universities, the one
with the background in communication has a better chance of
landing the job. Consider this point from the perspective of
a potential employer engaged in the process of hiring. Which
employee would the company rather hire as an organizational
leader: one who can effectively communicate with all other
employees, or one who needs constant coaching, fails to listen,
and cannot get along well with others?

   People also study communication because they recognize
that revolutions in communication technology have changed
the world. To date, four major revolutions in the way humans
                                           WHY STUDY COMMUNICATION? | 9

communicate have transformed the ways individuals and
societies behave, and each were predicated on the invention or
transformation of a new form of communication technology.
The four revolutions to communication consist of the
invention of writing, the printing press, the Industrial
Revolution, and the Information Age.
10 | WRITING

WRITING

The famed cave paintings of Lascaux, France, which are an
estimated 17,300 years old, represent some of the earliest
evidence of writing. Source: EU X, Lascaux painting, CC
BY-SA 3.0

People don't often think of writing as a form of technology,
but it serves as the second-oldest form of communication
technology, pre-dating all innovations in the field except for
formal language. Most people often take writing for granted
because they tend to learn how to do it at an early age, but
despite such familiarity, writing remains an ancient but useful
form of technology. Depending on the region of the world
                                            WRITING | 11

studied, scholars estimate the act of writing originated between

3200 B.C.E. (Middle East), 1200 B.C.E. (Asia), and 600 B.C.E.

(North America). Unlike iconic, or pictorial, depictions of

historical events, humans began to develop arbitrary systems of

writing, which means the symbols or letters used did not look

like the form they were used to represent.

                                It took a long time for

                                writing to resemble its

                                modern form. The Chinese

                                first invented paper around

                                100 B.C.E., but paper didn't

                                make its way to Europe and

                                the rest of Western

                                civilization until around the

                                10th century. This means

                                that, for about 4,200 years,

                                much of the Western world

                                was taking notes and writing

An image of a Ming dynasty      things down on media other
woodcut that outlines one of    than the paper. What did
the five processes required in  they write on, if not paper?
the ancient art of              For four millennia, writing
papermaking in ancient China.   took place on media such as
Source: anonymous, Making       slate, leather, bark, and clay.
Paper 3, marked as public       Due to the limitations of
domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

                                replication, storage, and

portability these media offered, writing during this time period
12 | WRITING

did not provide the potential for mass communication due to
the limited audience who could engage with such rudimentary
messages.

   Throughout history, individuals and societies have often
looked at innovative technologies with mistrust and fear, and
this holds true for the second-oldest. Even the now cherished
art of writing had its detractors when first developed.

The famous painting The Death of Socrates, painted by
Jacques-Louis David. Though the idea may seem silly to
modern audiences, Socrates expressed fears against the
newfound technology of writing as it began to proliferate.
Source: Jacques-Louis David artist QS:P170,Q83155, The
Death of Socrates MET DT40, CC0 1.0

Socrates (d. 399 B.C.E.), often credited as the founder of
Western philosophy, said this about writing in his famous
dialogue, The Phaedrus:
                                                                              WRITING | 13

        ...this discovery of yours [writing] will create forgetfulness in
        the learners' souls, because they will not use their memories;
        they will trust to the external written characters and not
        remember of themselves. The specific which you have
        discovered is an aid not to memory, but to reminiscence, and
        you give your disciples not truth, but only the semblance of
        truth; they will be hearers of many things and will have
        learned nothing; they will appear to be omniscient and will
        generally know nothing; they will be tiresome company,
        having the show of wisdom without the reality.

  In other words, Socrates' complained that the latest "fad" of
  writing could potentially create a society of idiots who relied
  so heavily on technology that they could no longer function
  for themselves. Does it sound surprising that one of the great
  philosophical minds held such a negative opinion against
  writing? Arguments against new communication technologies
  resurface every time society welcomes a new tool that enhances
  the process.

     The advantages of writing, however, far outweighed any
  negative tradeoffs, and people continue to engage in the
  process to this day. Suddenly, individuals could 1) store
  information more permanently without having to rely on
  someone with a remarkable memory, 2) transmit messages over
  greater distances, and 3) record and analyze communications1.

1. A detriment to politicians, for they could no longer count on getting away with
  changing their stories so rapidly!
14 | WRITING

Every rapid change in communication begets winners and
losers, grants benefits and drawbacks, and catalyzes change.
Such change becomes permanent if the benefits outweigh any
disadvantages society experiences to adopt the new technology.
This pattern will continue in the next three revolutions.
                                                         THE PRINTING PRESS | 15

THE PRINTING PRESS

It would take more than

4,000 years to witness the

next revolution in

communication. During

those millennia, humanity

managed to make

improvements to writing, to

language, and to the media

societies used to record their  This illustration depicts
thoughts, but none of these     Johannes Gutenberg with his
changes amounted to a           printing press. One of the first
revolution until Johannes       bibles published off that press
Gutenberg perfected his         would cost $35 million
printing press in the 15th      nowadays. Source:
century. Gutenberg became       Gr.Diana, Gr.diana Johannes
                                Gutenberg, CC BY-SA 4.0

interested in mass-

producing writing, because at the time, the only way the non-

royal "commoners" could get their hands on a Bible was to

purchase them from monasteries at an astronomical price.

Monks skilled in the art of calligraphy often took months, if

not years, to produce a single edition of the Bible. As a result,

few people had access to religious texts, so they had to rely on
16 | THE PRINTING PRESS

priests to read to them while attending religious services. Such
imbalanced access to the governing religious text of the day
presented the possibility for those in power to take advantage
of the limited flow of information, and as a result, embellish or
manipulate that information to suit their needs.

   Gutenberg received credit for the invention of moveable
type in Europe, which allowed him to print off about 180
copies of the Bible. Since paper was still not the most
commonly used medium of the time, he made 45 copies using
vellum, a parchment made from calfskin. It took roughly 170
calfskins to produce just one Gutenberg Bible, which means
they needed to slaughter about 7,600 calves to produce the
vellum needed!

   Gutenberg's invention suddenly made the most prominent
religious text of Europe available to considerably wider
audiences, and shortly thereafter, Martin Luther published his
95 Theses to kick off the Protestant Reformation, which split
the Christian church into fragments. This began religious
infighting that drastically changed Western civilization over
the next three centuries.

   Today, artists skilled in calligraphy do not hold a monopoly
in the book-publishing world, and though they lost their
status, the world gained huge benefits as the tools that would
lead to mass communication grew in number and capability.
                    INDUSTRIAL/ELECTROCHEMICAL REVOLUTION | 17

INDUSTRIAL/
ELECTROCHEMICAL
REVOLUTION

Source: Philip James de Loutherbourg creator
QS:P170,Q1970087 , Philipp Jakob Loutherbourg d. J. 002,
marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia
Commons

While the printing press enjoyed its heyday with respect to
transformation, another revolution began brewing on the side.
By the late 1700s (a mere 200 years after the last revolution;
notice how the time period between each revolution shrinks
18 | INDUSTRIAL/ELECTROCHEMICAL REVOLUTION

dramatically?), the Industrial Revolution began changing the
way humans communicate on a global scale in a much more
dramatic fashion. Refer to Table 1.1 to review the major
communication inventions from this time period:

   Table 1.1

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://nic.pressbooks.pub/
        messagesthatmatter/?p=874

Moving through the history of these first three revolutions,
the amount of time between each major communication
breakthrough reduces exponentially, from 4,600 years between
the first two, to less than 400 years between the next two, and
finally, a mere decade or so between the third revolution and
the most current one. Of course, the time reduces so drastically
because, with each new form of communication, the sharing
and spreading of information increases. With increased
information comes increased innovation.
                                                      THE INFORMATION AGE | 19

THE INFORMATION AGE

Source: "Purism team", Librem5 phone convergence - screen
keyboard mouse, CC BY-SA 4.0

Though the Defense Department technically created the
internet for a defense and academic project in the mid-1970s,
access to the internet became available to the general public
in 1991 and kicked off the most recent revolution in
communication: The Information Age. The internet 1)
provided the opportunity for the convergence of multiple
forms of technology, 2) facilitated the widespread availability
of information, and 3) allowed users on the network to create
and share content easily. The internet provides access to such
a wealth of information that some people jest that seeking
20 | THE INFORMATION AGE

information using it can feel like trying to take a drink from a

fire hose, and the simile fits.

The term zettabyte (a 1 followed by 21 zeroes) was

introduced to help define the scope of information created by

the wealth of new technological tools (Blair, 2010). A zettabyte

represented the amount of information projected for all of

humanity to create during the year 2010. In comparison, an

IBM supercomputer estimated that the amount of

information created by the culmination of humanity

previously amounted to five exabytes (Rieland, 2012), which

is a paltry 1/1000th of a zettabyte. While a statistical debate

currently rages as to the accuracy of these numbers, a core

truth remains evident.

                                 Thanks in part to the vast

                                 array and ever-growing

                                 repertoire of tools available

                                 for creating and sharing

                                 information, the human

                                 race has entered the

                                 Information Age, which

Source: Illustration by          future societies may view as
WebTechExperts via Pixabay       a turning point for this
                                 species. This radical

transformation, however, inspires the natural human tendency

toward anxiety. Communication technology continues to

advance further with each passing year, presenting ever-

approaching potential for rapid or radical change to occur,
                                                      THE INFORMATION AGE | 21

even for those born into the Information Age who know no
other reality. When this natural fear of radical change
combines with feeling overwhelmed by the ever-present
onslaught of information--some useful, but mostly not--one
begins to see that the Information Age comes with many
hazards. This does not suggest the proverbial sky is falling,
so speak, as a click glance at the history of communication
technology reveals such a claim does not lack historical
precedent.

   Wurman (1989) famously proposed that, "A weekday
edition of The New York Times contains more information
than the average person was likely to come across in a lifetime
in seventeenth-century England" (p. 32). Furthermore, he
suggested that, for one to be a successful member of modern
society, one must "assimilate a body of knowledge that is
expanding by the minute" (p. 32). Taking into account that
Wurman wrote this two full years before the release of the
internet to the general public, this proposition becomes more
salient now more than ever.

   Information has become easier to create and share with
others through an increasingly networked society. As a result,
the dissemination characteristics of information have altered
the behaviors of certain types of organizations, particularly
the well-networked and well-funded legacy media industries
such as journalism, book publishing, filmmaking, and music
producing. In the past, to get a book published, an author had
to write the tome, polish it to perfection, and spend months,
22 | THE INFORMATION AGE

if not years, querying agents and publishers in hopes that
someone would find it worthy of publication. Similarly, with
music producing, artists would often play free shows with the
hopes of getting "discovered" by talent agents who may
occasionally descend from their ivory towers to offer recording
contracts.

   The Information Age, however, has turned these industries
inside out and upside down. Anyone with a desire, a
computer, and an internet connection can publish a book,
article, song, or film. As a result, the information marketplace
has become flooded to the point of supersaturation with
information across various media. Companies such as Netflix
and Spotify rose to fill the role of information
curators--organizations whose sole purpose consisted of
sifting through the tide of new production, extracting the best,
and presenting it for all to consume. The deluge of emerging
information often sacrifices quality for timeliness in an
attempt to provide the first (rather than most accurate)
viewpoint on current events, as seen in the changing nature
of journalism and the 24-hour news cycle. As the world's
technological infrastructure becomes more efficient at the
creation and distribution of new information, this trend will
likely continue.

   This trend has inspired the transformation of the
information marketplace from one that purports to sell media
tailored to consumers' needs into one that simply competes for
attention. The information marketplace has not made getting
                                                      THE INFORMATION AGE | 23

a drink from the fire hose easier; it has simply presented more
fire hoses from which to choose. As a result, the information
marketplace now runs as an attention economy (Davenport &
Beck, 2001). Herbert Simon (1971), writing years before the
Information Age, stated the following:

      ...in an information-rich world, the wealth of information
      means a dearth of something else: a scarcity of whatever it
      is that information consumes. What information consumes
      is rather obvious: it consumes the attention of its recipients.
      Hence a wealth of information creates a poverty of attention
      and a need to allocate that attention efficiently among the
      overabundance of information sources that might consume
      it.

The COVID-19 Pandemic made this battle for attention
palpable in many students' lives, as campus shutdowns forced
them to adapt to online learning. Many found it difficult to
maintain focus in virtual classrooms. As Gillick and Magoulias
(2020) noted, "It is far too easy to open up another browser
tab, turn on some music, or check your Instagram when you
are using your computer/phone/tablet to do schoolwork."
Multi-teching - the act of switching between multiple
electronic information sources at one time - became a
common practice, adversely impacting students' ability to
remain focused on their schoolwork.

   As attention spans become taxed and more fragile with each
passing day, organizations operating within an attention
economy will need to compete more ruthlessly for the
24 | THE INFORMATION AGE

attention of potential consumers. Consumers now face the
unique complication of dealing with anxiety caused by their
attention spans getting pulled in several directions
simultaneously.
                                     THE FUTURE OF COMMUNICATION | 25

THE FUTURE OF
COMMUNICATION

Source: Isabel.santiago.photo, Adolfo Mesquita Nunes
07, CC BY-SA 4.0

Students and scholars of communication now ask the
question: What will the future hold for communication
studies, and what will the next big revolution bring? That
question has yet to be answered, though many theories exist.
Perhaps the next leap forward will occur in the
26 | THE FUTURE OF COMMUNICATION

communication of emotion, as the limbic brain (or part of
the brain responsible for the way humans feel) has no capacity
for language. Will future technology allow people to sense and
translate emotions from person to person, allowing humanity
to empathize with one another more efficiently? Perhaps the
next big advance will resemble telepathy, allowing individuals
to transmit thought without the need for language. Today,
however, verbal communication, whether vocally through the
act of speaking or in writing, remains the primary means of
sharing information.

   Regardless of what the future may hold, everyone now lives
in an exciting time of flux and dynamic change. People now
have vast oceans of information at their fingertips, and though
this provides them with a myriad of possibilities, the potential
for disaster coexists. To navigate the seas of information
overload, individuals must take a step back and observe such
changes from a more mindful, objective perspective, rather
than allowing themselves to get caught up like rats in a
psychology experiment (see B. F. Skinner), mindlessly clicking
away on links generated by an algorithm that knows their
deepest secrets. As with the alphabet, the printing press, and
the Industrial Revolution, humanity will eventually grow
accustomed to this change in due process, but only if it charts
a careful, rational course. Winners and losers will emerge from
the dust as it settles, and those with the impetus for the study
of the complexities of human communication will most likely
remain unscathed.
          THE FUTURE OF COMMUNICATION | 27

Activity

Visit www.google.com/images, type "communication
model" into the search field, and then hit enter.
Scroll through a few pages' worth of images and
take note of the staggering number of diverse visual
depictions of communication. Why do you think
are there so many ways of explaining the same
"basic" concept?
28 | BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY

BASIC COMMUNICATION
THEORY

Source: Phlsph7, Common components of models of
communication, CC BY-SA 4.0

This new understanding of the history and basic idea of
communication provides a great jumping-off point from
which to examine the actual process of communication more
clearly. However, this may prove challenging since it seems like
the number of communication theories that exist equals the
number of scholars studying the process, and unfortunately
every communication expert likely has her or his individual
opinion on exactly how the process works.

   Communication, diluted to its most basic form, includes
                                       BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY | 29

four major components: a message that gets transmitted from
a sender to a receiver, via some form of medium.

   The complex process of communication starts with the
message. The sender must first form the message, which
involves the translation of the brain's electrical signals into
some form of language, which could come in the form of
verbal, nonverbal, or a combination of both communication
types. This translation process often involves trying to
transform emotional impulses into language, which can be
an extraordinarily difficult process to achieve successfully.
Emotions reside in the limbic brain, the oldest portion of the
central nervous system. This portion of the brain has zero
capacity for language, which explains why it can seem so
difficult for individuals to verbalize their emotions at times.
This could explain why humans have been trying to define
concepts such as "love" for millennia, and still, nobody has
gotten it 100% right. Language processing takes place in the
neocortex, which is the more evolved, developed portion of the
brain that generates rational thought and separates the human
species from the rest of the animal kingdom. Transferring an
emotional impulse from the non-language limbic brain over
to the language-processing neocortex, and then effectively and
accurately translating that impulse into a coherent message,
presents a gargantuan challenge in many cases.

   Once the sender has formulated the message, it has to travel
to the receiver, and in that journey, a plethora of all-new
30 | BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY

challenges arise in the form of interference, which comes in
two forms: internal and external.

   Internal interference (also called semantic
      interference) arises from within in the form of mental
      distractions. For example, if a man gets into an argument
      with his spouse before leaving to go to work, he might
      start thinking of great comebacks to say to her later on,
      or he might also distract himself thinking of an
      appropriate apology. In addition, the sender might even
      generate this type of interference within listeners by
      using offensive, inappropriate, or confusing language
      that detracts from the message.

   External interference comes from an outside source
      and arrives via any of the five senses. Visual distractions
      include a shirt with distracting text or a person who
      exhibits an unusual physical stance while speaking.
      Auditory distractions may come in the form of the hum
      of an air conditioner, the horns honking outside the
      room, or any other distracting sound. The feeling of an
      itchy tag on a brand-new shirt or foot pain caused by
      breaking in new shoes represent examples of tactile
      distractions. People can even get distracted by taste, such
      as when they drink orange juice too soon after brushing
      their teeth. Finally, smell can equally distract if someone
      in the room decides to bring lunch to class and not offer
      to share with everyone else.
                                        BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY | 31

The channel (or medium) through which these messages
travel presents a wide variety of challenges as well. In the case of
this textbook, the channel consists of writing. In a live speech,
the channel is the human voice, and while watching a pre-
recorded speech on YouTube, the channel is the internet. Each
channel brings a unique set of challenges. For example:

   Voice: Speakers must project their voices loud enough to
      be heard evenly throughout the room. Speakers must
      speak a common language for the audience to
      understand and speak slowly enough for the audience to
      keep up. Presenters must speak with a variety of
      inflection suitable enough to maintain the audience's
      attention.

   Internet: Connection speed must be suitable enough to
      avoid lag or lengthy downloads. Data must be
      compatible with all operating systems and browsers.
      People tend to be more comfortable expressing
      themselves online, often resulting in more candid
      discussions that may often become heated.

   Writing: Message must be composed in a language the
      reader can understand. Font face, type, and size must be
      legible and not strain the eyes. Colors must have enough
      contrast to be easily legible. Language used must match
      the level of the reader.

Next, the message arrives at the receiver, who must then
32 | BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY

decode in much the same way the sender encoded the original
message. As before, the receiver must possess the capability to
understand the language that the sender used to encode the
message (both verbally and nonverbally), but additionally, the
receiver will run the message through various "filters." These
filters might include preconceived notions, such as when a
speaker wearing a UW Huskies shirt addresses a group of
students at Washington State University. That speaker could
deliver a message that all the students support, but the visual
distraction sparked by the shirt of their rival institution could
trigger preconceived notions against the speaker, which may
prove too difficult to overcome.

     Note to Self

     Can you think of a time when a "filter" impacted
     how you interpreted a message? What was the
     "filter" and what impact did it have?

Cultural norms also provide filters in communication. In
many countries in the Middle East, a speaker who fails to stand
close enough to smell another person's breath may become
viewed as untrustworthy, while in the U.S. such a breach of
                                       BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY | 33

personal space would create a high level of anxiety. That
anxiety creates an internal distraction that acts as an almost
impenetrable filter.

   Lastly, a filter most people use daily comes by way of a
differential between verbal and nonverbal communication.
Nonverbal communication is powerful and difficult, if not
impossible, to ignore. People begin learning nonverbal
communication before they are even born, via the pounding
rhythm of their mothers' heartbeats, the warm touch of the
womb, and external sounds transmitted through the amniotic
fluid. Conservative estimates predict that people send and
receive over 80% of their messages nonverbally, which means
that, if their verbal messages contradict their nonverbal
behaviors, their audience will accept the nonverbal message
as the more accurate one. If the husband from the
aforementioned internal interference example arrives at home
later in the day and asks his wife, "Hi honey, how was your
day?" and she replies in an angry tone with her arms crossed,
"Fine," does that mean things are fine? No, not a chance,
because when the speaker's nonverbal communication
contradicts the verbal communication, the nonverbal
communication almost always indicates the speaker's true
intent.

   Once the message has penetrated through these filters, the
receiver (hopefully) comprehends the message, and if
communication proves successful, the receiver understands it
as the sender originally intended. At that point, the receiver
34 | BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY

may opt to give the sender feedback. Feedback may come In
the form of nonverbal communication, such as head nods,
smiles, facial expressions conveying interest, or even
"paralanguage" (sounds individuals make that have meaning
but are not necessarily words) like "Hmm" or "Uh-huh." The
receiver may also use verbal communication, such as asking
follow-up questions or providing clarifying information to
add on to the speaker's message.

     Activity

     Find a partner and sit down facing each other. For
     two minutes one of you will speak. The speaker may
     talk about absolutely anything, but for this
     experiment to work, he or she must speak
     continuously. The other person must sit silently and
     give the speaker no verbal or nonverbal feedback
     whatsoever. The listener must look the speaker in
     the eyes, but may not smile, nod, speak, or provide
     any other type of nonverbal feedback.
     After two minutes have passed, switch roles. Do not
     speak during the switch, simply exchange roles.
     Again, interact this way for two minutes, with the
                                       BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY | 35

     speaker speaking continuously and the receiver
     providing no feedback (with the exception of steady
     eye contact). After completing this experiment,
     consider the following questions:

           What did you feel during the experience
             when speaking?

           Where were you thinking?
           Was this difficult or easy? Why?
           Which was more difficult: serving as the

             listener or speaker? Why?
           What role does nonverbal feedback play in

             communication?

The last aspect of the communication model to examine is
context, or the situation in which communication takes place.
A conversation held via Skype between longtime friends, for
example, follows a completely different set of "rules" than a
presentation before a board meeting designed to sell a product.
Or, the same speech delivered in front of a live audience might
read very differently when produced as a transcript for reading.
To see this effect firsthand, research the famous "I Have a
Dream" speech by Martin Luther King, Jr., and instead of
watching or listening to it, read it. While still remarkably
beautiful, passionate, and well versed, the written version of
one of the most well-known speeches in history does not seem
36 | BASIC COMMUNICATION THEORY

to have the same impact as hearing Dr. King speak the words
in his commanding voice. Communication theorist and
researcher Marshall McLuhan referred to phenomenon by
claiming, "The medium is the message," meaning that
contextual cues will heavily influence how a message is
perceived by its audience. Context always plays a role in
communication, from the composition stage all the way to
delivery of a message.

   The basics of the communication cycle may indicate this
cycle operates in a perfectly linear process, moving from
message sent to message received, but unfortunately
communication rarely (if ever) happens like this.
Communication remains complex because human dynamics
are remarkably unpredictable, hence the wide variety of
theories used to explain the process.
                                ADVANCED COMMUNICATION THEORY | 37

ADVANCED
COMMUNICATION
THEORY

                             This chapter will

                             continue its exploration of

                             the intricacies of

                             communication  by

                             reviewing one of the more

                             complex theories devoted to

                             to the subject. George

                             Herbert Mead, a

                             philosopher and sociologist

                             from the early 20th century,

George Herbert Mead, who     developed a communication
developed the theory of      theory known as Symbolic
symbolic interactionism.     Interactionism. This theory
Source: anonymous, George    states that meanings for
Herbert Mead, marked as      objects and experiences
public domain, more details  become derived from social
on Wikimedia Commons

                             interaction and modified

through interpretation. Furthermore, individuals act toward
38 | ADVANCED COMMUNICATION THEORY

those objects and experiences based on the meanings they
create.

Source: Kurtkaiser, Dinner table side pine wood large table
front, CC0 1.0

So what does that mean? Imagine a college student (call him
Dave) who has never seen a table before in his entire life. What
would happen when Dave walks into his communication
classroom, and sees it filled with several large objects with
broad, flat surfaces suspended a few feet above the floor by
stick-looking things at each corner. To make sense out of these
completely new objects, the first thing Dave will do is name
the objects. He will likely choose a name to bookmark these
objects based upon something similar that he has experienced
before, and comes up with "four-legged monoshelf."

   Now that he has named it, Dave will seek out validation for
his hypothesis by trying to share his newfound meaning with
others. He approaches a classmate, who has just entered the
room, and suggests his newly minted moniker to his classmate,
                               ADVANCED COMMUNICATION THEORY | 39

while simultaneously asking if that person has ever seen such
an object before. As he talks about the object, the other person
might look at him strangely and say, "It's a table," which starts
up a conversation about what it is and its purpose. Through
their mutual dialogue, they both derive meaning for the object,
which has solidified Dave's sensemaking of the new experience.
Every time he sees a "four-legged monoshelf" (or table) from
that point forward, he will act toward that object partially
or wholly based upon the interaction that helped him to
understand it.

   Symbolic Interactionism does not represent the only theory
of communication. Researchers can employ any number of
different theories to help define and explain the complicated
process of communication. Agenda-setting theory, framing
theory, social exchange theory, and many others exist to help
humanity study of all forms of communication that pervade
the modern world.
40 | TYPES OF COMMUNICATION

TYPES OF
COMMUNICATION

While Mead's theory deals more with the general concept of
human interaction, other theories branch off into more
specific areas within communication studies, so it becomes
helpful to review various types of communication.

Intrapersonal Communication

                               Earlier, this chapter

                           explored the basics of the

                           communication model

                           (message, sender, receiver,

                           channel or medium), but

                           what if the sender and

Source: Photograph         receiver are the same person?
by DanaTentis via Pixabay
                           In  this       instance,

                           intrapersonal

communication occurs. Now, before thinking about whether

or not it sounds "crazy" to talk to oneself, relax--everyone

does it. Intrapersonal communication is referred to as thought,

or communication where the communicator simultaneously
                                               TYPES OF COMMUNICATION | 41

operates as the sender and receiver. Intrapersonal
communication internalizes a communicator's use of
language, but individuals might find that they use it in any or
all of the following situations:

   Reading out loud to themselves
   Internal monologues
   Formulating thoughts before composing, whether by

      hand or typing (doodling and drawing also fall into this
      category)
   Making gestures while thinking (some people do this
      while practicing speeches in their heads)
   Sensemaking, as in the previous "four-legged
      monoshelf" example, before the classmate walked in
   Interpreting others' nonverbal communication symbols
   Communication between parts of the bodies (e.g., "My
      legs are telling me that I should not go to the gym
      today.")

Healthy intrapersonal communication provides the
foundation for all other forms of communication, for
intrapersonal interactions help formulate the messages that get
sent to external audiences. Dysfunctional (or nonexistent)
intrapersonal communication behaviors often result in
sending messages without thinking about them first, only to
end up regretting having done so later.

   Intrapersonal communication precedes external
42 | TYPES OF COMMUNICATION

communication in forms such as the thought process involved
in composing messages before delivering them, as well as any
deliberate decisions individuals might make regarding how
they send the message, such as choosing the accompanying
nonverbal tone, inflection, or facial expressions. These choices
affecting how to compose and deliver messages form the
foundation for human interaction. Whether verbal or
nonverbal in nature, external communication does not appear
out of nowhere. Such messages originate from an internal
cognitive process, which may be deliberately thought-out or
unintentionally reactive, but regardless, intrapersonal
communication requires careful monitoring and control to
ensure effective interpersonal communication.

Interpersonal Communication

Once other people get

added to the conversation,

intrapersonal

communication transforms

into           interpersonal

communication.

McCornack (2010) defined Source: Photograph

interpersonal                 by sasint via Pixabay

communication as "a

dynamic form of communication between two (or more)

people in which the messages exchanged significantly influence
                                               TYPES OF COMMUNICATION | 43

their thoughts, emotions, behaviors, and relationships." While
this definition provides a basic overview of interpersonal
communication, it distinguishes it from intrapersonal
communication by externalizing the receiver of the message
as well as the channel or medium for transmission, all while
creating an interaction in which the participants mutually
create meaning through sharing. This form of communication
leads to the construction of meaning, as demonstrated earlier
in Mead's theory of Symbolic Interactionism.

Small Group Communication

                         If more than two people

                         communicate

                         simultaneously,  small

                         group communication

                         occurs. Small groups have

                         become more commonplace

Source: Photograph       within           working
by dcondrey via Pixabay
                         environments since business

                         leaders find them integral to

organizational success. Small group sizes generally range from

three to 20 persons, and in most cases, get formed to

accomplish a specific purpose, whether to address a short-term

problem (ad hoc committees) or for longer-term use.

Sometimes, a group might meet informally, such as a group of

friends that typically spend time together, or the group might
44 | TYPES OF COMMUNICATION

have a more formal charge, such as a workgroup within a
professional organization. Regardless, a small group consists
of members seeking to use communication to achieve a
commonly held goal.

Public Communication

As the audience for a

speaker's message grows, the

form of communication

changes from a small group

discussion where each

member  has  the

opportunity to contribute,    Source: PopTech, Neri Oxman
to more of a public-speaking  - Pop!Tech 2009 - Camden,
scenario where the group      ME, CC BY-SA 2.0

becomes an audience focused on the speaker's message. The

feedback loop becomes partially and temporarily cut off,

causing information to flow in one direction, from speaker to

receiver, with the speaker receiving only nonverbal feedback as

the audience listens. That makes this form of communication

unique to the others discussed in this chapter.
                                               TYPES OF COMMUNICATION | 45

Mass Communication

                            Public communication

                            transitions to mass

                            communication as the

                            audience continues to grow

                            and the feedback loop has

                            become almost completely

Source: Photo Illustration  eliminated from legacy
by geralt via Pixabay       media outlets, though

                            modern online and social

media platforms have provided a platform for content creators

and consumers to provide original content and commentary.

Mass communication relies on technological mediation,

meaning that, with exception to speeches delivered to large

crowds in arenas, mass communication occurs through the

tools of mass media: radio, television, film, computers, and

other digital platforms. In most instances, the receiver has no

direct access to the sender, allowing the sender complete

control over the message .
46 | TYPES OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

TYPES OF PUBLIC
SPEAKING

Source: Greenwood High School, Teacher at Greenwood
giving speech, CC BY-SA 4.0

The art of public speaking remains a communication skill that
remains in high demand. The concept public speaking applies
generally to situations in which a message gets communicated
to a wider (most often live) audience. More specifically, public
speaking can be classified based on the method the speaker
used to construct the message. Speakers can present their ideas
                                              TYPES OF PUBLIC SPEAKING | 47

in the form of an impromptu, manuscript, memorized, or
extemporaneous speech.

   Impromptu speaking is unplanned, unrehearsed, and
unscripted. Sometimes, an impromptu speech might arise
when the speaker has no time to prepare and has to speak
in a completely improvised manner, but in other situations,
impromptu speaking may involve characteristically short
preparation times like a few minutes. Speakers most often give
impromptu speeches without notes, and will succeed if they
remain spontaneous, engaging, and confident. They must have
a knack for thinking quickly on a moment's notice.
Impromptu speakers face the challenge of staying on topic
while keeping the "flow" of their conversational style going to
maintain the audience's attention. Regardless of the varying
needs of one's career or industry, impromptu speaking
opportunities arise frequently, such as when one is called upon
to explain a project, product, or process to members of
management or constituent groups. Speakers that can respond
with relevant information in an organized and timely manner
have a greater chance of establishing credibility to their
audience.
48 | TYPES OF PUBLIC SPEAKING

                               Manuscript speaking

                               remains one of the most

                               formal speaking styles since

                               the speaker reads from an

                               entirely pre-written script.

                               Manuscript        speeches

Manuscript speakers            frequent large, formal
sometimes use a teleprompter
to keep them on message.       settings,   such           as
Source: naacpphotos, Hi-Res
NAACP DSC09057ACR              commencement ceremonies
(15313950261), CC BY 2.0
                               or political affairs, and may

                               utilize teleprompters to

                               allow the speaker to

maintain eye contact with the audience. Herein lies the

drawback of this type of speech. Instead of interacting with the

audience, keeping the speech fresh and engaging, manuscript

speeches can feel canned or inauthentic to the audience.

Memorized speeches share similarities to the pre-written

manuscript speech, but unlike the manuscript speech, the

speaker memorizes the speech as though it contained lines

from a Shakespearean play and recites them, verbatim, to the

audience instead of reading it. Memorization has its pitfalls,

however, as the speaker may forget a "line" and need to rely on

improvisation techniques to fill in the gaps in memory.

Extemporaneous speaking differs from impromptu in that

it allows for much more preparation and structure without

relying on memorization. Extemporaneous speakers utilize an

outline to serve as the foundation for a persuasive or
                                              TYPES OF PUBLIC SPEAKING | 49

informational speech, which provides a roadmap (but not a
complete script) for the speaker to follow. In addition,
extemporaneous speeches often contain a structure similar to
the classic five-paragraph essay, with an introduction, main
points, and a conclusion that reinforces a thesis or central idea.
Speaking extemporaneously ultimately means speaking fluidly,
yet with extensive preparation achieved through research. For
the vast majority of topics, structuring a speech using an
extemporaneous format provides the best of all worlds: a
presentation with well-prepared information and defined
structure, but with enough flexibility to remain conversational
and fluid.
50 | THE SECRET TO SUCCESS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING

THE SECRET TO
SUCCESS IN PUBLIC
SPEAKING

Source: Or Kaplan, Roie Galitz Speaking 01, CC BY-SA 4.0

In any public speaking scenario, the speaker must remember
and revere the priorities that offer the secret to public speaking
success. The message ranks at the top of this priority list,
followed by the audience next, and finally the speaker.

   Priority #1: The Message. In any given speech, presenters
will have an impetus, or driving force, that causes them to face
THE SECRET TO SUCCESS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING | 51

their fears, stand in front of an audience (whether it consists of

10 people or 10,000 people), and speak. The message should

reside at the core of that driving force. All too often, speakers

forget to prioritize their original central idea or core message,

and as a result, allow their message to become distorted by

either delusions of being an entertainer (i.e., seeking laughter as

a priority instead of delivering information) or fear of how the

audience will receive the message, resulting in a watered-down

message. Speakers should not forget the reason they stood up

to speak in the first place. Before speaking, speakers need to

remind themselves that they have one job to do: deliver a

message. However, they also cannot forget about the other two

components rounding out the triad of priorities.

Priority #2: The

Audience. Arguably, the

importance of the audience

theoretically should equal

the message, for without the

audience, the speaker might

as well be speaking to        Source: State Chancellery of
themselves in the mirror.     Latvia institution
While the core of the         QS:P195,Q7603104, nu diena
message ultimately comes      Ministru kabinet
                              (6880012361), CC BY-SA 2.0

first, how speakers will

present that message depends upon their audience. Speakers

must deliver the message to the audience in such a way that

makes it easy for them to understand the message as originally
52 | THE SECRET TO SUCCESS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING

intended. How audience members receive the core of the

message remains highly dependent upon how they filter the

message through their lens of understanding, so the speaker

must get to know what to expect from the audience. What

drives them? What are their feelings, attitudes, opinions,

values, and beliefs? How much or little do they know about

the topic? Effective speakers consider these questions and

more before composing the speech.

                                   Priority #3: The

                        Speaker. The person or

                        people delivering such

                        messages ranks last in the list

                        of priorities. Why place the

                        speaker last in this order of

Source: Photograph      importance? Frequently,
by klimkin via Pixabay  most novice speakers spend

                        more time and effort

thinking about their self-image and how audiences will

perceive them than they do on considering the strength of

their message and/or how the audience will receive that

message. As a result, novice speakers begin noticing nervous

symptoms (e.g., shaking hands, sweating profusely, dry mouth,

etc.) and start to dwell on them, fearful that the audience can

see these symptoms manifest, magnifying the natural fear of

public speaking exponentially. By placing the speaker last in

the order of priority, focus rightfully returns to the message

and how well the audience memorably understands it as the
                   THE SECRET TO SUCCESS IN PUBLIC SPEAKING | 53

speaker originally intended. Instead of wasting mental energy
on thinking about superficial qualities like appearance,
redirect focus where it is needed so that effective
communication can occur.
54 | CHAPTER 1 SUMMARY

CHAPTER 1 SUMMARY

Source: The Official CTBTO Photostream, CTBTO SnT
Conference (35400233922), CC BY 2.0

In its simplest iteration, communication involves only four
basic components: the sender, receiver, message, and medium.
This oversimplified definition may lull people into the
delusion that communication is a simple process.
Unfortunately, communication remains messy and difficult
for some and can result in misunderstanding, hurt feelings,
confusion, and damaged relationships. This book provides
principles, theories, and suggestions to implement practice and
                                                        CHAPTER 1 SUMMARY | 55

preparation strategies so that anyone reading this book can
work toward becoming a more effective public speaker.

   Humans use communication to make sense out of the
world. As people share their naming processes for things,
experiences, and phenomena, they effectively define the world
around them, and this reveals the essence of communication.
Communication affects each and every part of every person's
daily life at nearly every moment. Learning to communicate
effectively remains a sought-after skill. Learning how to speak
in public effectively and confidently will likely lead to many
benefits in life.
56 | CHAPTER 1 SUMMARY
                             CHAPTER 2: THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM | 57

PART II

CHAPTER 2: THE
DREAD OF THE
PODIUM
58 | CHAPTER 2: THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM
                                              THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM | 59

THE DREAD OF THE
PODIUM

"According to most studies, people's number one fear is
public speaking. Number two is death. Death is number two.
Does that sound right? This means that, to the average
person, if you go to a funeral, you're better off in the casket
than doing the eulogy." --Jerry Seinfeld Source:
Raph_PH, SeinfeldEventimLate120719-4, CC BY 2.0

Seinfeld was certainly right about one thing: public speaking
consistently tops just about any compiled list of fears. In fact,
a 2015 study conducted by Chapman University found public
speaking topped the list of personal phobias, narrowly beating
out heights, bugs and snakes, and drowning.
60 | THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM

   What causes the crippling fear associated with public
speaking, also known as glossophobia, and why do so many
people feel it? What makes getting up in front of an audience
and speaking strike terror in the hearts of so many? This
response to public speaking baffles the rational mind, confused
as to why such a situation--the sharing of information with
people who likely have interest to hear the message--would
cause so much anxiety in even the most confident of
individuals. Coming up with a logical reason to explain the
source of this fear can seem confusing, if not impossible.
Science, biology in particular, can explain this phenomenon.

   Relatively speaking (i.e.,
in comparison to the entire
history of the human
species), people have not
lived in civilized society for
very long. The vast majority
of individuals do not Source: Photograph by
encounter wild animals as a LukaszWyrwik via Pixabay
part of their daily lives, nor
do they come face to face with hostile scavengers seeking to do
them harm. However, each and every person has biological
mechanisms built into her or his brain to cope with such
situations.

   When a person perceives a potential threat, her or his body's
limbic system kicks into high gear, producing the "fight or
flight" response. This supposed threat triggers the limbic
                                               THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM | 61

system and convinces it that the prolonged eye contact from
multiple sources (i.e., the people watching the speech) causes
it to interpret this situation as a room full of hostile people
committed to causing harm. The system sends a signal to the
adrenal glands, which sit atop the kidneys, and they begin
pumping adrenaline and other hormones into the
bloodstream.

   As adrenaline hits the bloodstream, it acts like pure liquid
energy, and rightly so. Ever read a story about a panicked
mother who single-handedly lifted a car off of her child? The
problem occurs when logical neocortex (the thinking portion
of the brain responsible for language and rational thought)
attempts to calmly deliver an effective speech. Herein lies the
problem.

   The adrenaline immediately increases the heart rate, thereby
also increasing blood pressure. Next, the air passages to the
lungs expand, the pupils enlarge, blood gets redistributed to
the muscles, and blood glucose gets re-routed to the brain.
As the body's senses go on high alert, the increase in blood
pressure also increases the amount of heat produced by the
body, and as a result, people begin sweating to compensate. A
large differential exists between the amount of available energy
from the adrenaline rush and the demand for energy placed
on the body while trying to remain calm and collected. This
results in seemingly uncontrollable trembling. The hands
shake, knees wobble, and even the voice begins to tremble, all
62 | THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM

because the bodies' muscles want to expend all the extra energy
coursing through it.

   Meanwhile, despite all efforts to try and remain still, muscles
tremble involuntarily in protest. As the body's hydration
becomes redirected to these muscles, the throat begins to dry
up, followed by the mouth. The salivary glands temporarily
shut down, causing a "cottonmouth" effect. The stomach
tightens up because the parasympathetic system that covers
the "rest and digest" function for the body pauses while the
speaker attempts to deal with all the anxiety. This explains why
the stomach feels like it's tied up in knots. The increase of
blood sugar in the brain feels similar to how a computer reacts
when opening up too many programs at once, and it shuts
down due to overload.

     Note to Self
                        THE DREAD OF THE PODIUM | 63

Good news. If any of

these symptoms sound

familiar to you, based

on previous public

speaking experience,

then you are

completely 100%

normal. You just

experienced the

naturally instinctive   Source: Photograph
biological response to  by andreas_danang_a via Pix
such a scenario. The    abay

even better news is that you can effectively manage

such effects. Just because you currently feel pre-

wired to want to flee the room once your nerves

kick in does not mean you have to allow yourself to

become beholden to such a response.

Don't let fear of public speaking get to you; deliver
your message with confidence.
64 | ACKNOWLEDGING FEAR

ACKNOWLEDGING FEAR

Source: mattbuck (category), University Park MMB 첹1
Students' Union Elections 2013 Results Night, CC BY-SA 3.0

What scares people the most about public speaking? The
bullet points below outline common fears people share about
public speaking:

   Fear of eye contact. Most people have a natural desire
      to avoid being the center of attention within a crowd,
      and if and when that moment strikes, it can feel very
      unnerving.
                                                ACKNOWLEDGING FEAR | 65

 Fear of failure. Similarly, making a fool of oneself
   presents an almost equally daunting phobia.

 Traumatic public speaking experience. Many
   students can vividly recount stories where they botched
   a presentation in front of their peers, effectively creating
   a mental block, often leading to higher-than-average
   anxiety when faced with the prospect of public speaking.

 Clinical anxiety. Some rare individuals have cases of
   extreme anxiety in any social situation due to social,
   biological, or a variety of different reasons. For these
   individuals, public speaking may seem to present an
   insurmountable challenge.

                        Most people possess not

                        merely one of these fears,

                        but combinations of them

                        (or, in the worst-case

                        scenario, all of them).

                        Regardless, the most

Source: Photograph      important place for
by Kuviyam via Pixabay  individuals to start in

                        learning to cope with these

fears (and later, use them to their advantage) is to recognize

their onset and acknowledge their existence. Novice speakers

can sabotage their chances for success by ignoring these fears or

pretending they will not affect their performance--because

they most certainly will. Ignoring these fears can lead to a false
66 | ACKNOWLEDGING FEAR

sense of confidence, allowing them to creep up and strike at the
worst possible moment.

   All too often, novice speakers make the mistake of thinking
they need to conquer or overcome their fear, but that type of
thinking can set a speaker up for failure. Fear is a necessary
component of public speaking. Fear is part of what makes
a human human. It can keep people alert and provide them
with necessary energy. Above all, it makes the speaker care
about how well he or she perform. In public speaking an old
saying goes: "Speakers who say they are as cool as a cucumber
usually give speeches about as interesting as a cucumber."
Overconfidence has probably flattened more potentially
interesting and engaging speeches than nervousness ever has.

     Note to Self

     Instead of avoiding nervousness, practice strategies
     for coping with stressors, redirecting these energies
     to more useful outlets, and learning to use them to
     your advantage.

The following sections detail various strategies and techniques
for coping with anxiety, as well as providing useful tactics to
redirect this nervous energy into a more positive outcome.
                                           TALK ABOUT WHAT YOU LOVE | 67

TALK ABOUT WHAT
YOU LOVE

Source: Photograph by FuSuSu via Pixabay

One of the root causes for public speaking anxiety has to do
with uncertainty, and one of the greatest potential sources for
uncertainty has to do with content. Speakers can reduce such
nervousness by selecting topics they either love, know
something about, or show interest in learning more about.
This automatically reduces the severity for nervousness
because it reframes the presentation. The freedom of choosing
a topic means the speaker no longer has to view the speech as
a chore or a burden, but an opportunity to share information
68 | TALK ABOUT WHAT YOU LOVE

he or she deems important with others. The act of learning
can often imbue such excitement, providing an opportunity to
discover fresh, unique, and innovative information to present
to others.

     Note to Self

     Imagine having to deliver a presentation on a topic
     you know virtually nothing about; such a scenario
     probably ranks up there with having to give a
     speech in your underwear. Do yourself a favor and
     discuss something that interests you.
                                         PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE | 69

PRACTICE, PRACTICE,
PRACTICE

Public speaking is a learned skill. As with any learned skill,
one cannot simply read a book or manual on it and expect
to master it, or for that matter, even hope to do remotely
well her or his first time out. Learned skills require dedication,
commitment, time, energy, and effort to master, and public
speaking does not differ in this regard.
70 | PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE

Other learned skills include proficiency at various sports
(shooting free throws, putting, ice skating, throwing a ball,
etc.), learning and mastering a language, playing a musical
instrument, and so on. Source: Sandro Halank, Wikimedia
Commons, CC BY-SA 4.0, 2020-01-11 Ice Dance Rhythm
Dance (2020 Winter Youth Olympics) by Sandro
Halank-0220, CC BY-SA 4.0

One of the reasons "practice makes perfect" with respect to
public speaking has to do with the concept of uncertainty. In
approaching any given situation, individuals find themselves
likely to experience higher anxiety when they do not know
clearly what to expect. Furthermore, if they can imagine a
potentially disastrous outcome resulting from the situation,
their anxiety further compounds exponentially. Public
                                          PRACTICE, PRACTICE, PRACTICE | 71

speaking, unfortunately, is rife with uncertainty. Common
fears include forgetting what to say; saying something wrong
or embarrassing; facing public humiliation; failing to
communicate effectively; and becoming an object of ridicule.
Speakers can alleviate many of these pre-speech fears simply
by eliminating sources of uncertainty. In other words, speakers
who practice until they have the confidence to know what to
say in a number of different ways eliminate the uncertainty
of forgetfulness and the anxiety of humiliation by saying the
wrong thing or not knowing what to do. By getting to know
the audience (see Chapter 4), a person can eliminate the
uncertainty of knowing whether or not they will connect with
the message. Chapter 8 outlines efficient strategies for
practicing a speech and delivery tips for strengthening
confidence.
72 | POSITIVE VISUALIZATION

POSITIVE
VISUALIZATION

Source: Unknown author, Ford 1921, marked as public
domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

Henry Ford once said, "Whether you think you can, or you
think you can't, you're right." What does a top-level basketball
player do to prepare to take a free-throw shot? The player often
goes through a routine, usually by dribbling a certain number
of times, then assumes the shooting stance, and pauses. At
                                                   POSITIVE VISUALIZATION | 73

this point, athletes like this, as well as successful professionals
and public speakers, employ a technique called positive
visualization or positive imagery, in which they pause a
moment to imagine the best possible outcome before taking
action. That basketball player, in the brief moment before
taking the shot, imagines the ball arcing perfectly through the
air, and swishing through the hoop, touching nothing but net.
Consider these real-life examples:
74 | POSITIVE VISUALIZATION  Muhammad
                             Ali always
 Source: Ira                 stressed the
 Rosenberg, Muhammad         importance
 Ali NYWTS, marked as        of imagining
 public domain, more         himself
 details on Wikimedia        victorious
 Commons                     long before
                             his actual
 Source: Steve Lipofsky      fight.
 Basketballphoto.com, Jord
 an Lipofsky, CC BY-SA 3.0   Michael
                             Jordan
                             would
                             always take
                             the last shot
                             in his mind
                             before he
                             took that
                             shot in
                             reality.
                         POSITIVE VISUALIZATION | 75

Source: Noemi            As a young
Nuez, Jim-Carrey-2008   actor, Jim
(cropped), CC BY-SA 2.0  Carrey said
                         he pictured
                         himself
                         being the
                         greatest
                         actor in the
                         world.

So why does this technique seem to work? Can some mystical
psychic explain this phenomenon? Once again, biology holds
the key to understanding the benefit of this practice technique.
The human imagination is a powerful tool. CT scans taken
of the human brain during exercises involving the imagination
demonstrate that the very same areas of the brain that activate
during a real-life activity also activate when a person imagines
performing the same activity (Schlegel, Kohler, Fogelson,
Alexander, Konuthula, & Ulric Tse, 2013). This means people
can actually train their brains to perform effectively by
employing positive visualization and imagining successful
outcomes. When combined with practicing a speech as close
as possible to the desired end result, this technique works
powerfully to reduce anxiety, eliminate uncertainties, and
increase self-confidence.
76 | MINDFUL AWARENESS AND AUTHENTICITY

MINDFUL AWARENESS
AND AUTHENTICITY

Source: Photo illustration by Ri_Ya via Pixabay

When most people think of acting mindful, they imagine
showing consideration toward others and/or using awareness
to dwelling in the present moment, but being mindful requires
more than mere awareness. Mindfulness involves three main
components:

 1. Demonstrating acute awareness of one's surroundings
      and senses within the present moment;
                         MINDFUL AWARENESS AND AUTHENTICITY | 77

 2. Possessing a nonjudgmental acceptance of the way
      things exist at that moment;

 3. Being intentional, or as Dr. Jon Kabat-Zinn states,
      "paying attention on purpose."

What does this have to do with public speaking though?
Everything! Most individuals, when placed into a public
speaking scenario, have a sort of out-of-body experience.

     Note to Self

     It may almost seem as though your conscious,
     rational, thinking self exits your body and starts to
     float somewhere above you and off to the side, all
     the while pointing out a barrage of self-criticisms:
     You're blowing it! Stop shaking so much! Talk louder!
     Why didn't you practice more?

This strange sensation often compounds and increases the
natural biological anxiety response by shifting the focus away
from where it should be, on the audience and how they receive
the message, and instead, onto the escalating number of
nervous symptoms. As a result of this sensation, the
communication style shifts into the antonym of mindfulness,
78 | MINDFUL AWARENESS AND AUTHENTICITY

mindlessness, or the act of going through the motions (i.e.,
on "autopilot"). Audiences can easily tell when a speaker has
proverbially "checked out" and no longer seems "in tune" with
the audience. Perceptions such as these are indicative of a
speaker who no longer fully functions in the present moment,
and in such situations, the audience could likely stand up and
walk out and the speaker might not notice.

   By incorporating techniques to facilitate more mindful
behaviors, public speakers have the capability to reconnect that
conscious self with their physical self. Speakers who
intentionally remain more focused on the present moment,
begin to develop the valuable communication skill of
consciously thinking about the words before speaking,
allowing them to shape and choose their communication more
carefully--more mindfully. Achieving such a state requires
practice and skill, however, it also involves more than
possessing an intentional awareness.

   The final facet of mindfulness involves nonjudgmental
acceptance or acknowledgment. Nonjudgmental acceptance
entails recognizing when speakers feel the peak of their
biological anxiety response, usually within the first 60 seconds
or so after the speech begins, and accepting those
uncomfortable symptoms as a natural part of public speaking.
Most individuals find these symptoms rather unpleasant, so
learning to accept them requires a conscious effort to alter any
perceptions of them.

   Think about how a roller coaster fills riders with excitement
                         MINDFUL AWARENESS AND AUTHENTICITY | 79

and, simultaneously, dread. The body and brain undergo an
identical process prior to such a thrilling experience, and yet,
the perceptions of the two situations feel all together
differently. In one, the anxiety response might make people
giddy, causing the hairs on their arms stand on end, and
forcing an almost unstoppable smile. On the other hand, the
pre-speech jitters may feel like the worst punishment
humankind has ever devised. The brain, however, cannot tell
the difference, biologically speaking, so it is up to the neocortex
to redirect this energy and use it positively.

     Note to Self

     How might you reframe the way you look at public
     speaking nerves? What if, instead of dreading the
     experience of speaking in front of an audience, you
     viewed it with anticipation by looking forward to an
     opportunity to share with others information that
     either mattered to you a great deal or you find quite
     fascinating? Combined with positive visualization,
     you can see how beneficial reframing can transform
     public speaking anxiety into anticipation.

By adopting a more mindful approach to public speaking, the
80 | MINDFUL AWARENESS AND AUTHENTICITY

potential for an out-of-body experience dissipates, allowing
more fruitful interactions with the audience. Note the
reactions from the audience and feel the "energy" of the room,
and adapt in the moment to the changing nature of the
presentation. Such practices exude authenticity to audience
members, as opposed to speakers who "phone it in" and speak
from a memorized script, regardless of the audience.
                                                     PLAN OUT THE DETAILS | 81

PLAN OUT THE DETAILS

All too often, novice speakers find themselves derailed by
seemingly insignificant mistakes they failed to think of
beforehand:

   Technology details
          EXAMPLES: extension cord availability, software
            versions, video files, DVD vs. Blu-Ray capability,
            etc.

   Timing
          EXAMPLES: when to advance a presentation
            slide, arriving early to load a presentation

   Feeling of one's outfit during the speech
          EXAMPLES: an itchy shirt tag or painful heels

   How the room looks from the speaker's vantage point.
          VISUAL EXAMPLE:
82 | PLAN OUT THE DETAILS

Keep the speaking environment in mind when preparing a
speech. Source: Matt Brown, Speech Room lectern, CC BY
2.0

When anxiety levels run high, even the smallest overlooked
detail can easily fluster a novice speaker, detracting attention
from the message and/or the audience and instead, causing the
speaker to focus on themselves. The best speakers can spend
hours considering all of the details, imagining vividly how
every moment of a successful presentation will go. Such
speakers incorporate all of these details into their practice
sessions, which helps them eliminate all traces of uncertainty
and the anxiety it often breeds.
                                                                ANXIETY PEAKS | 83

ANXIETY PEAKS

Source: Photo illustration by TheDigitalArtist via Pixabay

In public speaking, students often describe two peak moments
of anxiety: one at the beginning of the speech and another at
the end. Anxiety generally begins from the moment someone
recognizes the impending "doom" of having to deliver the
speech, which may be different for each person. Some might
start experiencing this the night before a presentation,
especially if this person already has high levels of social anxiety.
Others might not feel this anxiety hit until the moment they
turn to face their audience. On average, most people begin to
84 | ANXIETY PEAKS

feel this major peak of anxiety about 60 seconds before the
speech begins. This peak tops out around 60 seconds into the
delivery of the speech, where it quickly subsides. This two-
minute window mirrors other situations involving the body
experiencing a sudden burst of adrenaline. As a result, speakers
need to know their introductions almost better than any point
made throughout the rest of the speech. That way, they can
still communicate effectively with their audience while they
cope with and redirect nervous energy as it heightens. Taking
this into account, devote extra time practicing the
introduction above all other parts of the speech, yet avoid
memorization. Learn the introduction so well that delivering
it smoothly and conversationally takes no effort.

   The second peak of anxiety often feels considerably more
positive in tone, and it occurs about 60 seconds before the
speech ends. This peak happens as soon as speakers recognize
their time in the spotlight will end soon. This usually results in
novice speakers rushing through the last part of their speech,
which can result in them forgetting to mention elements of
their conclusion. To counteract this anxiety wave, practice the
conclusions just as extensively as the introduction.

     Note to Self
                                                          ANXIETY PEAKS | 85

Take your time and ensure that you are prepared to
close your speech just as powerfully as you opened
it in the introduction and supported it while
delivering the main speaking points.
86 | CONTROLLING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

CONTROLLING
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY

Source: Korey Howell David Sheffield, Sylvia Acevedo public
speaking, CC BY-SA 4.0

While adrenaline causes many involuntary responses such as
profuse sweating, uncontrollable shaking, or forgetfulness,
some physical responses can induce a calming effect on people
looking to counteract negative biological reactions with
positive ones.

   Deep breathing. Without hyperventilating, pause
                                 CONTROLLING PHYSICAL ACTIVITY | 87

   momentarily, just before beginning the speech, and take
   at least a couple of deep, cleansing breaths. Allow the
   diaphragm to fill the lungs completely, and then exhale
   slowly, releasing as much air as possible. Do this slowly
   and deliberately, as the calming power of slow, deep
   breathing cannot be reinforced often enough.
 Use the body's muscles. Adrenaline may supply the
   body with tons of extra energy, but it has a down side: it
   gets burned off just as quickly as it sets in. Simply move
   around the room and use gestures while speaking.

  Note to Self

  You will not need to do jumping jacks or pushups to
  burn off this excess energy; it only takes minimal
  effort and movement. The last thing you want to do
  is stand still and grip the podium for dear life. The
  more rigid your stance, the longer the adrenaline
  burst will last!
88 | NERVOUS SYMPTOMS ARE UNSEEN

NERVOUS SYMPTOMS
ARE UNSEEN

                        Nervous symptoms seem

                        catastrophic to the person

                        experiencing them, even if

                        the audience may never

                        register their existence.

                        What about trembling

                        hands and knees? Squeaky

                        voice? Dry mouth? Rapid

                        heartbeat? Speakers have a

                        tendency to feel like freaks

Source: Photograph by   of nature and that everyone
Larsgustav via Pixabay  watching thinks the same.

                        Of course, this only occurs

because all these symptoms happen to the speaker. However,

in reality, the vast majority of nervous symptoms tend to go

completely unseen by the audience. Unless a particular

audience member shares a close proximity with the speaker,

then odds are, the audience spends most of their time directing

their focus on listening to the message. After all, few people (if

any) participating as audience members attend speeches with
                                   NERVOUS SYMPTOMS ARE UNSEEN | 89

the purpose of seeing if they can detect a speaker's nervous
symptoms.

   Often, novice speakers will also apologize for their nerves,
feeling as though the audience finds the manifestation of such
symptoms distracting. However, apologizing only draws
attention to symptoms that may have otherwise gone
unnoticed. Additionally, apologizing for nervous behaviors
might compound the anxiety and make it worse.

     Managing Physical Symptoms

     Dry Mouth

           Avoid dairy products, soda, and alcoholic
             beverages. Don't smoke before speaking. All
             these items increase mucus production and
             might leave a lump in the throat.

           Gently bite the tip of the tongue to trigger
             salivation.

           Drink room-temperature or warm water. Add
             a lemon, if available.

     For Sweaty Hands
90 | NERVOUS SYMPTOMS ARE UNSEEN

           Apply talcum powder or corn starch on hands/
             body.

           Carry a handkerchief.
     Red Splotches on the Face

           Wear pink or red colors.
           Wear high necklines.
           Use humor to release endorphins.
     Trembling Voice
           Project voice to the back row of the audience.
     Shaky Hands
           Use gestures, but make them small; don't

             wave about wildly.
     Shaky Legs/Knocking Knees

           Move around gently and easily, but do not
             pace.

     Rapid Heartbeat
           Engage in deep breathing.
           Avoid caffeine and nicotine.
                                                        CHAPTER 2 SUMMARY | 91

CHAPTER 2 SUMMARY

Source: Photo Illustration by TheDigitalArtist via Pixabay

Nervous feelings go with public speaking like cookies and milk
or fries and ketchup. Public speaking anxiety results from
natural, biological reactions. Instead of seeking to get rid of
nerves and anxiety, speakers need to welcome this fear as a
source of energy, reframing the opportunity to share news and
information with anticipation, rather than dread. Most
speakers easily accomplish this through redirecting their focus
on the message and how the audience receives the message, as
well as eliminating all sources of uncertainty through careful
92 | CHAPTER 2 SUMMARY

planning, preparation, and practice. Redirect anxiety into
useful energy, which will lead to a more mindful, authentic
speech delivery that connects with audiences on a deeper, more
engaging level.
                      CHAPTER 3: TOPIC SELECTION AND PURPOSE | 93

PART III

CHAPTER 3: TOPIC
SELECTION AND
PURPOSE
94 | CHAPTER 3: TOPIC SELECTION AND PURPOSE
                                       TOPIC SELECTION AND PURPOSE | 95

TOPIC SELECTION AND
PURPOSE

"The newest computer can merely compound, at speed, the
oldest problem in the relations between human beings, and
in the end, the communicator will be confronted with the old
problem of what to say and how to say it." --Edward R.
Murrow Source: Copyright 1953, Pan American Coffee
Bureau, Edward R. Murrow 1953, marked as public domain,
more details on Wikimedia Commons

Picture a student entering a college public speaking course for
the first time (probably not terribly difficult when reading this
96 | TOPIC SELECTION AND PURPOSE

text), faced with the prospect of having to deliver a speech to

a classroom full of other students. Immediately, the anxiety

of the unknown starts to build, as discussed in Chapter 2. It

builds slowly at first, but eventually the speaker becomes faced

with the same problem as everyone else in the room, as well

as anyone else in the history of a college speech course: the

choice of topic. What points should get covered? Many, if not

most, students lament this same question year after year, and as

they should, because topic selection often serves as one of the

single greatest predictors of success for novice speakers as they

practice and refine their craft.

Anxiety peaks when

speakers have to deliver a

presentation on a topic in

which they have zero

interest or knowledge. For

example, a communication

professor discussing public       Source: Terry Ballard from
speaking anxiety, mass            Merrick, New York, USA, J.
media studies, or                 Courtney Sullivan speaking at
interpersonal interaction         East Meadow Public
                                  (43477754264), CC BY 2.0

between men and women

might seem as though it comes naturally, partly because of that

person's interest in the topic, in addition to a high level of

training and experience. Ask the same professor to discuss the

ins and outs of health care administration or quantum physics,

and this same person quickly falls victim to quivering nerves in
                                       TOPIC SELECTION AND PURPOSE | 97

anticipatory anxiety. Talking about unfamiliar or
uninteresting topics rarely delights those involved.

   Speakers can reduce their anxiety levels by choosing to
discuss topics that genuinely interest them, primarily because
it naturally shifts focus away from nervous symptoms. For
example, take a look at time spent on most social media. When
people come across a scintillating story or fascinating article,
their natural inclination is to share that information with their
entire social network, and many do so without giving it a
second thought. They do this because they naturally take
pleasure sharing information that fascinates, excites, and
engages with others. However, before settling on a topic, first
consider the purpose of the speech.
98 | GENERAL SPEAKING PURPOSE

GENERAL SPEAKING
PURPOSE

Source: Avishek-018, Avishek Das at CLBLP 2023, CC BY-SA
4.0

Typically, speeches can be divided among three main types or
basic purposes: speeches to inform, speeches to persuade, and
speeches to entertain and/or commemorate special occasions.
All three speech types employ different methods that
                                           GENERAL SPEAKING PURPOSE | 99

intricately determine how to achieve their intended purpose,
so take a close and critical look at each:

   An informative speech provides an audience with new,
      unique, and/or innovative knowledge on a distinct
      topic. A speech to inform can: tell an engaging story
      with an intrinsic lesson; explain or clarify a difficult or
      complicated concept (often called the definition speech);
      or show an audience how to do something (often called
      the demonstration speech or how-to speech). Examples
      include a professor delivering a lecture, a student
      presenting an oral report; skilled demonstrations
      outlining skills such as cooking, woodworking, or
      welding; and biographical tribute speeches designed to
      honor a dignitary. Part II of this book (Chapters 4-10)
      will outline methods for delivering an effective
      informative speech.

   A persuasive speech has most, if not all, of the elements
      of a speech to inform, but takes the information a step
      further and uses it to change audience attitudes,
      opinions, or behaviors. Examples of speeches to
      persuade might include advertisements, political
      speeches, religious services, donation/registration drives,
      negotiations of various types, or daily conversations.
      Some persuasive speeches seek to alter attitudes, some go
      further and seek action as a result, and others may seek
      to inspire others. Part III of this book (Chapters 11 and
100 | GENERAL SPEAKING PURPOSE

      12) will examine how persuasive speaking differs from
      speaking to inform and provides strategies to craft
      effective persuasive and motivating messages.
   Finally, a speech designed to mark a special occasion
      or entertain audiences does simply that--it amuses,
      commemorates, arouses interest, diverts attention, or
      perhaps, in some cases, even "warms up" an audience for
      a larger event. Examples of speaking to entertain include
      stand-up comedy, a toast for a colleague or friend, or
      even storytelling (which differs from a speech to inform
      since there is no explicit lesson or moral to be learned).
      This book does not focus on this type of speech.

                                 While three general

                                 purposes attempt to

                                 accomplish different things,

                                 crossover between each of

                                 them does exist. In other

                                 words, a speech to inform

                                 can easily entertain, as well

                                 as present compelling

Speeches designed to mark a      information that persuades
special occasion often occur at  the audience to adapting a
weddings. Source:                particular viewpoint. A
Photograph                       speech to persuade can
by ohalek00 via Pixabay          present an audience with

fresh, new information while still managing to engage and
                                          GENERAL SPEAKING PURPOSE | 101

entertain. However, public speakers need to keep their general
purpose in mind at all times in order to craft a masterful
speech. All too often, novice speakers want to focus more on
providing entertainment, and as a result, their general purpose
gets lost since the focus has shifted to generating laughter as
opposed to providing information for the audience. Similarly,
a novice speaker might start out with a speech to inform, but
end up attempting to persuade the audience by the end of
the speech, in which case, the general purpose has failed.
Therefore, it remains absolutely critical that speakers
remember the general purpose as they compose their messages
so that they remain focused on the primary goal of the speech.

          The Three General
        Purposes of a Speech

           1. To Inform

          2. To Persuade

          3. To Entertain/Mark a Special
              Occasion
102 | TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT

TOPIC SELECTION AND
REFINEMENT

Source: Photograph by StartupStockPhotos via Pixabay

Once speakers have identified the general purpose, which
usually takes place early in the planning stages, they can begin
deciding on what specific topic areas they want to use to
inform or persuade the audience. This often presents one of
the more difficult stages of speech development, especially if
the speaker does not have a limited or narrowed set of topics
from which to choose. After all, when the sky is the limit, it
                                 TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT | 103

is all too easy to feel overwhelmed and burdened by trying to
figure out what to discuss.

   To determine worthwhile ideas, consider brainstorming lists
of various topics, but do so without judging their value.

     Note to Self

     For example, if you see a commercial on television
     that infuriates you because of the way it comes
     across, write down something like, "Manipulative
     media: How advertising controls our buying habits."
     If you run across a fascinating story on an elderly
     couple that survived the Holocaust and were
     reunited after 70 years apart from each other,
     consider writing down the following topic idea:
     "After the Holocaust: How Jewish survivors rebuilt
     their lives after WWII." Whether you keep a note-
     taking app handy on your smartphone, or an actual
     notepad handy in your bookbag, glove box, or purse,
     make sure to jot down ideas as they come up, so
     that when you become pressed to select a topic, you
     have a variety of ideas from which to choose.

Follow current events to find constant sources of topic ideas.
104 | TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT

Pay attention to various stories in the media. Exploring various
news websites, particularly those that provide a wide sampling
from diverse media outlets, such as Google News or the
Newsmap, provide a nearly limitless source of ideas.

   Additionally, certain times of the year provide timely,
interesting topics, such as general election season (political
candidate profiles, explanations of voting processes,
persuading others to register to vote, etc.), holidays (how to
make Christmas treats, history of Halloween, the truth behind
Christopher Columbus, etc.), or seasonal-related topics (fun
family summer activities, best places for skiing and
snowboarding, the science behind the colors of autumn, etc.).

   Lastly, speakers can consider covering a topic that might
be new and unique to them, requiring a bit of research on
their part. Often, these topics provide an opportunity to sate
intellectual curiosity. When researching these newer topics and
beginning to learn more about them, the process of research
can manifest into excitement, sparking a desire to share that
newfound information with others. Scholars call this approach
the social media share test, for if individuals come across
new information that excites them to the point where they
blindly click "Share" in order to spread that information with
everyone they know, then it could very well present a
fascinating topic from which to build a presentation.
                                 TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT | 105

     Activity

     For a fun topic-finding activity, go to Wikipedia.org's
     main page. Look for a link called "Random article"
     Click this link until an article of interest appears.

Nested Brainstorming

Another technique for generating topic ideas resembles a more
refined version of brainstorming. Try the following quick and
painless technique for coming up with speech topic ideas
before taking it a step further and refining those ideas into
something workable.

   In 60 seconds or less, compose a list of 10 general subject
      areas that sound interesting to share with others. Pay no
      attention to their value and do not imagine whether or
      not the audience will like hearing about those subjects.
      For now, simply come up with a list of 10 subject areas as
      seen here:
106 | TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT

       Creative Writing * Sci-fi Movies * Board Games *
       Mobile Technology * Cancer Research * Zombies
       * Automobile Repair * Mindfulness * Fatherhood
       * Digital Music

   Next, take this list of 10 potential subject areas and circle
      3-5 topics that seem the most interesting.

     Note to Self

     How you define this is completely up to you. You
     might select topics that you know a significant
     amount about, you might select topics that you are
     passionate about, or you might select topics with
     which you have a great deal of experience.

   Narrow the list to 3-5 topics:
                             TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT | 107

    Fatherhood * Mindfulness * Sci-fi Movies

 Now, rank these remaining topics in order of interest
   level. Which of these remaining topics sounds the most
   interesting to share with others? Do not worry (yet)
   about how the audience could feel about listening to
   these topics.

    1) Mindfulness 2) Fatherhood 3) Sci-fi Movies

 Once ranked, take the top-ranked item and break it into
   three subtopics. If this proves difficult, skip that topic
   and move to the next one on the list:

    Mindfulness
        1. Behaviors/activities to cultivate
            mindfulness
108 | TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT

           2. The effects of mindfulness on health
           3. How mindfulness can develop better

                relationships

   Once again, as with before, speakers should take these
      three subtopics and rank them in order of their interest
      level (not what they think an audience might like). The
      top-ranked subtopic may now become the primary
      speech topic. Once decided, break it down further into
      yet another three additional subtopics, which will
      become the speech's three main points:

       The effects of mindfulness on health
             Main Point #1: Defining mindfulness
             Main Point #2: Effects of mindfulness on
                mental health
             Main Point #3: Effects of mindfulness on
                physical health
TOPIC SELECTION AND REFINEMENT | 109
110 | TOPIC CONSIDERATIONS

TOPIC
CONSIDERATIONS

Source:Illustration by athree23 via Pixabay
                                     TOPIC CONSIDERATIONS | 111

As speakers continue the

process of narrowing and refining

the topic of the speech, they        For Your
                                     Information
should  keep  certain
                                       The average
considerations in mind. First,         audiobook
                                       utilizes a
remember to abide to any time          conversational
                                       speaking rate of
restrictions placed on the speech.     around 150
                                       words per
If the allotted speaking time rests    minute
                                       (Williams, 1998
on the brief end of the spectrum,      ). That means a
                                       five-minute
such as 6-8 minutes, the speaker       speech should
                                       consist of about
will likely want to avoid selecting    750
                                       words.Naturally
topics that are too broad in scope.    , when people
                                       get nervous,
Such topics run the risk of            they speak a bit
                                       faster, but this
exceeding the allotted speaking        number

time, putting the audience into a

state of information overload

where they no longer feel

compelled to listen, and/or

overwhelming the speaker during

the preparation phase.

Conversely, avoid topics that are

too narrow in scope, as they

present the possibility for the

opposite consequences: failing to

reach the minimum amount of

time assigned or presenting

information that falls well beyond
112 | TOPIC CONSIDERATIONS

provides a good  the audience's comprehension
starting point   level, which again, can cause
for estimating   attention spans to falter.
how much
writing is          Ideally, in a speech to inform,
needed for the   the topic will have a fresh, unique,
time given.      and innovative quality to it. Avoid
Knowing this     trying to inform an audience
helps with       about information they already
narrowing and    know, but at the same time, avoid
focusing topic   going overly deep into a topic
selection, so    without presenting background
that a speaker   information first. Finding the
can avoid        perfect topic, as well as
choosing topics  determining the level of
that are too     complexity for the information, is
broad to fit     part of the art of learning
within the time  audience-centered speaking. The
constraints      next chapter will examine
given.           methods to gather information
                 about the audience so that a
                 speaker can carefully tailor the
                 information presented to their
                 needs and information levels.
                                                           SPECIFIC PURPOSE | 113

SPECIFIC PURPOSE

Source: Photo illustration by geralt via Pixabay

Once speakers have identified the general purpose and topic,
they can begin narrowing and refining their message using a
funnel approach, moving from general information toward
more specific information. One method of accomplishing this
task is to re-frame the question "What do I talk about?" to
"What do I want my audience to know or do, once they leave
the room?" Answer that question by filling in the unknowns
left behind by the general purpose discussed earlier: 1) To
114 | SPECIFIC PURPOSE

inform the audience about________, or 2) To persuade the
audience to___________ .

   Keep in mind that the specific purpose should only address
one idea. If the specific purpose clumps together multiple,
unrelated, or distantly related concepts with an "and" or two,
then then the speaker has sufficiently failed to refine the topic.
Using a specific purpose like this will likely result in a speech
that comes across as choppy, disorganized, and confusing for
the audience to follow. However, using the nested
brainstorming method mentioned earlier could easily lead to
a well-defined specific purpose like: "To inform my audience
about the effects of mindfulness on health."

   Choose the specific purpose carefully and think critically,
because from that point forward, everything in the speech will
go toward fulfilling that specific purpose. Furthermore, when
composing the outline, return to this specific purpose often to
ask, "Does this information further the attempt to achieve this
purpose?" A great tip for accomplishing this task is to write
down the specific purpose on a sticky note and then placing it
somewhere visible within the workspace. The specific purpose
ultimately keeps a speaker focused on a single goal, preventing
them from getting off-track or off-topic, which, depending on
the length of the speech, can be easy to do, especially with
longer presentations.
                              CENTRAL IDEA | 115

CENTRAL IDEA

                              Once speakers identify

                              the specific purpose, they

                              must next figure out the

                              central idea. The central

                              idea gets expressed as a

                              single sentence that

Source: Photograph            articulates the one thought
by andrewlloydgordon via Pix  the presenter wants the
abay                          audience to remember at the

end of the speech. This might sound an awful lot like a specific

purpose, and many novice speakers confuse the two concepts

and use their specific purpose as their central idea. However,

they are not the same, and to clarify the difference, try thinking

of the central idea in a more familiar term, one which most

people have likely heard before in a writing class: a thesis

statement. A thesis statement concisely presents an assertion or

proposition that the speaker must then support with evidence.

One method to help determining a central idea is to answer

the specific purpose as though it leaves a question unanswered,

such as why or what. If the specific purpose is "To inform the

audience about the effects of mindfulness on health," then the

question unanswered by this statement is, what? What does
116 | CENTRAL IDEA

the speaker want the audience to know about the effects of
mindfulness on health in a single sentence? In other words,
what is the central idea behind this purpose that will ultimately
lead to achieving that goal?

   Keep the central idea simple, yet focused. If preparing a 6-
to 8-minute speech informing an audience of the causes for
the Industrial Revolution, the central idea "The history of
Western civilization is complex" would not work well. Such a
central idea is too broad and vague, opening up the possibility
to present a speech with far too much information for the
speaker to cover in that short time period. Instead, the speaker
should want a more specific central idea that more specifically
summarizes the content of the speech, as the following
example demonstrates:

   "Beginning with Gutenberg's printing press, the explosion
of information-sharing in Western civilization led to rapid
technological development."

     Exercise

     Still struggling to identify the central idea? Try the
     "because" technique. Start by writing out the
     specific purpose, and then add "because" to the end
     of it. Whatever statement that follows "because"
                                                           CENTRAL IDEA | 117

may help reveal the answer to the what or why
question left unanswered by the specific purpose.
EXAMPLE: To educate my audience about saving
for retirement because by adopting simple saving
strategies that can be accomplished on any budget,
you will set yourself up to savor your retirement.

Think of the speech as a

delicate and exquisite sauce

that a master chef needs to

make. In making a sauce, the

cook gathers together all of

the ingredients (information

from various sources); mixes

it together in an orderly,

careful, and measured         Source: Norman
fashion (the process of       Giry, PORTRAIT JEAN
composition); and then        SULPICE, CC BY-SA 4.0

applies heat and simmers it,

thereby reducing the liquid to a rich, powerfully flavored sauce

that ignites the taste buds. The central idea remains when the

entire speech gets boiled down into just one carefully worded,

yet rich, sentence, encompassing the whole message.

Referencing the specific purpose regarding the effects of

mindfulness on health, an ideal central idea could look
118 | CENTRAL IDEA

something like this: Developing mindfulness through regular

practice produces benefits in all aspects of life, from mental

health to physical well-being. Note that the sentence is

complete, grammatically correct, asserts a perspective, and

includes just enough information from which to derive the

main points. From this single sentence, speakers can write a

speech about mindfulness, the practices that nurture it, and

the physical and mental benefits individuals might expect from

doing so. This central idea, once written, supports the specific

purpose and becomes the hinge around which everything else

in the speech will revolve.

                             Keep in mind that the central

                             idea may need to remain flexible

Helpful Hint                 during the research phase of

                             preparing the speech in order to

                             tailor the information specifically

Students often               to the audience. The specific
struggle to                  purpose, regardless, remains the
determine if                 same. Different audiences may
they have                    require different methods to relay
effectively                  the same message, so keep the
stated their                 central idea fluid until more
central idea as              information is known about their
an assertion.                preferences.

Figure out by
                          CENTRAL IDEA | 119

Bringing It All           asking if
    Together              someone could
                          disagree with
Topic: Study Cycle        the central idea
                          or develop a
General Purpose: To       speech on a
Inform                    different
                          perspective
Specific Purpose: To      regarding the
inform my audience        same topic.
about the study cycle
                          For example,
Central Idea: The         the central idea
study cycle offers a      "Even with
simple set of steps       limited space,
that will support your    growing your
effectiveness and         own vegetables
efficiency as a student.  is easy and has
                          many mental
                          and physical
                          benefits" could
                          lead someone
                          to present a
                          different
120 | CENTRAL IDEA

     perspective on
     this topic and
     propose an
     alternate
     central idea
     such as:
     "Growing your
     own vegetables
     is a complex
     and challenging
     process that
     requires
     immense time
     and ample
     space."
                                                        TITLING THE SPEECH | 121

TITLING THE SPEECH

                             While Shakespeare may

                             have famously had Juliet

                             ponder, "What's in a name?

                             That which we call a rose/

                             By any other name would

Source: Photograph           smell as sweet," the truth is,
by Katzenfee50 via Pixabay   a creative and well-worded

                             title potentially wins over an

audience's collective attention span before the speaker even

begins. The speech's title may act like the cover to a book, and

like it or not, most people (despite the famous advice not to

judge books by their covers) decide what books receive further

attention based on their initial impression. In most cases,

speakers will get introduced by someone, who will, at the very

least, tell the audience the person's name and speech title,

though visual aids could sometimes serve this purpose.

Providing the audience with that first taste of what the speech

promises to deliver--and doing so creatively--sets the stage, so

to speak. Have fun with it.

One student creatively titled his 6- to 8-minute speech to

inform with visual aids, "How to Make a Baby in 8 Minutes or

Less." Before the speaker reached the podium, his title already
122 | TITLING THE SPEECH

invoked laughter and giggles from his audience, thanks to the
title's double entendre. However, his speech went on to inform
the audience about contemporary fertility approaches for
couples having difficulties getting pregnant. In an extremely
well-researched presentation on medical science, the speaker
found a way to use wry humor to win over his audience before
he even spoke, but then followed that up with a charismatic,
fresh, and innovative presentation that maintained their
attention throughout the speech.

   Another approach to developing a speech title involves
looking at key phrases that may appear throughout the speech.
If the speech contains a key phrase that gets used repeatedly,
such as "I Have a Dream" in Martin Luther King, Jr.'s
infamous speech, consider using a shortened version of that
phrase to reinforce it before the speech begins. Speakers could
also turn a phrase into a provocative question, such as using
"Could You Save a Life?" as a title for a speech providing
instructions on the basics of CPR.

   The next chapter offers a closer look at how speakers can get
to know their audience, including methods for collecting data
about their knowledge level, attitudes, opinions, and beliefs, all
with respect to the topic covered in the speech.
                                                      CHAPTER 3 SUMMARY | 123

CHAPTER 3 SUMMARY

Source: Photograph by danymena88 via Pixabay

Remember that topic selection can make or break a successful
speaker. Speakers should choose topics that they feel
passionate about or know extensive amounts of information
about. The speaker's selection of a personally motivating topic
can effectively cut anxiety in half. Consider a topic's "share
test"--if the information sounds worthy enough to share on
124 | CHAPTER 3 SUMMARY

social media, it will likely present a viable choice with which to
work.

   Next speakers need to determine the speech's purpose: to
inform, to persuade, or to entertain. From there, begin
brainstorming topics right away, and the sooner, the better.
While narrowing and focusing topic ideas, start working to
develop a specific purpose statement. What should the
audience know upon completion of the speech? If persuading,
what is the goal? Identify the specific purpose first, and then
start working on a draft of the central idea. Remember to keep
everything fairly fluid and flexible, because, as the presentation
develops, valuable information about what the audience
members know (or don't know) and how they feel about the
topic (or don't feel about it) may change how the speaker's
purpose ultimately looks and subsequently, the central idea.
                 PART II - CHAPTER 4: ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE | 125

PART IV

PART II - CHAPTER
4: ANALYZING THE
AUDIENCE

Source: Columbia GSAPP, Canopy Gathering Space (Kazuyo
Sejima) (15137244987), CC BY 2.0

Chapters 4-10 outline how to prepare for speeches to inform.
126 | PART II - CHAPTER 4: ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE
                                               ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE | 127

ANALYZING THE
AUDIENCE
128 | ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE

               "If the people in the audience are
               talking, you're being ignored. If the
               people are gazing at you, you've got
               something they want to hear."
               --Chuck Berry Source:
               Pickwick, Chuck Berry (1958),
               marked as public domain, more
               details on Wikimedia Commons

After selecting a topic and establishing both the general and
specific purposes, speakers should turn their focus to the
audience. Presenters might as well stay at home and converse
with themselves in front of a mirror if they fail to take their
                                               ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE | 129

audience into consideration when refining the message in
preparation for delivery. Great communicators retain the
integrity of their original message, but carefully tailor, shape,
and mold that message to each audience's unique wants and
needs. Speakers who fail to connect with their audiences often
do so because they cared more about how they looked and
whether or not their audiences liked them.

   "Care deeply about your audience." Veteran speakers often
give this piece of advice when asked to explain the number-
one rule for effective public speaking. Unfortunately, many
speeches prove ineffective because the speaker could not
mindfully connect with the audience. Instead, they become
self-focused and preoccupied with distractions such as, "How
do I look?" or "Does everyone like me?" This self-focused
approach can amplify existing anxieties and interfere with
presenting successful communication. This rarely produces
positive results. Caring deeply for the audience means making
preparations in advance, staying mindfully present with the
message and how it will connect with the audience.

     Note to Self

     Show your genuine and authentic self.
130 | ANALYZING THE AUDIENCE

Effective and powerful communicators have one goal: to create
an audience-centered speech that adds value and meaning to
the information presented by remaining mindful of what the
audience members know about the topic and how they feel
(attitudes, opinions, and beliefs) about it. To achieve this goal,
speakers must, before every speech they deliver, analyze their
audiences and adapt their communication to the results of
that analysis. This process of analysis and adaptation, however,
must never sacrifice the integrity of the original message. This
explains why topic selection and initial planning come first
in the process, for personal motivations to discuss this topic
should not get overlooked.

     Note to Self

     Deliver your message despite what you think the
     audience may want to hear. You chose the topic
     because you found it has value to you, so take the
     opportunity to share this message so that other's
     may grow to adopt your perspective.
                                            COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA | 131

COLLECTING AUDIENCE
DATA

The word "data" might

conjure an image of an

accountant's office or a

research laboratory filled

with beakers and vials for

some, but data comes in

non-numerical forms. Data      Source: Governor Tom
concerning numbers and         Wolf, First Lady Frances Wolf
statistics is considered       Gives Remarks at the
quantitative, but it also      Pennsylvania Breast Cancer
comes in qualitative forms,    Coalition Pink Fountain
which include facts, stories,  Event, CC BY 2.0

and observations. Collecting meaningful, purposeful data

about an audience in relation to a speech topic is part science

and part art. Planning and critical thinking play a large role in

succeeding in this endeavor.

Before creating a means to gather data, decide on what data

matters for the speech. Knowing information about the

audience's demographics, or the most basic and quantifiable

characteristics of a population of people, could prove most

useful. Data on demographics (see sidebar for examples) can
132 | COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA

greatly enhance the crafting of an effective message. Why do

any of these characteristics matter?

Gender and sex do not necessarily mean the same thing,

and knowing the difference can make or break certain speech

topics. Sex refers to the biological differences that make a

person male or female, while gender refers to masculine or

feminine qualities evident within a person of either sex. To

determine how sex makes a difference to a speech topic,

consider the following situation:

               Jill is scheduled to speak to an

               audience made up of 18 women

Demographic    and 2 men. Her speech topic

Categories to  concerns early detection for breast

Consider       cancer. Given that the sex

               breakdown of the room is 90%

               women and 10% men, the majority

 Gender       of her speech's information will
 Sex          likely be directed toward the
 Age          women in the room, but at the
 Educatio     same time, she absolutely must find
               a way to make a portion of her
   n           information appeal to the men in
 Occupati     the room, such as by talking about

   on

 Religious    how 1 in 1,000 men will get breast

affiliation    cancer, or how a man can assist a

               female partner with early

               detection measures. If she doesn't
                            COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA | 133

find a way to include the men in

this conversation, then their

attention spans will likely fade      Socio-
early in the presentation. By           economic
speaking inclusively and inviting       status
men into the conversation using
information that directly impacts     Ethnicity
them, she has acted as an effective   Nationali

                                        ty

audience-centered speaker.            Income

Age represents another               level

important demographic factor,         Birthplac

because each generation learns       e

and grows in different

environments. Opinions and

knowledge levels on a particular

subject may vary greatly from one generation to the next.

For example, an informative speeches outlining the dangers

of social media delivered to two different audiences, one to

parents of high school students and another to the high school

students themselves, would likely get arranged in different

ways. The parents of high school students might need to hear

more background information before the speaker covers the

dangers of social media, whereas the experiences of the

students themselves (who grew up as "digital natives" and used

social media for the better part of their lives) allow the speaker

to immediately explore the topic with much more depth.

Sex and age may represent more outward characteristics that
134 | COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA

seem relatively easy in most cases to spot without a lot of effort,
but what about socioeconomic background, and how does
this demographic affect the speech preparation process?
Socioeconomic background refers to one's position in society
relative to others, which many will identify as "middle class,"
"impoverished," or "wealthy." Others may also refer to their
position among the working hierarchy, such as "blue collar" or
"white collar." To illustrate this point, consider the following
student's example:

       Shortly after graduating from my community
       college, I transferred to a prestigious private
       university, at which point, I was immersed into a
       student body of considerably greater wealth.
       One of my first experiences there was in a
       speech class, where a student delivered a speech
       on how to buy a used car, and her first main
       point discussed her real dilemma, which was
       whether to go with a BMW or a Mercedes. At
       that point, considering that I came from a high-
       poverty working-class background, I
       immediately tuned out.

Had the speaker, in this case, known her audience's
background, rather than assuming a homogenous (like-
                                           COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA | 135

minded, with similar backgrounds) one, she could have
provided more appealing options, thus inviting the whole
audience into her presentation, which would have prevented
losing listeners due to alienation or exclusion.

   Lastly, a speaker must also know the intricacies of culture
for a particular audience. A speaker discussing law
enforcement abuses will cover information one way with a
predominantly Caucasian audience and another way with an
audience with a higher representation of minorities due to
vastly differing viewpoints for each audience, but will ideally
maintain the integrity of that message with both. Additionally,
regional cultural expectations (e.g., a New York audience
compared to an audience in Atlanta) can vary greatly, as will
multinational audiences, so it pays for a speaker to prepare
based on intercultural knowledge, as well as individual
audience member characteristics. Delivering a message that
meets cultural expectations and respects cultural norms and
customs can earn a speaker the respect and admiration of that
audience, regardless of message content.

   While demographics offer a great place to start, speakers
often need more detailed information about their audiences to
achieve success. They can use both passive and active methods
to gather information.

     Hypothetical Situation #1
136 | COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA

                                You need to deliver a

                              rousing persuasive

                              speech in front of the

                              city council. How might

                              you go about learning

Source: Jared Piper/          more about each
PHLCouncil, Stated Meeting    member? You could
of Philadelphia City Council  start with a simple web
3-14-2019, CC BY-NC 2.0       search. Visit the city

council's web page to read about each of the

individual members, especially if they plan to vote

on the issue you came to address. Learn about their

individual priorities, their backgrounds in the

community, and even how they have voted in the

past. Use this information to tailor your message to

match those needs (this book discusses persuasive

strategies in Chapters 11 and 12). However, in

addition to this research-based approach, you could

simply show up early to the meeting and try to talk

to various people. Learn about this specific audience

by listening to the various conversations, or by

talking to people who know this audience well.
                                     COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA | 137

Hypothetical Situation #2

Pretend you just got

hired as a

communication

consultant for a

relatively large

organization. How      Source: Photograph by
would you learn about  RAEng_Publications via Pixa
the company to         bay

effectively perform

your job? You might look through the organization's

website, but also, could search local papers and

other news outlets for stories and press releases

about the organization. This will lead to finding

examples of various practices and activities the

organization has conducted. This technique also

works to prepare for a job interview. Interviewing

the supervisor or human resources manager of an

organization can also help you gather information

about the organization. These key people can

provide demographics, behaviors, knowledge,

attitudes, and interest levels of the targeted

audience.
138 | COLLECTING AUDIENCE DATA

The more speakers know and the more they can speak
specifically toward topics and information that various
audiences find important, the greater rapport, or connection,
they can generate.
                                                          SURVEY RESEARCH | 139

SURVEY RESEARCH

Source: Piryelgamer, Persona enquestant a una noia., CC
BY-SA 4.0

Passive information collection works well in many cases, but
sometimes a presenter wants to guarantee a successful speech.
At this point, consider pursuing more active means of
collecting data on the audiences. Accomplish this goal by
conducting survey research.
140 | SURVEY RESEARCH

Types of Questions

Survey questions come in the form of two general categories:
open-ended and closed-ended questions. Open-ended
questions have no definitive answers, allowing the survey
respondents to answer with anything they see fit, such as
"What is your favorite movie of all time, and why?" Closed-
ended questions limit the number of responses a respondent
may offer, such as either-or questions (yes/no, true/false, etc.),
multiple choice questions, and scaled questions ("On a scale
from 1 to 10, rate your knowledge of...).

   Both question classifications yield specific types of results.
Open-ended questions provide detailed information about
each individual taking the survey, and as such, these questions
may prove challenging to categorize due to the variety of
responses they inspire. While the answers offer valuable
information that might appear in the speech in order to tailor
content to very specific members of the audience, they fail at
providing a more basic snapshot of the audience as a whole. To
fill this void, closed-ended questions work well. Limiting the
number of responses to a question allows the speaker to more
efficiently collect and analyze data about highly specific aspects
of the topic.

Methods to Administer Surveys

In addition to question types, consider how to deliver, or
                               SURVEY RESEARCH | 141

administer, the survey to the audience, because each type of

survey brings with it a different set of benefits and challenges.

                               One of the simplest ways

                               to conduct a survey is to

                               deliver it face-to-face in a

                               sort of informal interview

                               approach. Write the

Source: Women's                questions out on a single
eNews, Form Filing, CC BY 2.0  sheet of paper, then

                               approach people in the

room, ask them the questions and record their responses. This

cheap and relatively quick (depending on the number of

questions asked) method comes with drawbacks. If any of the

questions get remotely personal or invasive, meaning that they

dig a little too deep, they may activate social desirability bias,

or the tendency for most people to want to bend the truth ever

so slightly on surveys to make themselves seem better than they

actually are. For example, speakers including a survey question

that asks respondents face-to-face how many illicit drugs they

have tried in the last month can expect that most people will

answer none, even though statistics suggest otherwise.
142 | SURVEY RESEARCH

Another method of

conducting a survey is to

create a single sign-up or

pass-around sheet that

contains all of the questions,

allowing each member of

the audience to see how Source: Photograph
others before them have by delphinmedia via Pixabay

answered. While this

provides an equally cost-effective solution as the previous

example, it also may activate the social desirability bias. In

addition, it adds the potential for groupthink, or the

tendency for people to respond how the majority of others

have responded before them, even if they don't truly feel that

way.

                                A third method employs

                                technological means to

                                create online surveys. A

                                quick internet search for

                                "free online survey tools"

                                will turn up a wide variety of

Source: Photograph              websites designed to create
by BiljaST via Pixabay          surveys effortlessly, before

                                providing a link (URL) that

the user can then email to everyone in the audience.

Additionally, such survey tools provide free analysis options,

allowing the speaker to automatically calculate a wide array of
                                 SURVEY RESEARCH | 143

basic statistics (averages, distributions, percentages, etc.). Such

surveys are quick to take, free to produce, and seem like they

might offer the best option available, but they come with their

own unique problems. Most notably: response rates are

notoriously low. Most online survey websites tell their users

up front to expect response rates of around 20-25%, so for

every 20 people polled, expect that a mere 5-6 will respond.

Sadly, this does not provide a very representative picture of the

audience to assist the speaker.

    The final option, the old-

fashioned paper survey, may

represent the best of all

possible benefits. When

speakers need to know as

much as possible about their

audience to effectively create Source: Photograph

an  audience-centered by andibreit via Pixabay

speech, individual paper

surveys present extensive benefits. First, depending on the

length of the survey, one can copy and paste the same set of

questions multiple times on a single page, thereby keeping

printing cost to a minimum. Second, an individual paper

survey provides anonymity and/or confidentiality to the

survey-taker, thereby negating or minimizing the social

desirability bias. Third, individual paper surveys, if handed out

to a captive audience, capture the highest possible response

rate by taking advantage of physical audience presence. While
144 | SURVEY RESEARCH

paper surveys require the survey-asker to tabulate and analyze
the results, unlike the online survey method, it does capture
a large sample, resulting in the best possible snapshot of the
audience.
            Figure 4.1: Types of Surveys

Open-ended  Describe how the thought of exercising every day
            makes you feel:

            __________________________________________

Either-or Do you exercise on a regular basis? ... Yes ... No
Multiple   How often do you exercise each week?
choice
            1. Not at all
            2. 1-2 times
            3. 3-4 times
            4. 5-6 times

Scaled     Exercising is an important part of maintaining
questions  my health:

           Strongly Agree Agree Neutral Disagree
           Strongly Disagree
Checklists  What types of exercise do you engage in regularly
Ranking     (check all that apply)?

            ... Running
               ... Biking
               ... Hiking
               ... Weight training
               ... Yoga
               ... Team sports
               ... Other

            Which of the following exercise types would you
            say you most enjoy? Rank in order from 1 (most
            liked) to 5 (least liked):

            Running
               Biking
               Hiking
               Weight training
               Yoga
148 | SURVEY RESEARCH

Survey Length

So how long should the survey be? The speaker's topic should
determine the appropriate length for the survey. Consider the
number of questions needed for the following topics:

   Caffeine intake of college students
   Differences between political parties
   Depression and anxiety

The first topic might need, at most, 3-5 questions to
determine the audience's average weekly caffeine
consumption. The second topic, however, has much more
nuance and require up to 20 or more questions to determine
the audience's political views. While that may seem excessive,
consider the third topic, which is so broad and complex it
necessitates 100 or more questions (and likely a lot more time
than one might have in a speech class) to accurately diagnose.

   In addition to one's topic, context plays a large role as
audience demographics might determine how many questions
seem appropriate. For example, if speaking to a group of first-
grade children, asking five or more questions will likely tax
their attention spans. Speakers may also want to consider the
amount of time they have to deliver the survey, the size of the
audience to survey, and the survey's method of delivery. All
                                                          SURVEY RESEARCH | 149

these factors and more may require speakers to choose their
questions wisely.
150 | DESIGNING QUESTIONS

DESIGNING QUESTIONS

Source: Photo illustration by Tumisu via Pixabay

As mentioned previously, speakers will need to decide early
on if they need open-ended questions for individual feedback
or closed-ended questions to gather more generalized
information about the audience. Closed-ended question types
include either-or, multiple choice, and scaled questions, but
each type carries with it a different set of considerations.

   Either-or questions include true/false, yes/no, or any
other pair of polar opposite responses. Use these types of
                                                    DESIGNING QUESTIONS | 151

questions only if two available options exist from which to
choose. Consider the following poor examples of either-or
questions:

   What political affiliation are you: Democrat /
      Republican
          People are more likely to identify as having
            tendencies toward both parties or neither. A
            multiple-choice question that gave the audience
            more options would work better here.

   What religion are you: Christian / Other
          This question implies that any religion besides
            Christianity is not worthy of naming. Lumping all
            other religions into a general category could
            unintentionally insult some members of the
            audience, particularly the ones who practice
            anything besides the aforementioned religion.

   Would you consider yourself: Healthy / Unhealthy
          Consider the social desirability bias here--who
            would rate themselves as unhealthy?

   How often do you exercise: All the time / Never
          The either-or dichotomy presented here does not
            represent the full range of possibilities.

By altering these questions into better uses of the either-or
question type, they may look like the following:
152 | DESIGNING QUESTIONS

   Do you generally describe yourself politically as:
      Left-leaning / Right-leaning

   Do you consider yourself strongly religious: Yes / No
   I can recite the Bill of Rights: Yes / No

Notice how the generalized nature of the questions lead the
respondents to choose between two equally attractive options?

   Multiple-choice questions can provide helpful
information because they offer a wider range of answer
choices, however, a poorly designed question might unfairly
lead them to answer in a way they normally would not. Avoid
unintentionally inserting bias into the lead-in question or
statement, and also ensure that each response has an equal
a chance of being selected as the others. Avoid inserting one
improbable response for the sake of humor, because then
people may choose that response in an attempt to play along
with the joke, at which point the data collected has become
compromised.

     Note to Self

     Do not give preferential wording to the answer(s)
     you want your audience to select. Honest feedback
     will make it easier for you to tailor your message to
                                                    DESIGNING QUESTIONS | 153

     them. Speaking of feedback, how would you
     improve the following multiple choice survey
     question: I trust local government officials to do
     what's right. A) Yes B) Sometimes C) Hell no!

Scaled questions provide the best possible insight into how
an audience feels about the subject of a question. Ask the
audience to place their knowledge or interest level on a scale
from 1 to 10, and once completed, analyze the results to
capture an overall picture of that audience. For example, if,
on a knowledge-level question like "how comfortable would
you feel building a computer," the audience surveys resulted in
an average response of 7.2, this means they possess reasonable
knowledge already, requiring the speaker to prepare a more
advanced presentation since the audience already has
demonstrated they have more than a basic understanding of
the subject. Other uses of scaled questions include Likert-scale
questions, which feature responses on a qualitative scale of
agreement, such as those having "Strongly Disagree" on one
end of the scale, "Strongly Agree" on the other end, and
"Neutral/No Opinion" in the middle of the scale. These types
of questions prove particularly helpful for determining
audience attitudes, beliefs, and opinions.

   However, as with any other type of survey question, make
154 | DESIGNING QUESTIONS

sure to keep any potential bias out of the question prompt, as
well as the scale itself. For example:

   Poorly worded scaled question prompt: "The president's
speech last night was full of lies and deceit."

   Re-worded scaled question prompt: "The president
delivered an effective and informative speech last night."

   In the first example, the survey taker knows immediately
that the person who wrote the survey does not hold the
president in high regard. For a fellow critic of the president,
that could lead to an answer of stronger agreement than
normal, and for a fan of the president, that could lead to
greater disagreement than normal. By rephrasing the question
neutrally as shown, the initial statement sets up a survey
respondent with the best possible opportunity to agree or
disagree, thereby capturing the most honest and accurate
responses possible.
                                                   MAINTAINING SURPRISE | 155

MAINTAINING SURPRISE

When designing surveys to test an audience's knowledge level
or gauge their overall opinions and feelings about a certain
topic, remember the general purpose in designing and
distributing these surveys: to collect information. If, however,
a survey unintentionally reveals the best parts of the speech
by informing them about the topic or arousing their curiosity
to the point where they pull out their phones to do a quick
search, then why give the speech at all? Great surveys seek to
collect information, not give away the major talking points
before the presentation. Consider the following story, as told
by a former COMM-101 student:

For my speech to motivate

others to act, I decided that

I wanted to persuade my

audience to think more

critically about stories they

hear in the media, but to

accomplish this goal, I

decided it would be best to    The "lethal" Dihydrogen
show them how easy it is to    Monoxide (DHMO). Source:
be fooled. So, I decided to    Thad Zajdowicz, Water
give the time-honored          Bottles Image, CC0 1.0

Dihydrogen Monoxide

(DHMO) speech. Of course, DHMO is just another name
156 | MAINTAINING SURPRISE

      for water; however, in my presentation, I didn't reveal that
      DHMO is another name for water. Instead, I continued
      using the acronym DHMO and described what happens
      when someone comes into contact with DHMO in its gaseous
      state (a steam burn); 2) what happens with prolonged
      exposure to DHMO in solid form (frostbite); and 3) how
      there are "secret" government pipelines that carry DHMO
      beneath our very feet (water mains).

         After making my case for the dangers of this chemical,
      my audience, for the most part, was simultaneously disgusted
      and terrified, or at least, they were until I revealed that "Di"
      is the prefix for 2 and "Mono" is the prefix for 1, meaning 2
      hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom, better known as H2O or
      water. At that point, my case was made and my speech was
      successful, but that would not have happened if I had asked
      a question on my audience survey like "Have you ever heard
      of Dihydrogen Monoxide?" Someone would have looked it
      up, blurted it out, and the surprise would have been ruined.
      Instead, I asked my audience about things like their
      knowledge of chemistry or of Latin/Greek roots. Once I knew
      who those experts were, I was able to ask them to remain silent
      while I spoke, to maintain surprise.

This doesn't mean the audience should not know anything
about the speech's topic after they complete the survey, rather,
it serves as a reminder to make sure the survey's purpose
remains focused on collecting information, not on giving the
audience too much information in advance.
                                                    MAINTAINING SURPRISE | 157

Survey Analysis and Usage

Once the audience has responded to the surveys, what should
the speaker do with all the data? Basic survey analysis like
calculating simple averages proves quite effective to turn
numbers into useful data. Tally up the total number of
responses for each question, and then divide by the total
number of surveys returned. Multiply this by 100, which
results in the percentage for that answer. For Likert-scale
questions, simply assign a number to each response along the
scale to determine the audience average along that scale.
As speakers continue working on their speech, audience survey
results provide them with an excellent way to let the audience
know how they measure up to the rest of their peers, which can
create an effective way to relate to members of the audience. In
other words, it tends to keep them listening.
158 | MAINTAINING SURPRISE

In a presentation focused on outdoor activities in the
summertime, a speaker might insert a statement into the
speech like, "According to my audience survey, 15 out of 18 of
you like to go camping in the summer, while the remaining
three would rather stay at a resort." Information such as this
can prove extremely helpful in relating the topic to specific
members of the audience, but also, these statements help
show people how their responses to the survey compare to
others in the same audience, satisfying a natural element of
curiosity. Source: Mallory Paige, Outdoor Camping, CC
BY-SA 4.0

Beyond inserting survey results into the speech, the audience
survey also helps speakers more specifically tailor the
information they ultimately choose to use within the speech.
If the speech starts to grow beyond the scope of time allotted,
then the survey provides a window into what the audience
truly needs to know. For example, if a speaker only has 6-8
                                                   MAINTAINING SURPRISE | 159

minutes to present and enough information for a
10-15-minute presentation, then that person could consult
the survey results to determine more accurately what
information to cut from the speech without negatively
impacting to the central idea. Conversely, if the speaker only
had enough information to make 4-6 minutes' worth of
talking time, then survey data could be used to determine what
information to expand or elaborate on, based on what the
audience needed to hear the most.
160 | CHAPTER 4 SUMMARY

CHAPTER 4 SUMMARY

Source: Aditya Pal , Questionnaire survey with farmers of
Koshi Tappu Wildlife Reserve, CC BY-SA 4.0

After selecting and refining the speech topic, the next most
important consideration is to determine how that topic will be
received by the intended audience. This reflects the principle
of audience-centered speaking, or the act of carefully and
mindfully tailoring one's presented information to the
knowledge levels, beliefs, values, and opinions of the audience.
As a means to adapt the information to an audience in this
manner, speakers must first start with collecting information
from that audience. This data collection can happen passively
(eavesdropping, public information, conversations prior to the
                                                      CHAPTER 4 SUMMARY | 161

speech, etc.) or actively (interviews, surveys, etc.), but
ultimately, presenters must find out what the audience knows
or does not know about the topic, and also, how they feel
about the topic (attitudes, opinions, beliefs, values, etc.). Once
they know what the audience knows and how they feel about
the topic, then speakers can work further to refine what
information makes it into their presentation, as well as how
it gets presented so that the audience memorably understands
the message as originally intended.
162 | CHAPTER 4 SUMMARY
                              CHAPTER 5: GATHERING INFORMATION | 163

PART V

CHAPTER 5:
GATHERING
INFORMATION
164 | CHAPTER 5: GATHERING INFORMATION
                                                GATHERING INFORMATION | 165

GATHERING
INFORMATION
166 | GATHERING INFORMATION

            "Research is to see what everyone else
            has seen and to think what nobody else
            has thought." --Albert Szent-Gyrgyi
            Source: FOTO:FORTEPAN / Semmelweis
            Egyetem Levltra, Szent-Gyrgyi
            Albert, Nobel-djas s Kossuth-djas
            orvos, biokmikus. Fortepan 74535, CC
            BY-SA 3.0

After selecting a topic, refining it, outlining its components
(general purpose, specific purpose, possible ideas for main
points), and taking into consideration the interests of the
audience, it is time to add pizzazz to the speech by conducting
                                                GATHERING INFORMATION | 167

research. This represents the process of systematically
investigating a subject or topic area as a means to gather new
facts and information, so in a sense, research helps speakers
make their speeches fresh, unique, innovative, and interesting.

   The arduous task of gathering information to use in a
speech can feel quite challenging in the Information Age due
to the overwhelming abundance available. One of the main
keys to conducting effective research is to keep the specific
purpose in mind when starting. Write or print out the specific
purpose and keep it nearby while beginning the quest to seek
new and innovative information. This simple practice will
prevent wasted time and effort.

     Note to Self

     For each piece of information you gather and each
     source you identify, consistently ask yourself two
     important questions: "Does this evidence support
     the goal of the speech?" and "Would this audience
     find it important and appropriate?"

Lastly, start researching as early as possible. This should occur
soon after the speaker refines the topic and considers the
audience's needs based on their knowledge and interest levels.
168 | GATHERING INFORMATION

Of all the tasks involved in preparing an effective presentation,
the two portions requiring the most time and dedicated effort
are the research process and rehearsal/practice (covered in
Chapter 8).
                                                             WHERE TO LOOK | 169

WHERE TO LOOK

Source: Photograph by ElasticComputerFarm via Pixabay

When embarking on a research endeavor, most (if not all)
people likely head for the student's best friend: Google. This
chapter will dedicate plenty of time to discussing how to
effectively, efficiently, and accurately search electronic sources,
but first will outline more traditional means of gathering
information.
170 | WHERE TO LOOK

     Note to Self

Sometimes it is actually more effective and efficient
to use classic research methods than what might
seem faster and easier, so take some time to
challenge yourself regarding these time-honored
traditions of research listed below.

Know Your              Traditional
Sources                Sources

  Popular               Traditional research sources (i.e.,
  Literature -          the ones that do not require
  news articles,        internet access) include:
  magazine
  articles, and       Books
  other expos        Magazines
  pieces written      Newspapers
                      Interviews with credible experts
                      Peer-reviewed academic journals
                      Documentaries

                        Note: Researchers can technically
find all of the above by way of the   WHERE TO LOOK | 171
internet. Books, magazines, and
newspapers now all have homes         by either
online, as do many interviews         journalists
with experts, academic journals,      employed by a
and documentaries via sources         publishing
such as YouTube or Netflix.           entity or
                                      freelance
   In the not-so-distant past,        contractors
scholars considered all of the        hired for a
above sources automatically           specific
credible, but with more recent        assignment.
developments in communication         These pieces
technology, some of the above         cover current
sources may require more careful      events, offer
consideration. Take, for instance,    profiles of
the fact that anyone with a           people and
computer and internet access can      places, highlight
publish a book. So-called "vanity     in-depth
publishers" such as Lulu.com          reporting,
offer users the ability to upload     showcase
document files and have them          investigative
professionally printed and bound.     reporting, or
"Vanity publishers" earned this       feature other
distinction because they were         items of
once reserved for authors who
"couldn't cut it" in the traditional
publishing market, but merely
172 | WHERE TO LOOK

                     wanted to see their names on

                     book jackets. However, more and

interest to the      more authors find this avenue of
general public       publishing a viable alternative, as
in legacy media      self-publishing often offers
outlets.             authors a much higher percentage
Popular, in this     of royalty revenue. Take into
context, does        account that contemporary
not refer to         publishers may not carefully
how many             verify information printed in their

people buy the       books. Some publishers even have

magazine or          unscrupulous motives for

read the article     providing misinformation, such

online. Instead,     as driving book sales. Research the

it refers to the     reputation and credentials of the

piece's intended     article, for in public speaking, the
audience, in this    responsibility sits with the speaker
case the             to show the audience why they
"general             should consider the source
population."         credible. Simply stating that an

                     author published a book does not

                     do enough to demonstrate

                     validity.

Similarly, with respect to magazines and newspapers, an

author of an article in the New York Times or Time may have

automatic credibility, considering the acclaim these
                                                              WHERE TO LOOK | 173

organizations have earned over the years. Some organizations
and websites, however, present biased information.

     Note to Self

     If you had to label Fox News as a predominantly
     conservative or liberal organization, what would you
     say? What about MSNBC? In this modern era of
     media consolidation, it helps knowing what other
     publications operate under larger parent companies.
     Rupert Murdoch, the current head of News Corp.,
     the parent company of Fox News, also owns the
     Wall Street Journal.

Recognizing these biases and how an audience might perceive
them helps the speaker know what research to use and what
to avoid. If an audience survey reveals that the audience leans
more to the left (slightly more liberal than conservative), then
the speaker should probably avoid using sources like Fox News,
and instead, look for the same or equivalent information via
a publication that the audience will more likely perceive as
credible and trustworthy.

   Interviews with experts can add credibility to the speech,
174 | WHERE TO LOOK

but also come with the caveat that the speaker must know how
an audience may perceive that expert.

     Note to Self

     Source: Dr. Phil, Prince Avenue Mascot, CC BY-SA 4.0

     For example, if you found an interview with Dr. Phil
     published online, you would probably want to know
     whether or not your audience would feel he was a
     credible source to use. Objectively, Dr. Phil McGraw
     has the credentials of a licensed psychologist,
     leading one to believe that his testimony would be
     accurate, but again, the act of communication with
     an audience requires that the audience perceive the
                                                       WHERE TO LOOK | 175

testimony as credible for it to have a positive effect.
Otherwise, you lose credibility with your audience
and your communication falls upon deaf ears.

   Finally, consider referring to   Know Your
peer-reviewed academic journals,    Sources
such as Communication
Monographs or the Journal of the      Trade and
American Medical Association .        Professional
These periodic publications rank      Journals-
among the most trusted and            published by
widely revered sources of             and for specific
information regarding credibility,    industry
and for good reason. The process      insiders and
of peer review makes achieving        professionals.
publication in one of these           These
journals a gargantuan feat for        publications
many would-be contributors. As        provide
soon as an author submits an          industry leaders
article (often a research study or    and
a theoretical article), it gets
dispatched to a team of expert
volunteer reviewers. These
renowned authorities on the
article's subject know nothing
176 | WHERE TO LOOK

                     about the author of the article

                     (called a blind review). They

practitioners        proceed to read, fact-check, and
with trends,         provide suggestions for editing as
news, political      needed. The rate of rejection
analysis,            varies depending on the
commentary,          reputation of the publication,
and other            though most rank generally high.
information          An author may receive stacks of
that specifically    rejection letters before

relates to their     successfully  achieving

specific             publication. By the time such an

interests. Due       article reaches this point, the

to their limited     audience can rest assured that

target audience,     experts have carefully scrutinized

most                 and edited the piece, making the
publications get     source among the most credible
produced             possible.
weekly,
monthly,                Although this section has
quarterly, or        covered "traditional" sources, one
annually.            can find all of the above online
                     with knowledge of where and

                     how to search. Google Books,

                     Amazon, and others can provide

helpful previews of books, some magazines and newspapers

provide access to their articles free of charge, online sites

publish interviews with experts, and students can review
                                                              WHERE TO LOOK | 177

scholarly journals via their college library's website. However,
having the skill to conduct effective searches can prove quite
challenging to some and may require outside assistance. For
that reason, spend time consulting with a college reference
librarian after selecting a topic to formulate a general research
plan. Consulting these highly trained and well-educated
specialists can help uncover the most credible and beneficial
information. In addition, their expertise in knowing where
and how to look for credible information, once tapped, can
save quantifiable amounts of time.
178 | INTERNET SOURCES

INTERNET SOURCES

Most modern research begins with a quick internet search.
However, please consider the wisdom imparted in this popular
meme:

Source: Alexander Gardner artist QS:P170,Q661176 Moses
Parker Rice (1839-1925), possibly one of Gardner's former
assistants, copyrighted this portrait in the late nineteenth
century, along with other photographs by
Gardner., Abraham Lincoln O-77 matte collodion print,
marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia
Commons

Most, if not all, sources found online will require further
review and careful consideration before accepting that source
as legitimate enough to cite within the presentation.
                                     INTERNET SOURCES | 179

Domains

                                     Some people hold the

                              misconception that a

                              website's domain (the letters

                              that follow the "dot" such as

                              .com, .org, .edu, etc.)

                              provides clues as to whether

Source: Photograph by         they may deem the
StartupStockPhotos via Pixab  information credible or not.
ay                            In 1985, the world saw its

first .com domain, Symbolics.com. At that time, the internet

consisted of six top-level domains: .com, .org, .mil, .gov, .edu,

and .net. During this period, for-profit corporations received

the .com designation, non-profit organizations reserved .org,

federal and state government entities used .gov, military

branches seized .mil, higher education institutions claimed

.edu, and .net generally applied to networking purposes only,

such as email servers or internet service providers.

However, as the internet began

to expand rapidly around 1991

and beyond, many of these Know Your

protocols did not get enforced, Sources

especially for individuals or

organizations wishing to register a

website with a .org domain.

Today, any person (without
180 | INTERNET SOURCES  accountability or oversight) can

     Scholarly          register for a .com, .org, or .net
     Literature -
     Generally          domain, while .gov, .mil, and .edu
     written by
     people who         face far more regulatory oversight.
     others consider
     experts in their   A vast array of top-level domains
     field, the
     authors of this    has sprung up, almost as a cottage
     type of
     literature         industry. Nearly every country has
     consist of
     researchers,       their own unique domain (.ca, .jp,
     scientists, and
     professors         .uk, etc.). Other domain types
     usually
     employed by        include topic, interest, and
     universities,
     colleges, or       industry-specific domains (.cloud,
     other research
     institutions.      .link, .club, .bike, .hotel, .church,
     Articles
     submitted for      etc.) and ones aimed toward
     publication
                        developing           interpersonal

                        relationships (.family, .dad ,

                        .home, .mom, etc.).

                        www.martinlutherking.org

                        serves as an example of why the

                        domain should not serve as a

                        primary factor in determining the

                        credibility of a website. In 1995,

                        Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux

                        Klan (KKK) and leader of the

                        controversial white supremacist

                        group Stormfront Don Black

                        purchased the rights to this

                        website, along with mlking.org
                                         INTERNET SOURCES | 181

and mlking. com. Since then,

Stormfront has resisted repeated         undergo a peer-
attempts by other parties to take        review process
over the domain, both through            that uses a
court action as well as through          blind review to
outright purchase, and instead,          evaluate the
continues to present information         article for
such as stating that the renowned        accuracy,
civil rights leader had, in fact, lived  quality, and
his life as a drunken philandering       appropriatenes
con-man. It also proposed that           s for
the federal government appeal the        publication.
holiday marking King's birthday.

Students using information from

this site without carefully

verifying or vetting the information by checking sources could

end up facing a hostile audience due to the presentation of

grossly inaccurate and factually incorrect information.

Who Runs the Site?

To vet such information on common websites, look for links
marked as "About us" or "Hosted by ______ ." Explore those
links, for they usually take the viewer to at least a brief
paragraph explaining the mission of the organization and why
they exist. Some authors who work for news organizations
such as Huffington Post or Time, have hyperlinks embedded in
182 | INTERNET SOURCES

their bylines to help provide access to additional information.
Often, if the author appears to push an agenda, performing
a quick internet search on that author's name will return
enough information to make an educated decision as to
whether or not the person should become a credible source in
the speech.

What Ads Populate the Site?

In addition to vetting the author(s), observe the products that
get advertised on the site.

   Quick caveat: In many cases an individual might see
automatically generated ads based on cookies stored on her or
his computer. A cookie represents a small piece of data sent by
a website that gets stored in a user's web browser while the user
browses the internet. Every time the user loads the website, the
browser sends the cookie back to the server to notify them of
the user's previous activity on that site.

   The ads permanently loaded to the specific site reveal a lot
about the values and stature of the organization presenting
the information on the site. As the old saying goes, "money
talks," which means that advertisers pay revenue to the owner
of that site for the opportunity to place their message amid the
site's information, and as a result, depending on the revenue,
an advertising company could easily sway the owner of the site
to alter the tone or content of said information.
                                                         INTERNET SOURCES | 183

How Old Is the Information?

Next, evaluate the age of the information presented on the site,
particularly if dealing with date-sensitive information, such as
technology-related topics. The following student account
demonstrates the importance of checking the timeliness of
information:

   I was in a class my senior year, called Communication
Consulting. In this class, we split into groups of four students
each, and each group had to present a different consultation
project summary. A group got up to speak before mine, and their
topic was "How to handle yourself at an international business
dinner." One of the students in their group was covering people
from Eastern Europe and their customs, and as she started
speaking, she said something that struck us all as odd: "First
thing you guys need to know is that you never want to call them
Russians, as they prefer to be called Soviets." Everyone in the
audience started looking around at each other in disbelief, but
she continued: "Also, don't talk about the Iron Curtain, the arms
race, or Communism. Instead, talk about topics like Glasnost
or Perestroika." Our eyes widened, because at that moment, we
knew she was serious. We knew she was using some pretty sketchy
information. Everyone started looking at our professor, whose
face was turning redder by the minute. At the end of their
presentation, the prof asked to see her sources, at which point, he
pulled one of them up on the big screen, in front of the whole
class. Imagine her shock when he pointed out that one of her
184 | INTERNET SOURCES

sources, on the Soviet Union, was a snapshot of the World Book
Encyclopedia from 1983!

   The student in this example failed to look for a date
reference of any kind, and instead, accepted everything she
read as contemporary fact, and in the end, she ended up feeling
humiliated in front of her peers. Always check for a date.
Consider moving on to another source that includes one if
unable to find one.

Wikipedia

No conversation about research would seem complete without
discussing Wikipedia, which happens to commonly rank #1 in
search results regardless of the topic of research. The common
argument against using Wikipedia as a research resource is that
the site allows anyone to change information in any article at
any time. This raises concerns that whatever information the
site presents could be manipulated and false. While this holds
some truth, it only presents a small fraction of what really goes
on behind the scenes of a Wikipedia article.

     Hypothetical Case Study: "Asphalt Aaron" (loosely
     based on real events)
                           INTERNET SOURCES | 185

                           Hi, I'm Aaron, and to

                           say that I am

                           passionate about

                           asphalt paving is an

                           understatement. It is

                           my life, my livelihood,

                           and all I care about. You

                           might suggest I need a

Asphalt Aaron Source:      better hobby, but I
Photograph by              wouldn't listen. One
KlausHausmann via Pixabay  day, after work, I am

                           surfing the web,

looking up new and innovative advances in asphalt

paving technology, when I decide to see what

Wikipedia has to say about my passion, but lo and

behold, there is no such article. Emboldened by this

oversight, I take it upon myself to create one.

I then have to sign up to create the article in the first
place, which presents very little difficulty, but then I
have to learn the Wikipedia interface as a means to
create my article and do it justice. Unfortunately,
learning to create this article requires some
advanced understanding of coding and
programming lingo, but I am passionate about this,
so I remain convinced that it is my duty to bring this
article to life. Eventually, I learn my way around,
186 | INTERNET SOURCES

craft a well-composed article on asphalt paving, and
I submit it for publication.

At this point, the article goes to a volunteer editor at
Wikipedia. Think, for just a moment, about the type
of person who volunteers their time to edit articles
for Wikipedia--for free. These people get aptly
referred to as "grammar police" and they quickly
point out inconsistencies and errors, so getting an
article accepted by them could prove difficult. Many
articles require source material to back up
assertions, high quality writing, and uniqueness of
topic to achieve publication, otherwise, they get
swiftly deleted by these editors, who ultimately
have the final say.

   However, throughout      Concrete Chris Source:
a process of editing and    Modified Photograph of
revision back and forth     KlausHausmann via Pixabay
between the editor and
I, my article finally goes
live. The next day,
however, my mortal
enemy, Concrete Chris,
decides to play a cruel
joke on me and edit my
article to suggest that
                                                         INTERNET SOURCES | 187

     concrete paving has superior qualities compared to
     asphalt. He signs up, enters my article, and makes
     the edits, proud of his work to undo everything I
     have done. At that point, I receive an email
     notification telling me that someone has edited my
     pet project. Given the amount of time and effort put
     into my article, I likely would try to find a computer
     quickly to see the revisions. As soon as I see my
     nemesis' writing, I can click a button to notify those
     same volunteer editors that I dispute the edit, at
     which point, my article reverts back to the last saved
     version prior to Concrete Chris' edits while the site
     resolves the issue.

While anyone can edit a Wikipedia article, the process to do
so remains rather rigorous and regimented. Although this does
not equate to full accountability, this, combined with previous
studies on the accuracy of Wikipedia that shows the site's
accuracy equals (if not exceeds) print sources such as
Encyclopedia Britannica (Giles, 2005), demonstrates the
validity of utilizing it as a research tool.

   However, note that Wikipedia does not have an "author,"
as the site provides access to an aggregate of information
compiled by millions of individual authors. For this primary
reason, never quote Wikipedia as a primary source. Doing so
188 | INTERNET SOURCES

would be like reading a book from your college library, and
then, in your speech, stating, "According to the library..."

   Instead of referencing Wikipedia, browse the article's
sources cited within the entry. For example, take a look at the
following excerpt from a Wikipedia entry on the reliability of
Wikipedia:

   Take note of the hyperlinked numbers in brackets. Clicking
on that number takes the user to the following entry in the
bibliography at the bottom of the article:

   This represents the kind of information worthy of citation
in a speech. For example, "According to a study conducted
by the journal, Nature, in 2005..." However, take the time
to verify the information and follow the trail to the original
source, consume that information, and verify that the source
truly says what the Wikipedia author contends. The last thing
speakers should do is cite false or inaccurate information and
end up with an audience member who knows this, for that
person will immediately attempt to point out the flaw once the
Q&A starts!
                                  INTERNET SOURCES | 189

Blogs

                                  Anyone can write a blog

                                  for any reason. They pre-

                                  date social media

                                  applications like Facebook,

                                  Instagram,   Pinterest,

                                  YouTube, and others, so

In 1994, Justin Hall created the  many of them started as
first online journal while
attending Swarthmore College      passion projects developed
(Chapman, 2011). Weblogs, or
"blogs," have become popular      by people who wished to
places for people or
organizations to journal          communicate  their
personal and share
information. Source: Joi          thoughts to the world.
Ito from Cambridge, MA,
USA, Justin Hall                  When conducting a web
(12371470735), CC BY 2.0
                                  search with any search

                                  engine, dozens, if not

                                  hundreds, of blogs appear in

                                  the search results for nearly

any topic or search string. Blogs can present a single person's

opinion, information from a scholarly journal of a researcher,

or the output of a collection of like-minded individuals sharing

their perspectives on a topic. Major news outlets like the New

York Times, the L.A. Times, and others, have blog sections in

their publications where knowledgeable journalists and

credentialed individuals share their opinions on a subject or

present deeply researched current event information. Look

carefully at blogs, just as with any website, to evaluate the
190 | INTERNET SOURCES

accuracy, trustworthiness, and credibility of the author and
the information presented before using it as a source. Key
questions people should ask when evaluating blogs include:

   What kind of blog is it?
   What is the blog's overall purpose?
   Did the blog list its credentials or contact information?
   Does the blog provide source citations and links to

      supplemental information?
   Is the blog current?
   Does the blog seem to present a noticeable bias by its usage

      of loaded rhetoric or selective facts?
   Does the information in the blog contradict information

      found in another source?

     Note to Self

     Not all blogs are created equal. Know your source
     before you rely on the information to use it in the
     speech. This will help avoid any embarrassment of
     losing credibility with your audience by presenting
     faulty information.
                INTERNET SOURCES | 191

Blog Spotlight

                Source:

Started by renowned attorney, Harvard Law
professor, and Supreme Court advocate Tom
Goldstein in 2002, scotusblog.com has become a
highly respected comprehensive source for what
happens at the Supreme Court. The blog
contains commentary and analysis by
credentialed and well-respected experts in the
legal community. Attorneys, students, and
professionals view the blog as a trusted
resource.
192 | USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH

USING RESEARCH IN A
SPEECH

Source: Petty Officer 2nd Class Cameron
Edy, 230203-N-DK722-1003 - Obangame Express 2023
Closing Ceremony, marked as public domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

When writing, an author who uses outside information has
specific rules guiding how one cites someone else's work.
Whether utilizing MLA, APA, Chicago, or any other
formalized set of citation and referencing rules, the guidelines
clearly lay out the process for an author. In verbal
                                         USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH | 193

communication, such as a public speaking context, however,
rules do not seem as readily apparent, if they exist at all.
Regardless, speakers still have the ethical responsibility to let
listeners know where certain outside information originated,
so how can they accomplish this?

   As mentioned, the rules for writing citations are clear. While
styles like MLA and Chicago may have differing rules to
format these citations, they all perform the function of letting
the reader know specifically where to go look for more
information should something resonate with the reader. The
in-text citations point to reference materials, usually listed at
the end of a paper, chapter, or book, so that the reader can
go look up the reference if they choose. In a speech, the
responsibility to let listeners know where information came
from works a bit differently.

   As speakers deliver the message to the audience, they will
need to support a claim by using an outside source. At those
moments, the speaker has an ethical responsibility to let the
audience know where the information came from, just as in
writing, but with a subtle difference. A speaker also has the
responsibility of letting the audience know why they should
perceive the source as credible. Unlike a writer, the speaker
does not have the luxury of providing an instantaneous way for
the audience to pause the act of communication and look up
the source in question.

   This begs the question: How much information does a
speaker need to share with the audience to demonstrate
194 | USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH

credibility? The answer, of course, depends on the audience,
which provides yet another justification for the speaker to get
to know the audience as much as possible prior to the
presentation. While this presents some difficulty in assuming
how much information provides enough context, typically
speakers find it best to err on the side of caution and present
more information, but not so much as to become distracting.
Take a look at the following two examples:

   Oral citation 1: "According to Dr. Shann Ferch, touch is an
integral component in acts of forgiveness."

   In this first sample, the citation provides too little
information. All audience members unfamiliar with this
expert would know is that this person has earned a doctorate,
but they would not know his area of specialty. For all they
know, Dr. Ferch could work as a chiropractor, which does not
suggest he would not know anything about the topic, but the
audience definitely needs more information. However, if the
audience knew of Dr. Ferch and his work, then this first oral
citation would provide the right amount of information.

   Oral citation 2: "According to Dr. Shann Ferch, author of
the 2011 book Forgiveness and Power in the Age of Atrocity,
published by Lexington Books, as well as professor of forgiveness
and leadership studies at Gonzaga University, touch is an
integral component in acts of forgiveness."

   In this second sample, the citation runs too long. While it
does provide ample information (in fact, it provides nearly all
the information listed in a bibliography's citation), by the time
                                         USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH | 195

the speaker finishes relaying all of Dr. Ferch's information, the
audience has forgotten the topic of discussion.

   Oral citation 3: "According to Dr. Shann Ferch, a
leadership professor and forgiveness researcher at Gonzaga
University, touch is an integral component in acts of forgiveness."

   This third sample provides the perfect amount of
information for the average audience unfamiliar with the
source. The claim gets effectively supported by providing the
audience with just enough information to establish the
source's credibility. Commonly known and understood
sources do not need much in the way of credibility, however.
For example, a mainstream and well-known publication like
the New York Times needs no initial explanation as to the
credibility of the author, so the best rule to follow remains to
include only as much information as necessary to make the
case for a source's credibility.

   But where should the speaker insert bibliographic
information? Follow one of the two general approaches to
accomplish this: front loading and back loading. Take a look at
the following samples:

   Back loading: "More than 90% of our communication is
sent through nonverbal channels, such as facial expressions, eye
contact, vocal tone, posture, and gestures. Marketers are keenly
aware of this fact and often manipulate actors in commercials
to provide maximum persuasive effects. I found my information
on nonverbal percentages from a book on public speaking by
196 | USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH

Hamilton Gregory, and I found the information on marketing
in an article in Time Magazine."

   Front loading: "According to a book on public speaking by
Hamilton Gregory, more than 90% of our communication is
sent through nonverbal channels, such as facial expressions, eye
contact, vocal tone, posture, and gestures. A recent article in Time
Magazine suggests that marketers are keenly aware of this fact
and often manipulate actors in commercials to provide
maximum persuasive effects."

   In the back-loading example, the researched information
gets provided up front, and the source for that information
comes later. With this type of citation, the audience may
initially assume that the speaker created the factual
information, but after the speaker reveals the source, the
audience comes to realize that it comes from an outside source.
In the front-loading example, the audience gets immediately
cued to hear that the information that follows comes from an
outside source, but done in 11 fewer words, allowing a more
conversational tone to develop.

   Constructing an oral citation seems quite simple, but how
do speakers know when and where to insert them? Generally
speaking, any time they relay information to the audience
gathered from an outside source, they should want to give
credit to the original source. Follow this rule the vast majority
of the time. In addition, note these more specific instances
where a citation becomes absolutely necessary:
                                         USING RESEARCH IN A SPEECH | 197

   Any time using numbers: dates, statistics, total counts,
      etc. Never leave a number hanging without stating who
      provided the data.

   Any time stating a testable, observable, verifiable
      fact. Use a source citation to provide support for that
      fact. For example, "According to recent reports by
      NASA, evidence suggests that a planet lies beyond the
      orbit Pluto."

   Any time the speaker share information that the
      audience could deem questionable. Use a credible
      source to back up the claim. Example: "Cleopatra lived
      closer to the invention of the iPhone than she did to the
      building of the Great Pyramid." According to whom?

While these guidelines provide a starting point for where,
when, and how to cite outside research, keep in mind that one
of the goals of a public speaker is to remain conversational and
engaging. If the speech begins to sound like a book report and
subsequent bibliography, the audience may very well tune the
speaker out. Be sure to find ways to insert this information as
support material, but remember to do so as conversationally as
possible.
198 | THINKING CRITICALLY ABOUT INFORMATION

THINKING CRITICALLY
ABOUT INFORMATION

Source: Photo illustration by geralt via Pixabay

To think critically about the information used in a speech,
learn to put in the effort and "leg work" to obtain the most
accurate and up-to-date information possible. As mentioned
previously with vetting sources, sometimes speakers need to
just carefully review the information before presenting it as
fact. To discern the difference between questionable
information and credible information, watch for clues to help
make determination.

   Is the information well supported, or is it based on
                  THINKING CRITICALLY ABOUT INFORMATION | 199

   hearsay? Hearsay essentially means the same thing as
   rumor. If the information sounds like it might be true
   but does not have sources to back up the claims, it might
   be anecdotal evidence or hearsay. For example, many
   people believe that suicide rates skyrocket on Christmas
   Day, and at first glance, this makes sense, partly because
   people share the claim anecdotally (or through hearsay)
   so many times. Why wouldn't they, as the rationale
   seems plausible? A 30-second Google search, however,
   produces credible information proving this wrong, as
   suicide rates peak in the springtime "because the rebirth
   that marks springtime accentuates feelings of
   hopelessness in those already suffering with it" (Burton,
   2012, para. 3).
 Is the information based solely on the testimony of
   non-experts or on opinions alone? Beware of claims
   made by many sources of information that a product or
   service changed someone's life for the better. Read the
   fine print, which usually states something along the lines
   of, "Results not typical." Additionally, generally avoid
   using personal blogs for most intents and purposes.
   Blogs rarely get peer-reviewed, and the bloggers running
   them rarely get held accountable for spreading
   misinformation. Of course, exceptions exist to almost
   every rule, including this one. Certain blogs may provide
   a wealth of information, particularly blogs written and
   managed by an expert in a particular topic-related field.
200 | THINKING CRITICALLY ABOUT INFORMATION

      Always take a few extra moments to double-check
      information found in a blog with outside sources. The
      extra effort will pay off in self-confidence that the
      information shared in the presentations stays accurate.
   What do opposing perspectives say? Do not merely
      research the agreeable aspects of the information,
      because frequently, audience members will not share the
      same support for the topic. Therefore, identify the
      opposition's viewpoints to a topic to prepare to address
      these concerns adequately. For example, if giving a
      presentation on stricter gun regulations, research the
      positions of advocates for fewer restrictions and less gun
      control, even when delivering a purely informational
      speech. Doing so provides a more well-rounded
      presentation because expanding one's perspective can
      also create a much richer, more deeply layered message,
      relatively free from bias.
                         USING OUTSIDE INFORMATION ETHICALLY | 201

USING OUTSIDE
INFORMATION
ETHICALLY

Source: RyanMinkoff, Plagiarism signature, CC0 1.0

Plagiarism is defined as the practice of taking someone else's
work and passing it off as one's own original work. However,
plagiarism can take several forms that speakers should avoid.

   The first and most severe form of plagiarism is the practice
of blatantly copying someone else's original work. While this
202 | USING OUTSIDE INFORMATION ETHICALLY

practice appears relatively commonplace in writing, blatant
copying with respect to a speech actually presents more work,
rather than reducing it. It becomes significantly easier to learn
what to say in one's own speech by crafting it all along than
trying to memorize someone else's "lines," similar to the way
an actor memorizes a script. Additionally, memorization
presents problems with delivering a speech conversationally,
which will get discussed later in Chapter 8.

   The second, and somewhat less severe, form comes in the
practice of piecing together others' works from multiple
sources, without any sort of effort to synthesize these works
into an original presentation. This copy-and-paste approach
creates the same difficulty in delivery as mentioned above.

   The third, and possibly most common, form takes someone
else's work and lazily paraphrases it just enough to avoid direct
or blatant copying of another's work. For example, if a source
changes the following statement: "Plagiarism is one of the
greatest transgressions in all of academia and should warrant
a public flogging," to, "Plagiarism is one of the gravest sins
in education and deserves a public beating," then the speaker
really has not created original work, but instead, has used a
thesaurus to help steal another's ideas. While the speaker did
not steal the words themselves, the original ideas certainly were
stolen. Whenever the original source does not receive credit,
plagiarism has occurred.
                                                     CHAPTER 5 SUMMARY | 203

CHAPTER 5 SUMMARY

Source: Photograph by StockSnap via Pixabay

Speakers ultimately have an ethical and moral responsibility
to both their basic message as well as to their audience to use
credible and accurate information in the presentation of their
messages. Supporting one's message with information in this
fashion begins with critically evaluating the sources, followed
by critical evaluation of the information itself. As the speaker
delivers the message, alert the audience that outside sources
have contributed that information, but furthermore, the
audience must also know why they should perceive those
204 | CHAPTER 5 SUMMARY

sources as credible authorities on said information. By
following these practices, speakers build credibility and
believability among their audiences, lending to the desired goal
of making the message memorably understood as originally
intended, thereby fulfilling the general and specific purposes
of their speech. Additionally, these practices help eliminate the
scourge of plagiarism by encouraging ethical communication
practices. Learning to research critically, evaluate information
carefully, and communicate it clearly results in the creation
of innovative, original thought, but also provides for the
dissemination of ideas among others. For more information,
please see Appendix H for the "CRAAP Test," a handy guide
to evaluating information for use in academics (and life).
                                                 ADDITIONAL RESOURCES | 205

ADDITIONAL
RESOURCES

Make sure that all material mentioned in the bibliography
appears in the written outline in some format. Speakers can
easily forget to mention their sources during the actual
speech if they forget to reference them in the outline.
Source: Photograph by libellule789 via Pixabay

The resources provided on this page apply exclusively to the
written outline and not the speech itself (as discussed in this
chapter, the speaker needs to employ a more conversational
206 | ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

approach when citing sources during the speech's delivery).
Scribber provides wonderful tips for guiding students through
all phases of creating original works within academia.

   A large number of educational institutions require APA
or MLA formatting. Visit the following hyperlinked websites
for additional assistance with creating either APA or MLA
citations. When using an online citation generator, always
check the final draft against the guidelines hyperlinked above.

   Using proper formatting, remember to provide a
bibliography/works cited for all of the speech's source material
at the conclusion of the speech's outline.
                                   CHAPTER 6: ORGANIZING THE IDEA | 207

PART VI

CHAPTER 6:
ORGANIZING THE
IDEA
208 | CHAPTER 6: ORGANIZING THE IDEA
                                                     ORGANIZING THE IDEA | 209

ORGANIZING THE IDEA

"Mostly I make lists for projects. This can be daunting.
Breaking something big into its constituent parts will help
you organize your thoughts, but it can also force you to
confront the depth of your ignorance and the hugeness of
the task. That's okay. The project may be the lion, but the list
is your whip." --Adam Savage, Mythbuster Source: Gage
Skidmore from Peoria, AZ, United States of America, Adam
Savage (47956183282), CC BY-SA 2.0

By this point a speaker has chosen a topic, analyzed the
audience, and gathered research on the subject. Now he or she
must organize the information. Remember, public speakers
should not try to memorize their speeches or improvise what
210 | ORGANIZING THE IDEA

they say, but speak extemporaneously. Compose a plan for
what to say, then learn that plan, creating notes to keep on
track, and then speak conversationally according to the plan.

   To illustrate this point, take a look at the following example.
Estimate much time it would take to memorize and repeat the
following 41 letters:

   y-m-s-e-c-p-h-e-i-s-a-u-t-o-b-m-u-s-o-a-t-e-p-o-r-x-e-e-
n-n-o-r-o-t-a-a-i-n-i-z-g

   Without a photographic memory, memorizing this
seemingly random string of letters may prove nearly
impossible. But what if the dashes got eliminated and letters
reorganized as follows:

   Notice that none of the letters changed; nothing got added
or deleted. By arranging the letters into meaningful and
manageable chunks, the message became more focused. The
same holds true for information within a speech, whether
speaking for 5 or 50 minutes. Besides the benefit associated
with recalling information at will, a well-organized speech
makes it easier for an audience to understand and recall the
information shared, which is, of course, the end goal for an
effective communicator.

   Audiences can quickly tell the difference between an
organized and a disorganized speaker. Disorganized speakers
often bounce between unrelated points, detour into irrelevant
                                                      ORGANIZING THE IDEA | 211

stories, lose their connection to the audience, and generally
seem unprepared. Such disorganization, at best, turns away an
audience's collective attention span, and at worst, can create
a hostile, irritated, or insulted group of listeners. This does
not suggest that a little disorganization will lead to failure,
however. When a speaker can still engage, entertain, and
inform effectively, a hint of disorganization may almost seem
welcome, as it makes the speaker seem more fluid and
conversational. On the whole though, audiences perceive
organized speakers as more knowledgeable, articulate, and
believable, ultimately gaining the their trust and respect.

   To organize information efficiently, use the process of
outlining to arrange the ideas for the speech. Outlines help
speakers arrange the larger ideas into a manageable order, but
then also help them fill in those larger ideas with supporting
information to help expand and refine the major talking
points. Outlines also help to ensure that both the introduction
and conclusion effectively frame those larger ideas into a
memorable format for the audience. The remainder of this
chapter will present the recommended outline format needed
to create effective speeches. First this chapter will cover the
importance of introductions, followed by instructions on how
to create the body of the speech, and end with a discussion on
how to compose memorable conclusions.
212 | ORGANIZING THE IDEA

     Note to Self
     You will find several helpful sample outlines that will
     serve as models for future work at the end of this
     chapter.

     Why Not Memorize?

        Source: Public Domain photograph via ph, CC0 1.0
                                               ORGANIZING THE IDEA | 213

  Most novice speakers operate under the
  assumption that they should memorize their
  speeches, word-for-word, but that could not be
  further from the truth. The best speakers do not
  memorize, but rather learn their speeches in a
  process similar to learning directions from home
  to somewhere unfamiliar. Rather that obtaining
  a map and memorizing step-by-step, turn-by-
  turn directions, individuals pull up a map and
  learn the major milestones they need to note.
  They figure out where to turn, roughly how far
  to go between turns, and what to look for along
  the way. As such, an outline acts as a roadmap
  that focuses on the highlights that provide just
  enough detail to get from start to finish. Save
  the memorization for theatrical or cinematic
  performances.

Note To Self
214 | ORGANIZING THE IDEA

Source:                 In another analogy, think of a
Photograph           familiar story from your past,
by peterhav via Pix  like when you learned to ride a
abay                 bike. Could you tell the story
                     without creating an outline and
the same.            note cards? Of course you could,
                     since you know the story. You
                     might tell it differently from one
                     retelling to the next, but the
                     highlights of the story (the main
                     points, central idea, etc.) remain

If you try to memorize your speech, you're only
making it harder for yourself.

Similar to a written essay or composition, speakers should
utilize three main sections in an informative speech: the
introduction, the body, and the conclusion. Each section
serves an important purpose in crafting a memorable speech.

   These three sections align perfectly with a saying often
credited to Dale Carnegie: "Tell them what you are going to
tell them, tell them, then tell them what you told them."
Though some question whether or not he coined the phrase,
no such rift exists on the message it espouses, as a broad
consensus among communication professionals and educators
                                                      ORGANIZING THE IDEA | 215

believe these three things represent all a person needs to know
to craft a memorable speech or presentation regardless of
length and complexity.

Tell Them What You Are Going
to Tell Them

This portion serves as the introduction of the speech--the
opening component that serves to engage the audience and
capture their attention. The introduction has several specific
roles to fill and generally should not consist of more than
10-15% of the speech. The introduction not only includes
"coming attractions" for the audience, but it also grabs their
attention and gives them a reason to sit up and pay attention.

Tell Them

This portion represents the substance or content of the speech.
Organize this section into the most important points that will
most clearly and effectively deliver the message to the audience.
Provide the details of the speech, which should include
researched information supported by evidence. This section of
the speech should consume 70-80% of the speaking time.
216 | ORGANIZING THE IDEA

Tell Them W hat You Told Them

Reiterate, summarize, and add punctuation during the
speech's conclusion. Like the introduction, the conclusion of
the speech should only last 10-15% of the total time of
delivery, but it serves as a critical role in achieving highly
effective results. Reminding the audience about the most
important points detailed in the body and ending the speech
with a memorable closing statement solidifies the message in
the minds of the audience. Abruptly ending a speech will
nearly guarantee that the audience will remember less of it and
for a shorter period of time--if at all.
                               THE PURPOSE OF THE INTRODUCTION | 217

THE PURPOSE OF THE
INTRODUCTION

Source: Photograph by Ramdlon via Pixabay

Though the introduction constitutes a small portion of the
time allotted for delivering the speech, it has to contribute a
significant amount of information to get the speech started
right. Speakers will never get their message across to the
audience if they don't first get their attention. Once speakers
have their attention, they don't want to lose it, so they need to
"set the hook" by capturing the audience's interest. This helps,
but will not be enough to insure they continue to listen. The
audience needs to know that the information will benefit them
218 | THE PURPOSE OF THE INTRODUCTION

in some way. They also want to know the speaker's investment
in the topic and gauge their knowledge to speak on it. Finally,
the introduction offers the first opportunity to deliver the core
message to the audience (the thesis or central idea) and give
them a preview of the most important elements of that idea.
If the speech lasts less than 10 minutes in length, the speaker
needs to accomplish all of the following in less than two
minutes: 1) Grab attention; 2) Relate to the audience; 3)
Establish credibility; and 4) Provide the core of the speech,
including a preview of the speech to come.
   CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION | 219

CREATING THE
INTRODUCTION, STEP 1:
GRAB ATTENTION

      "It was a pleasure to burn." --Ray Bradbury, Fahrenheit
      451

         "It was the best of times, it was the worst of times."
      --Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities

         "Mr. and Mrs. Dursley, of number four Privet Drive,
      were proud to say that they were perfectly normal, thank
      you very much." --J.K. Rowling, Harry Potter and the
      Sorcerer's Stone
220 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION

                                Well-known authors

                                often admit that the

                                opening line of a book is

                                possibly the most important

                                one in the entire book.

                                Authors, like any other

                                profession, need to make a

                                living to maintain their

                                lifestyle. This requires them

                                to sell copies of their books,

Source: Hannah                  so authors must possess the
Barnett, Reading..., CC BY 2.0  capability to hook a reader
                                within only one or two short

lines to entice further reading. Most people, when searching

for a new book, look first at the covers, and then to the first line

of the story, and if it sufficiently grabs their attention, they

continue perusing the pages. However, if those first lines fall

flat, the book gets closed, set down, and likely forgotten

forever.

A similar phenomenon occurs within the first few seconds

of a speech. The first words uttered or the first actions that

may communicate a message to an audience become absolutely

critical. Borrowing from the previous analogy of a speaker to

an author, imagine picking up a book that began with, "Hi,

everyone. My name is Stephen King, and today, I'd like to share

a really scary story with you about homicidal clowns." Such a

book promises little excitement, and most people would likely
   CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION | 221

put it down without hesitation. In a similar light, a speaker
who gets up before an audience and "warms up" with a casual
greeting, small talk, and an awkward announcement of the
topic tends to put off most audiences' attention spans.
Considering that the average human transient attention span
(temporary response to a stimulus) lasts around 8 seconds
(Dukette & Cornish , 2009), a speaker has an extremely brief
window of time in which to grab the audience's attention
and, subsequently, sustain it for the duration of the speech. In
fact, the shorter the time the speaker has to speak, the more
important this initial attention getter becomes. If given a
limited amount of time to speak, don't waste it on anything
that does not further the purpose for speaking.

   To grab an audience's attention, try using one of the several
time-honored techniques that continue to work today, despite
all the various advances in technology. These include
quotations, stories, rhetorical questions, shocking or
unexpected information, and compelling visual aids or
demonstration.

Quotations

A great quotation related to the speech topic often provides
wisdom from a well-respected source that says something
valuable or profound in much fewer words than most people
can manage using many more. Choose quotes that
demonstrate elegance, eloquence, or clever wit, yet make sure
222 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION

they remain relevant to the topic. Avoid using fun or
humorous quotations for the sake of it, for this may make
the audience feel cheated. Consider pulling quotations from
websites, like BrainyQuote.com or GoodReads.com, works of
literature, poetry, film, or even from personal acquaintances.
Quotes can work especially great at the beginning and ending
of speeches.

Stories

Providing a story or a narrative helps speakers frame the topic
for the audience. Stories provide speakers with a way to
personalize a topic by helping audience members identify with
the characters, events, or places within the story. Also, stories
can entertain and engage, further reinforcing the idea of using
an attention getter at the beginning of a speech. Stories can
present "what if" scenarios that give the audience a
hypothetical situation that illustrates the main point of the
speech. Stories can also come in the form of real-life anecdotes
based on personal experiences, those of others, or even events
portrayed in fictional works like television, film, or literature.
Select a story for both its relevance to the topic, but more
importantly, its ability to resonate, or strike a familiar chord,
with the audience.

   Knowing the audience in advance becomes critically
important when selecting the perfect story to illustrate or
frame a point.
   CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION | 223

The more information the speaker can gather about the
audience, the more likely he or she will a deliver a message
that will resonate with them. Source: Photograph
by MariSmithPix via Pixabay

Asking Questions

"According to the U.N., roughly 734 million people live on
less than two dollars a day. Could you?" This rhetorical
question, or question designed to evoke a thought or emotive
response from an audience, requires no answer. Starting a
speech with a question like the one above immediately cuts
to the point, while simultaneously provides the audience
concrete information and gets them to think about the main
idea of the speech. Delivering a rhetorical question effectively
224 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION

requires skill, though, so inexperienced public speakers should
avoid using them until they gain a bit more experience. Deliver
the question slowly, deliberately, and follow it with a brief
pause that allows the audience to consider what they heard.
Too short a pause, and the audience does not have adequate
time to think, while too long a pause runs the risk of having
the audience actually start responding to the question. Finding
the right balance of time takes skill, but once perfected, gives
the speaker a powerful opening tool for grabbing attention. In
addition to this deft use of a pause, the speaker should also
follow up the question by explaining how the rest of the speech
will address the nature of the question.

   In a quick poll the speaker poses a question that requires
little commitment from the audience, other than raising a
hand. For example, using the topic above, the speaker might
start by saying, "Can I get a quick show of hands for everyone
in this room who currently has a job?" Gaining a small
showing of audience involvement like this provides a highly
effective way to grab attention, and the critically thinking
speaker can combine this technique with the rhetorical
question to further drive home an important point. For
example, following the question above, the speaker could say,
"Now, keep your hand up if you make less than two dollars a
day at your job, just like the other 734 million people in the
world who make this wage or less, according to the U.N." Such
strategies have risks though, especially when they backfire,
such as when audience members do not raise their hands as
   CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION | 225

expected, or when a speaker ends up with more audience
involvement than previously desired. Use discretion, and
always have a backup plan.

Unexpected Information

"Just how big is a billion? To put this in perspective, let us
look at a single second. Now, let's figure out how much time
passes in one billion seconds. Any guesses? It takes more than
31 years. If you started counting to one billion when Orson
Welles' War of the Worlds radio broadcast convinced some
Americans that aliens had invaded the country in 1938, you'd
finish counting around the time Neil Armstrong took his first
step on the moon." Using a set of statements like this to arrive
at an unexpected conclusion would provide a great segue to
kick off a speech explaining a concept like the federal deficit,
especially if the speaker wished to put into perspective the
scope of the federal budget. Statements such as these stimulate
audience members' curiosity and keep them listening for more
useful information. Another way of approaching this, but also
combining the technique with gaining audience involvement,
would occur if the speaker asked every other male in the room
to raise his hand and then asked every third female in the room
to raise her hand as well. Then, the speaker could explain to
the audience that, according to the Damon Runyon Cancer
Research Foundation, the statistics show that the people with
their hands in the air represent the odds of receiving a positive
226 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION

diagnosis for some form of cancer. While sobering and
somewhat macabre, such involvement causes the audience to
feel invested and personally related to the topic from that point
forward.

Visual Aids and Demonstrations

Source: Valerio Bozzolan, Luca Pozzi - presenting Rosetta
Mission 2022, Blender, Mozilla Hubs, contemprary art 002 -
Linux Day Milano 2022, CC0 1.0

Chapter 10 will discuss the impact of visual aids in much more
detail. Suffice to say, visual aids can provide a speaker with
powerfully gripping opening techniques. Additionally,
demonstrations may provide an audience with a visually
compelling reason to listen as well. A student delivering an
   CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 1: GRAB ATTENTION | 227

informational speech on the martial art of tai chi may walk
slowly and deliberately out into the center of the room, take
a deep breath, and, in silence, begin performing various forms
and poses inherent to the art. Without saying a word, such
a demonstration effectively captures an audience's interest to
hear more.

Refer to Current or Historical
Events

      "Last week we noted the founding of this great college in
      1886, with a big celebration in the campus commons. The
      first students to graduate were nursing students, and they
      received their diplomas in 1890. Since then, there have been
      thousands of nurses who got their education right here."

The above example refers to both the past and the present. A
nursing student attending this college might use this as a good
attention getter for a speech about some element of nursing or
the medical field. Generic yet personal, it immediately engages
the audience and brings them personally closer to the topic
and its relevance.
228 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 2: RELATE TO THE
AUDIENCE

CREATING THE
INTRODUCTION, STEP 2:
RELATE TO THE
AUDIENCE

   What happens once the
speaker has primed audience
members and prepared
them to listen by effectively
hooking their collective
attention? The speaker must
do something to promise Source: Photograph
that the audience's by FaviconLtd via Pixabay
investment in time and
attention will continue to be worthwhile for the remainder of
the speech. Do this by explicitly and carefully relating the topic
to the audience, not on a general basis, but in a highly
controlled and specific manner. Demonstrate effective
presentation skills by carefully tailoring the topic to the
audience's needs. This reinforces how the audience analysis
remains absolutely critical for a speaker to achieve success.

   Clearly and explicitly answer the question "What's in it for
              CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 2: RELATE TO THE
                                                                       AUDIENCE | 229

us?" for the audience. Rather than merely telling the audience
why the topic should matter to them, show them how it relates
to them. For example, if the speech topic concerns methods to
detect breast cancer early, the speaker might state the statistics
on how many women will get diagnosed with breast cancer in
their lifetimes, but then, he or she might also state the odds
of the men in the room receiving the same diagnosis as well,
in addition to talking about how spouses and partners play a
critical role in early detection. This connects the topic clearly
to each and every individual in the room.
230 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 3: RELATE TO SELF
(ESTABLISH CREDIBILITY)

CREATING THE
INTRODUCTION, STEP 3:
RELATE TO SELF
(ESTABLISH
CREDIBILITY)

     Note to Self

     You could be the most knowledgeable, well-
     educated, competent, caring, and trustworthy
     person on the planet, but if your audience doesn't
     know that, or if they perceive you do not have these
     qualities, then all the work you did to prepare, all the
     passion and experience you have, will not matter.
     Your audience will stop listening or won't believe
     what you have to say.
CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 3: RELATE TO SELF
                                     (ESTABLISH CREDIBILITY) | 231

                              After grabbing the

                              audience        members'

                              attention and showing them

                              how the topic relates to

                              them personally, the speaker

Source: olivier gobet         should relate the topic back
(Gd6d) from France, CSS Grid  to themselves and answer
Changes Everything (About     the questions: "Why me?
Web Layouts) Morten           Why now?" To establish
Rand-Hendriksen               credibility as a speaker, this
(35013588400), CC BY 2.0      step is absolutely necessary,

                              because audiences want to

know up front why they should trust or believe the speaker as

he or she delivers all subsequent information to them in the

presentation. For example, the speaker may be an expert or an

authority on the chosen topic, but he or she may also have

nothing more than a vested interest in the topic and a genuine

desire to share the information with others.

Scholars and philosopher have conducted a lot of research

on Aristotle's concept called "ethos," which mean credibility.

The late James McCroskey, a communication professor at the

University of Alabama- Birmingham, and Jason Teven, a

professor at California State University, Fullerton, spent years

researching the concept of credibility. They identified three

components of individual credibility: competence,

trustworthiness, and caring/goodwill (1999). This portion of
232 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 3: RELATE TO SELF
(ESTABLISH CREDIBILITY)

the introduction should provide three important pieces of
information to the audience:

 1. Competence: The degree to which an audience
      perceives a speaker as being knowledgeable or expert on a
      given topic. What are the speaker's credentials, if any,
      regarding that person's relationship with the
      information? Has the person researched the topic
      extensively or taken coursework in this area of study?
      Does the speaker's work experience relate to the topic?
      Without giving the audience an exhaustive rsum and
      work history, make this connection clear, yet brief.
      Explain just enough to establish credibility.

 2. Trustworthiness: The degree to which an audience
      member perceives a speaker as having honest and sincere
      qualities. Why does the speaker want to discuss this
      topic? What vested interest does the speaker have in
      conveying this information to the audience today?

     Note to Self

     Is there a specific inspiration that might show the
     audience why you care about this topic? What is
             CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 3: RELATE TO SELF
                                                  (ESTABLISH CREDIBILITY) | 233

     your motivation?

 3. Caring/Goodwill: The degree to which audience
      members perceive a speaker as genuinely caring about
      them.

     Note to Self

     Let the audience know that you chose this topic
     because you care about them and have concern for
     their welfare. Convince them you are not trying to
     manipulate or mislead them. If the audience
     members believe you have their best interest in
     mind, they may overlook imperfections in your style
     or delivery, in addition to other concerns relating to
     competence and trust.

Review the example below that combines these three aspects:

      "I'm a biology major, so talking with you about the potential
      for a pandemic relates pretty heavily to my future career
      goals (Competence). Pandemic diseases fascinate me,
234 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 3: RELATE TO SELF
(ESTABLISH CREDIBILITY)

      which is why those goals include pursuing a career in medical
      research (Trustworthiness). I believe that we should all
      have a basic understanding of what a pandemic flu could do
      to us as a society, so that we can better prepare ourselves for it,
      when the next pandemic does strike (Caring/Goodwill)."

Be careful with this step, though. Try not to seem boastful or
arrogant. Instead of stating, "I have a Ph.D. in this subject,
so I'm the most highly educated person in this room," say
something like, "I have extensive training and education on
this subject, and since it was the topic of my doctoral studies,
I feel well prepared to share some of my findings with you
today." Again, keep this section relatively brief, but long and
detailed enough to provide the audience with a reason to trust
this particular message.
          CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 4: THE CORE OF THE
                                                                          SPEECH | 235

CREATING THE
INTRODUCTION, STEP 4:
THE CORE OF THE
SPEECH

Source: Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff from
Washington D.C, United States, 190330-D-SW162-1698
(46587642895), marked as public domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

The last step of the introduction before transitioning into the
body of the speech involves showing the audience what they
236 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 4: THE CORE OF THE
SPEECH

can expect to hear throughout the presentation. Break the core
of the speech down into the following parts: the central idea
(thesis) and the preview of main points. For novice speakers,
this step may appear repetitive--and it is. Human listeners are
remarkably inept at remembering what they hear, so effective
speakers know to cover their most important points at least
three times throughout a speech. This becomes the first
opportunity for speakers to share their central idea and main
points, but it won't be the last.

Central Idea

Speakers should boil down all the ideas they want to express
in the speech into just one declarative sentence. That sentence
serves as the speech's central idea.
Speakers should ask themselves what one piece of information
ranks as the most important for the audience to know and
remember above all other information. The central idea
should tie together all of the main points and their supporting
points, for everything throughout the rest of the speech relates
to this central idea. Think of it as the thesis statement. The
following example shows a central idea that needs a bit more
revision followed by one that does not:
         CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 4: THE CORE OF THE
                                                                        SPEECH | 237

Needs work: "How to

shoot a basketball."

Why it needs work:

First, this is an incomplete

sentence. Second, it makes

no assertion or declaration.   Source: Photograph
Third, it more resembles the   by Pexels via Pixabay
topic or title of a speech

rather than a central idea or

thesis.

Better: "Learning how to shoot a basketball may seem

difficult but can be perfected through practicing fundamental

techniques."

Why this statement works better: This complete

sentence makes an assertion that can be proven or disproven

through research and fact. The audience can expect to hear

the speaker talk about the difficulties of learning how to shoot

a basketball, fundamental techniques needed, and how they

might incorporate those techniques into practice.

Preview of Points

In the final step of the introduction, consider relying on
Carnegie's quote to "tell them what you are going to tell
them." After relaying the central idea with this particular
audience, briefly tell them what points they can expect to hear
during the presentation that follows. Note the keyword,
238 | CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 4: THE CORE OF THE
SPEECH

"briefly" here. Rarely should a preview require the speaker to
deliver more than three sentences or so.

   The preview provides the audience members with a set of
mental bookmarks to help organize the information in their
minds. This way, as the speaker transitions between main
points, the audience members effectively know what to expect.
This knowledge maintains their attention spans. Additionally,
this step proves to the audience that the speaker came well
prepared and organized, further cementing the person's
credibility as a speaker.

                                         The following example
                                      demonstrates an effective
                                      preview, beginning with the
                                      earlier central idea and
                                      specific purpose statements:

                            "Learning how to shoot a

Source: Photograph by       basketball may seem
user1476758133 via Pixabay
                            difficult but can be

                            perfected  through

                            practicing fundamental

techniques, so today, I would like to inform you about how to

develop the perfect jump shot. I will first cover the importance

of a strong stance, then secondly, I will show you the steps of

an effective shot, and finally, I will talk about methods for

practicing to improve your accuracy."

Notice that the speaker in this case adds certain words to
demonstrate to the audience the order in which these points
          CREATING THE INTRODUCTION, STEP 4: THE CORE OF THE
                                                                          SPEECH | 239

will come: "I will first cover...secondly, I will show you...
finally, I will talk..." Including these verbal signposts organizes
the points to make them more memorable later on.

   The purpose of an introduction is threefold: 1) orient the
audience to the topic; 2) set the tone for the remainder of
the speech; and 3) hook the audience's attention and show
them that their investment of time and energy spent listening
will seem worth it in the end. An effective introduction for
a speech that runs 6-10 minutes will likely take about 1-2
minutes to deliver. Obviously, the time will vary depending
upon the overall length of the presentation, as an hour-long
lecture may require much more time than that to effectively
orient audience members to the information. Great
introductions fulfill these purposes without giving away too
much of the "good stuff," which speakers keep in their back
pocket until the body of the speech, the next stop on this tour
of speech composition and organization.
240 | COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH

COMPOSING THE BODY
OF THE SPEECH

Source: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Sacramento
District, Corps engineers showcase federal jobs to students
at Career Fair (6312589818), marked as public domain, more
details on Wikimedia Commons

The body of the speech will likely comprise about 80% of the
total speaking time or more, depending on the length of time
given to speak. Some speakers find it beneficial to compose
the introduction and conclusion sections of the outline after
completing the body because they find it easier to summarize
                     COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH | 241

and introduce content once it has been constructed. As

speaking time lengthens, that percentage will increase, but for

the most part, presenters should devote 75-80% of the

speaking time to presenting information in the body of the

speech. The speaker should take great care organizing this

information in the speech.

Most speakers start composing the body by devising the

main points first. On average, most people can comfortably

take in about 2 to 7 main points in a presentation, but many

beginning speakers find it best to start with 3 points.

Delivering three main points provides a variety of information

without overwhelming the audience, but at the same time,

keeps information manageable, given the average classroom

speech time limits.

When developing main points, keep the following

guidelines in mind to develop a higher quality oratory and help

manage the presented information. First, remember to restrict

each of the main points to a single concept or idea.

                            Poor: Main Point I:

                            Engineers serve important

                            roles in our society, but

                            people don't understand

                            what they do.

Source: Photograph             Better: Main Point I:
by borevina via Pixabay     Engineers serve important
                            roles in our society.
242 | COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH

   Main Point II: People don't understand the role of
engineers.

   Avoid combining too much information into a single point
when a point could effectively be split into two main points.
Additionally, express main points using complete sentences,
similar to the central idea. A main point makes an assertion
that subpoints will then add information to support.

   When arranging information, consider the order in which
it gets presented. Keep in mind the primacy effect and the
recency effect. Listeners can best recall information presented
first (primacy) and last (recency), while they will find
information presented in the middle harder to remember.
Therefore, place the most important information for the
audience at the front and/or closer toward the end of the body
for better retention.

   Speakers have several options available for how to arrange
their information, and should determine the best formula for
the particular topic:

   Chronological Pattern: In this organizational pattern,
      arrange information in a time-based sequence. This
      works for presentations about historical events, but
      could also, for instance, teach kids how to make
      chocolate chip cookies. In cases like this, the information
      gets presented in a thorough step-by-step breakdown
      that follows a sequential order.

   Spatial Pattern: To use this format, arrange
                        COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH | 243

   information according to physical proximity to one
   another, such as in explaining how an internal
   combustion engine operates. In such a speech, the
   presenter might move from explaining the bottom to the
   top of the engine, or from the inside to the outside. Such
   a pattern also works for a speech attempting to inform
   new students on where to find services on campus.
 Cause-Effect Pattern: In this speech pattern, the
   speaker might want to show the relationship between
   certain causes and their effects. For example, a speaker
   could discuss the topic of drug addiction by presenting
   three unique stories about users and showing the
   audience what caused each addiction, as well as the
   effects it had upon their lives.
 Problem-Solution Pattern: A pattern frequently used
   in persuasive speeches. In this pattern, the speaker
   presents a problem and then provides a solution to that
   problem. In an informative speech, the speaker could
   break up each main point into a problem and its
   corresponding solution, followed by another problem
   and corresponding solution for the next main point.
 Topical Pattern: In one of the most common patterns
   found within informational speeches, this pattern
   involves breaking up the topic into smaller topics, such
   as seen in the previous example of learning how to shoot
   a basketball. This often becomes the "default" pattern
   when none of the others seem to offer a better fit.
244 | COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH

Once speakers have selected and finalized the main speaking
points, they need to start thinking about developing
supporting points nested beneath each main point. To
illustrate this portion of speech composition, consider the
following sample speech topic of examining various classes one
could take in communication studies with the central idea:
Communication is a diverse field of study that touches nearly
every portion of everyone's daily lives. Review the following
photo captions to see three main points a speaker could
develop for this topic:

Main Point I: Public speaking provides us with a way to
learn about how to communicate in front of groups. Source:
Emilio J. Rodrguez Posada creator QS:P170,Q30564104
, Inauguracin del Memorial Republicano 15 de marzo de 2019
(46662970964), CC BY-SA 2.0
                            COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH | 245

Main Point II: Interpersonal communication gives students
the opportunity to learn about one-on-one communication
in a variety of contexts. Source: Photograph
by YouYouHD4 via Pixabay
246 | COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH

Main Point III: Intercultural communication courses allow us
to explore how our culture and background affects the way
we interact with one another. Source: Photograph
by angelladagenhart0 via Pixabay

At this point, the speaker needs to take each of the main ideas
(underlined) and break them down further into subpoints in
an effort to expand these ideas and add supporting material.
Notice that each main point relates closely to the central idea.
Write each as a declarative assertion to provide the opportunity
to "prove" or support that idea with research.

   For the first main point in the example above, the
supporting points could look like this:

   Main Point I: Public speaking provides us with a way to
learn about how to communicate in front of groups.
 A. Most of us suffer from varying degrees of public speaking
                          COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH | 247

    anxiety, requiring us to learn how to overcome this anxiety
    so that we might effectively communicate our ideas with
    others.
B. Many of the lessons we learn in public speaking impact
    our ability to write, as well as interact with people on a
    daily basis.

   Notice that each of the           For Your
supporting points is outlined        Information
using a capital letter, whereas
main points are indicated by           As a rule of
Roman numerals (I, II, III, etc.).     outlining, use a
Add another indentation using          minimum of
numerals (1, 2, 3, etc.) to break      two subpoints,
down supporting points further.        or else a single
                                       subpoint may
   Also, each supporting point         then become an
should fall within the topical area    additional main
of the main point, rather than         point. Outline
becoming another main point of         sticklers simply
its own. While the other two main      cannot stomach
points relate to other fields of
communication studies, these two
subpoints correspond directly to
the study of public speaking,
demonstrating how they support
the main point of public
speaking.
248 | COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH

     a solitary     To continue the example, take a
     subpoint.   look at the expansion of the other
                 two main points:
contexts.
                    Main Point II: Interpersonal
                 communication gives students the
                 opportunity to learn about one-on-
                 one communication in a variety of

A. Interpersonal communication may include interaction
    with friends, family, romantic relationships, and even
    coworkers.

B. Learning about interpersonal communication combines
    the fields of psychology, sociology, and communication
    theory into a fascinatingly complex and interwoven area
    of study.

Main Point III: Intercultural communication courses allow us
to explore how our culture and background affects the way we
interact with one another.

A. Culture goes much further than merely ethnicity or
    nationality, as many of us might initially think of when
    considering our culture.
      1. Gender affects listening ability.
      2. Age affects relevance to certain topics.
      3. Religious preference may affect one's internal
                          COMPOSING THE BODY OF THE SPEECH | 249

          priorities.
B. Learning about one's own culture provides a greater

    foundation from which to study others' cultural
    backgrounds.
250 | TRANSITIONS

TRANSITIONS

Source: Policy Exchange, Michelle Rhee at Policy Exchange -
2012 (7447791758), CC BY 2.0

As the speaker continues to fill in the outline with main points
and supporting material, the information should begin to
"flow" together. However, before going much further,
consider the elements of speech composition that help tie each
of these various points together seamlessly. Those are called
transitions. Ideally, transitions should sound conversational,
so as to make the speech feel effortless as the audience listens.
                                                                   TRANSITIONS | 251

At the same time, transitions must guide and direct listeners
toward where the information is headed. A speaker could do
this by explicitly announcing that transition to a new point:
"For my second main point, I would like to cover..." However,
avoid using such obvious transitions. They sound mechanical
and stiff while adding a proverbial speed bump to the flow of
information. They should sound effective and clear while at
the same time appear seamless and conversational.

   One helpful technique for transitioning between points
involves creating a single sentence that links prior information
with a preview of upcoming information, often called a
bridge. To do this, create a sentence with two parts, or clauses,
where the first half of the sentence provides a summary of the
previous topic, and the second half of the sentence gives a brief
preview of the next talking point. For example:

   Main Point I: Public speaking provides us with a way to
learn about how to communicate in front of groups.

 A. Most of us suffer from varying degrees of public speaking
      anxiety, requiring us to learn how to overcome this anxiety
      so that we might effectively communicate our ideas with
      others.

 B. Many of the lessons we learn in public speaking impact
      our ability to write, as well as interact with people on a
      daily basis.

Transition: Speaking in front of groups can truly be nerve-
252 | TRANSITIONS

wracking, but there are times when speaking to just one person

can be equally daunting.

Main Point II: Interpersonal communication gives students

the opportunity to learn about one-on-one communication in a

variety of contexts.

                               In this example, the first

                               half of the sentence

                               "Speaking in front of groups

                               can truly be nerve-

                               wracking..." summarizes the

                               supporting point the

Source: Wildrun, Budi          speaker just made, while the
Gunawan giving public lecture  second half of the sentence
at ITB, CC BY-SA 4.0           "...but there are times when

speaking to just one person can be equally daunting" previews

the next point regarding interpersonal communication

studies. With practice, these types of transitions can easily

become second nature to speakers, and some may even become

clever enough to compose and use them on the spot!

Transitions can also come in the form of a signpost, and

just as with an actual signpost on a road, these phrases signal

listeners, in a literal or explicit sense, to the direction of the

speech. For example, if a preview of points states that a speech

will inform the audience about: "First, public speaking,

second, interpersonal communication, and third, intercultural

communication," then between each of those main points,
                                                                  TRANSITIONS | 253

speakers could signal where they are headed by inserting a
signpost such as, "Moving on to our second topic of the day..."

   Finally, the last transitional device is the spotlight, which
shares similarity to the eye-catching headlines broadcast on
a viral social media article: "What this public speaking class
taught me was more important than anything I had ever
learned before." Note that this sentence builds curiosity
through suspense, but at the same time, spotlights the
upcoming information will concern public speaking.
254 | SIGNAL THE END

SIGNAL THE END

Source: Michael Nagy/Presse- und Informationsamt
Mnchen, Dr. Hanna Sammller-Gradl, Speech 2022, CC
BY-SA 4.0

The final transition of the speech, which concludes the last
supporting point within the final main point, must cue the
listeners in the audience that the speech has almost reached its
conclusion. This is referred to as signaling the end. One of
the simplest and most obvious ways to signal the end is to state,
"In conclusion..." Don't do this. As with mechanical, robotic,
and awkward transitions, most people probably cannot
                                                             SIGNAL THE END | 255

imagine using the phrase "in conclusion" in daily conversation.
Instead, use the opportunity to get creative! Many speakers
choose to employ a time-related reference, such as "I could go
on all day, talking about all the benefits to taking additional
communication classes, but my time here is limited." Some
speakers choose to employ a more creative and topic-based
approach, such as a student's speech on how to build a fire,
where he stated, "Now that I'm done talking about
extinguishing your fires, it's time to extinguish this speech."
Adding creative touches like this, especially near the
conclusion of the speech, often works well among listeners,
considering that they have just put in a lot of mental effort
in digesting all of the presentation's unique and innovative
information.

   For example, think about college professors as they near the
end of a class session. What do they say that cues everyone to
start unzipping backpack zippers, close their books, and put
away materials? Sometimes, they make subtle statements, such
as, "As you all leave here today..." (which provides a cue that
time has almost time expired), and other times, they may get
more explicit.
256 | CONCLUDING THE SPEECH

CONCLUDING THE
SPEECH

Source: Photograph by triggonometry via Pixabay

The conclusion's style should resemble that of the
introduction, so that may beg the question, why the
repetition? Remember, most people have relatively poor
listening skills, in that they only have the capability of
capturing and retaining portions of what they hear. This
becomes more challenging as the length of a speech and depth
of material presented increases in scope. Signaling the end cues
the listeners to prepare for the concluding remarks, and so
the conclusion essentially represents the last opportunity to
                                               CONCLUDING THE SPEECH | 257

reinforce the most important portions of the speech. This
portion of the speech includes 1) the central idea, 2)
restating the main points, and 3) leaving the audience with
a memorable statement or clincher.

Restate The Central Idea

In many cases, immediately after signaling the end of the
speech, speakers can flow straight into restating the central
idea, and many speakers restate it word-for-word or verbatim.
However, if this "feels" too repetitive and raises concerns about
the audience sharing the same feeling, paraphrase it with
slightly different verbiage. Show care by not changing the
meaning of the central idea. Be direct and clear so that the
audience knows, without a doubt, the primary idea of the
speech.
258 | CONCLUDING THE SPEECH

Recap Main Ideas

                             Following a restatement

                             of the central idea, the

                             conclusion should deliver a

                             recap of the main points.

                             This serves as the "Tell them

                             what you told them"

Source: Photograph           portion of the presentation.
by coacheadksu via Pixabay   Again, even though it may
                             feel repetitive to preview the

three points from the introduction, detail those points in the

body of the speech, and recap the main points yet again in the

conclusion, remember that this repetition works for the

listeners' benefit. The recap drives home the most important

points one last time, so make it count. Present this summary of

the main points clearly, yet briefly, and never include new

information at this point. Review the example below of an

effective recap of main points, based on the prior example

(main points identified for reference):

"We now know that 1) public speaking helps us with our
confidence when talking to groups, 2) interpersonal
communication helps us with our daily interactions, and 3)
intercultural communication helps us learn how to interact
with people from different backgrounds than ourselves."
                              CONCLUDING THE SPEECH | 259

Clincher

Following this brief recap

of the main ideas, the

speaker needs to find a way

to close out the speech.

Ideally, the remaining few

statements should reinforce

the central idea, as well as

provide some form of verbal

punctuation, letting the      Source: Photograph
audience know beyond any      by mufidpwt via Pixabay
doubt that the speech has

concluded. Provide closure for the audience by leaving them

with a feeling of completion and not confusion. A clincher

acts similar to an attention getter but occurs at the end of the

speech instead of the beginning. This last statement could very

well be the last thing the audience remembers about the

message, so make it count!

Speakers can employ a variety of methods to craft an

effective clincher:

Use a Quotation

Find a great and powerful quote to illustrate the topic that
also reinforces the central idea. For example, in the prior speech
example, the speaker could end it as follows:
260 | CONCLUDING THE SPEECH

      "I would like to close today with the words of composer John
      Powell, who said, `Communication works for those who work
      at it.'"

Use a Narrative

Speakers often begin their introductions with a story that
illustrates one of their points or the central idea. When using
this technique, consider utilizing a story split, which
introduces the story in the beginning of the speech but then
saves the dramatic ending for the conclusion.

   For example, using the previous example, pretend the
speaker started the speech talking about a student who walked
into the first day of his speech class, nervous and feeling sick
to his stomach because of extreme anxiety. Such a story helps
students in the audience relate with the character in the story,
especially the extreme nerves the student experienced. Then, in
the conclusion the story could end as follows:

      "Remember the deathly afraid student from my story in the
      beginning of this speech? I'm proud to tell you all that I was
      the student in this story. Today, I teach public speaking, for I
      learned how important it is to connect the passion behind my
      message to the power of the human voice. You all hold that
      power and potential in you today."
                                               CONCLUDING THE SPEECH | 261

Reference the Introduction

In addition to story splits, speakers can try other methods to
bring the speech around full circle to whatever concept was
introduced within the introduction. If the speech started with
a quote, consider bringing the audience back to the wisdom
from that quote, or even consider sharing another quote from
the same person. If the speech begin with a startling fact or
statistic, how can the conclusion bring the audience's
attention back to the significance of that fact? Referencing the
introduction helps put the entire message into a nice, neat
package for the audience to remember.
262 | IMPORTANT GUIDELINES FOR CONCLUSIONS

IMPORTANT
GUIDELINES FOR
CONCLUSIONS

Source: Biswarup Ganguly, Ganga Singh Rautela Delivers
Speech - Opening Ceremony - Exhibition Light Matters -
BITM - Kolkata 2015-12-23 7124, CC BY 3.0

Avoid lengthy conclusions. A good, effective conclusion
should probably not take longer than a minute to a minute and
a half. Exceptions to this rule can apply, but use discretion.
                 IMPORTANT GUIDELINES FOR CONCLUSIONS | 263

 Never include new material. The conclusion recaps
   the major talking points and reinforces the central idea,
   so don't include any additional information in this part
   of the speech.

 End strong. Many newer speakers experience difficulty
   crafting strong conclusions, as they often feel excited
   about the prospect of ending the speech and finally
   getting out of the spotlight, so they rush it. Others fail to
   effectively practice the delivery of their closing lines and
   struggle to find the right tone, usually resulting in the
   speaker uttering a desperate "Thank you" or "That's all,
   folks." This represents the public speaking equivalent of
   an acclaimed author placing "The End" at the
   conclusion of an award-winning novel. This is
   unnecessary, for if the conclusion has done its job, the
   audience will automatically know the speech has ended.

  Activity

  Power Statement: The next time you rehearse
  your closing statement, consider trying this activity.
  As you speak your concluding lines, close your eyes
264 | IMPORTANT GUIDELINES FOR CONCLUSIONS

     and imagine yourself pounding your fist on the
     podium with each and every word.
     As you do so, you will notice that your vocal rate
     slows down, you dwell a bit longer on each word,
     and you utter the words with more strength and
     power. During your speech, don't actually hit the
     podium, but do so in your mind, as a means to
     remind yourself to slow down and add verbal
     punctuation.
                                                     CHAPTER 6 SUMMARY | 265

CHAPTER 6 SUMMARY

Source: Nyamsinc, Academic Writing Company, CC BY-SA
4.0

Creating an outline provides a speech with a skeleton and
foundation from which to prepare spoken remarks. The
outline does not represent a transcript of what the speaker
will say, though. Creating a transcript for a speech only works
for those attempting a memorized or scripted talk, not an
extemporaneous speech, the focused style of speaking this
book recommends. Extemporaneous speakers start with a
basic plan (the outline) and then prepare for a free-flowing, yet
guided conversation with the audience using that outline as
the plan.

   The outline covered in this book identifies five-essential
266 | CHAPTER 6 SUMMARY

components: introduction, three main points, and a
conclusion. Within the introduction step, the speaker should
incorporate four primary components: 1) the attention getter,
2) relate to audience, 3) establish credibility/relate to self, and
4) the core of the speech, which consists of the central idea and
preview of main points. The body of the speech consists of
three main points, each of which is supported by a minimum
of two subpoints. Between each main point, the speaker
should use smooth and seamless transitions. The conclusion of
the speech consists of three parts: 1) signal the end, 2) briefly
recap the main points, and 3) conclude with a clincher that
reinforces the central idea.

   Speaker should write outlines in such a way as to capture
the essence of what they intend to say to the audience. Ideally,
create an outline for a speech that could be redelivered to
multiple audiences over great periods of time. While the
phraseology and elaboration of points may differ slightly, the
outline provides speakers with the core message of that
presentation, so that they can effectively deliver the same
essential information to a variety of audiences.

   This chapter concludes with some sample course outlines.
Note how each incorporate the basic elements of planning an
extemporaneous speech.
                                        SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM | 267

SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO
INFORM

Name: Cassidy Kobialka

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 A. How much does your audience already know about your
      topic and how will you design your speech regarding
      their level of knowledge? No one could define for me
      what an engineer does, so I'll have to cater my
      explanations to this group's basic knowledge level.

 B. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? Over
      30% of my class is interested in the social sciences,
      so they have not thought about engineering, but we
      are all still considering our career choices now.

 C. What is your audience's attitude regarding your topic?
      How will you address that attitude in your speech? Most
      of my audience considers engineers to be nerds. I
      will show them the wide variety of professional
268 | SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM

      careers that engineers go into to dispel this myth.
 D. How will the audience demographics (not what you

      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? We have more females
      than males, and engineering is usually considered a
      "guy" career.

Title: It Ain't Rocket Science!
   General Purpose: To inform
   Specific Purpose: To inform my audience about the career

of an aerospace engineer

Introduction

 A. Grab Attention: Have you ever wondered what an
      aileron does or what a winglet s? Have you ever heard
      the term "transonic" and wondered what it means?

 B. Relate to Audience: Okay, I know what you're
      thinking--what the heck is she talking about? Or maybe
      you're thinking, no...not really--all of that sounds just
      too complicated. Well, to tell the truth, this stuff "ain't
      rocket science!" You could say it takes one to know one.
      Those strange terms are actually important to you, too,
      but you just don't know it yet.

 C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): Well, I "ain't
      no rocket scientist" myself, but considering the fact that
      five of my family members are engineers, I feel qualified
                                       SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM | 269

      to talk to you about this career. Don't worry, that
      doesn't mean I'm going to explain what an aileron does
      or what a winglet is. That stuff I'll leave to the rocket
      scientists. I do think I want to become an engineer,
      however.
 D. Central Idea: Aerospace engineering is one of the most
      progressive, challenging, and rewarding fields that can be
      studied today.
 E. Specific Purpose: Today, I would like to inform you all
      about the career of an aerospace engineer.
 F. Preview Main Points: I will cover...

        I. What engineers do
       II. Why aerospace engineers are important to us
      III. The skills needed in engineering--not the least of

            which is communication

Transition to #I: So what is engineering?

Speech Body

  I. The role of the engineer is perhaps one of the least
      understood in society, according to Jeff Lenard of the
      American Institute of Chemical Engineers.
       A. The comic strip creator, Scott Adams, debunks the
            mystery of engineering through his famous
            character, Dilbert; when you read Dilbert, you
270 | SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM

            actually have a pretty good idea of what an engineer
            does.
       B. Engineering is not a science; engineers generally
            don't "do" science.
       C. "Scientists discover the world that exists; engineers
            create the world that never was."
       D. Engineering is all around us; as a career it may be
            the best way to make the biggest contribution to
            society.

Transition to #II: Let's talk more about those contributions
now.

 II. Aerospace engineers are very important to us.
       A. The settings in which aerospace engineers work is
            varied because of their demand.
       B. Aerospace engineers are needed in NASA, the
            Department of Defense, with private defense
            contractors, and aeronautical firms. (NASA)

Transition to #III: One does not simply wake up one day and
decide to work for NASA, though.

III. To be successful in this rewarding career, engineers are
      required to have excellent skills--especially
      communication.
       A. Entry-level aerospace engineers require at least a BA
                                        SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM | 271

            in aerospace engineering or mechanical
            engineering.
       B. Courses in propulsion, thermodynamics,
            aerodynamics, chemistry, physics, and calculus are
            typical for the aerospace engineer.
       C. There is a tremendous need for engineers to have
            excellent verbal and written communication skills.

Signal End: I could go on talking about engineering all day,
but my time is limited, so now it's time to wrap up.

Conclusion

 A. Restate Central Idea: Today, we learned about how
      aerospace engineering is one of the most progressive,
      challenging, and rewarding fields that can be studied
      today.

 B. Recap Main Points: I explained to you what an
      engineer does, why we specifically need aerospace
      engineers, and the skills needed to become an
      engineer--especially those skills we learn in this course.

 C. Clincher: Who knows? One of you may become a
      rocket scientist. It really is a high-flying career!

Works Cited

Blain, Celeste. Is There an Engineer Inside You? A
272 | SAMPLE 1A: SPEECH TO INFORM

Comprehensive Guide to Career Decision in Engineering. (2nd
Ed.) New York: Bonamy Publishing, 2015. Print.

   "Careers in Aeronautics." National Aeronautical and Space
Administration. NASA.gov. n.d. Web. 5 Feb. 2018.

   Garder, Geraldine. Careers in Engineering. (2nd Ed.) New
York: The McGraw-Hill Company. 2013. Print.
                                        SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO INFORM | 273

SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO
INFORM

Name: John Raines

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 A. How much does your audience already know about your
      topic and how will you design your speech regarding
      their level of knowledge? Everyone is familiar with
      fear in general, so I'll try to focus on aspects of it
      that are specific to my topic.

 B. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? The
      audience was curious about the direction this
      speech would take, so I'll try to build on that and
      give them specific, solid examples that they can
      integrate into their lives.

 C. What is your audience's attitude regarding your topic?
      How will you address that attitude in your speech? The
      attitude was mostly positive, so I'll try to use that
274 | SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO INFORM

      to my advantage.
 D. How will the audience demographics (not what you

      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? The majority of the
      audience is 18-20 years old, so I'll try to word my
      information in such a way that it is received as
      constructive advice from a fellow student with a
      little more life experience. Gender shouldn't be an
      issue.

Title: A Fearless Life
   General Purpose: To inform
   Specific Purpose: To inform my audience about the nature

of fear

Introduction

 A. Grab Attention: Frequent urination, dry mouth,
      excessive sweating...these are but a few of the many
      symptoms of phobic anxiety.

 B. Relate to Audience: Many of you are standing at the
      thresholds of your adult lives, with an excitement about
      the unknown.

 C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): I have always
      been a bit of a risk taker, looking fear square in the eye,
      and it hasn't always been easy.

 D. Central Idea: But, to live without risk, is to risk not
                                        SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO INFORM | 275

      living.
 E. Specific Purpose: Today, I want to inform you about

      the nature of fear.
 F. Preview Main Points: I will cover...

        I. What fear is
       II. What fear does
      III. How to master your fears

Transition to #I: "Courage is resistance to fear, mastery of
fear--not absence of fear." (Mark Twain) So let's begin by
talking about what fear is.

Speech Body

  I. Fear is a complicated emotion.
       A. Fear is a perspective. (PsychCentral.com)
       B. It's a response to the unknown and uncontrolled.
       C. Fear is a controlling emotion. (MedicineNet.com)

Transition to #II: Now, let's look at how this plays out in our
lives.

 II. Fear controls our actions.
       A. Fear greatly reduces our options. (Encarta)
       B. Fear limits experience to the safe and the known.
       C. Ultimately, fear makes life dull and routine.
276 | SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO INFORM

Transition to #III: There is no reason we have to live that
way. We can master our fear.

III. Mastering our fears can be a way of life.
       A. First you must see fear for what it is.
       B. And by seeing it, develop a hatred for its
            controlling nature.
       C. Then love it, for the passion and excitement it
            brings to life.

Signal End: So before I close, let me recap.

Conclusion

 A. Restate Central Idea: Remember, that to live without
      risk, is to risk not living.

 B. Recap Main Points: Today, we talked about what fear
      is, what it does, and how you can master it.

 C. Clincher: Now you have the tools to understand how
      fear might be affecting you. In the words of Philip
      Adams, "It seems to me that people have vast potential.
      Most people can do extraordinary things if they have the
      confidence or take the risks. Yet most people don't. They
      sit in front of the telly and treat life as if it goes on
      forever." (Philip Adams)
             SAMPLE 1B: SPEECH TO INFORM | 277

Works Cited

"Generalized Anxiety Disorder." MedicineNet.com. 2009.
Web. 10 Mar. 2019.

   "Phobia." Encarta Encyclopedia.com. 2008. Web. 11 Mar.
2019.

   "Social Anxiety Disorder Symptoms." PsychCentral.com.
2009. Web. 10 Mar. 2019.
278 | SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO
INFORM WITH VISUALS

Name: Cory Williamson

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 A. How much does your audience already know about your
      topic and how will you design your speech regarding
      their level of knowledge? The audience knows very
      little about the actual science of attraction, so I'll
      need to keep the terminology very basic and not
      lose them with big, technical terms.

 B. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? The
      audience is very interested already, but I'll try to
      maintain that interest with some humor and some
      explanations of human nature that might surprise
      them.

 C. What is your audience's attitude regarding your topic?
      How will you address that attitude in your speech? My
                 SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS | 279

      audience seems to be mostly interested in how to
      use my information to get a date, improve
      relationships, etc. I'll try to use that inherent
      connection to the material as a way to keep them
      interested in the actual scientific explanations.
 D. How will the audience demographics (not what you
      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? Most of my audience
      members are traditional college freshmen in age,
      economic status, etc. This means they probably
      have dating/attraction on their minds quite a bit.

Title: Are You Lookin' at Me?!
   General Purpose: To inform
   Specific Purpose: To inform the audience about the

science of attraction

Introduction

 A. Grab Attention: Are you lookin' at me? Well that's
      alright...well...I like to write...I like classical music...I
      dress nice...I enjoy Mexican food...and on occasion I like
      to beat the person I'm with...Now hold on! That is an
      exaggeration. But that is how attraction works
      sometimes. You initially see someone and you are
      attracted in some way, but as you get to know someone
      that attraction could change for better or worse.
280 | SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

 B. Relate to Audience: Every human has experienced
      attraction in one way or another.

 C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): I am greatly
      interested in why humans are attracted to one another
      and have experienced the feeling of attraction toward
      another, so I decided to look into the matter.

 D. Central Idea: Human attraction is a scientific process
      that begins many kinds of relationships.

 E. Specific Purpose: Today, I want to inform you all about
      the science of attraction.

 F. Preview Main Points: I will cover...
        I. The visual aspects of attraction
       II. The biological aspects of attraction

      III. How attraction affects relationships

Transition to #I: Experiment number one: Sins of the Flesh.

Speech Body

  I. Part of attraction is due to what our mind perceives as
      physically appealing.
       A. The human body is the first thing we notice in
            another human.
              1. Females are generally attracted to males that
                  are sexually appealing and have good fatherly
                  traits such as height, muscles, facial features,
                  some hair.
                  SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS | 281

              2. Males are generally attracted to females that
                  have sexually appealing features such as large
                  breasts, waist-to-hip ratio, face, legs, and butt.

       B. Symmetry plays a role in figuring out if the person
            has good genes.
              1. When we see a person we are subconsciously
                  analyzing if they have the features that would
                  make for good offspring. (Science of Sex
                  Appeal DVD)
              2. The better the symmetry the more it shows
                  that a person doesn't have any visible gene
                  defects.

Transition to #II: Now to take a look at how human biology
takes action in attraction.

 II. The biological aspects of attraction are the natural
      human responses that trigger sex appeal in a person.
       A. Pheromones are the chemically secreted odorless
            molecules that trigger sexual responses from
            animals. (Pheremoneking.com)
       B. Females are more vulnerable to these pheromones.
       C. Females find different males more attractive
            depending on if they are ovulating or not.

Transition to #III: Attraction is both what we see and what
282 | SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

we feel. Those experiences could lead to relationships or simply
sex.

III. Attraction has the possibility of leading to relationships.
       A. According to Dr. Fisher (The Brain in Love and
            Lust), love is divided into 3 categories.
              1. Sexual cravings are sometimes mistaken for
                  love.
              2. Attraction is craving for the individual.
              3. Attachment is when you are at peace and
                  comfort with the one you're with.
       B. Getting to know someone can change where they
            belong on the love scale--up or down.
       C. Lust is the sexual drive of attraction.
              1. When humans experience an orgasm while
                  having sex a chemical oxytocin is released that
                  gives the feeling of attachment between males
                  and females. (mcmanweb.com)
              2. Love is what you make it. It varies amongst all
                  people, so love as you want to be loved.

Signal End: Enough about love. As I close, let us take a look
back at what attraction is about.

Conclusion

 A. Restate Central Idea: We now know that human
                 SAMPLE 2A: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS | 283

      attraction is a scientific process that begins many kinds
      of relationships.
 B. Recap Main Points: We saw that physical appearance
      plays a major part in initial attraction as well as biological
      occurrences in our body. Attraction has the possibility
      of leading us to sex and/or love in a relationship.
 C. Clincher: The ideas of what I have said aren't meant for
      you to overanalyze a relationship you are in or could be
      in. Allow attraction to flow naturally and experience
      where it could take you...Let me leave you with one last
      thing. The next time you visit the strip club take a look
      around and see lust and attraction working at their
      finest.

Works Cited

Science of Sex Appeal. Perf. Alan Dunn, Farrah Shaikh.
Discovery Communications, LLC, 2009. DVD.

   "The Brain in Love and Lust." McMan's Depression and
Bipolar Web. n.d. Web. 21 Mar.

   2019.
   "The Science of Attraction." Pheremoneking.com. n.d. Web.
21 Mar. 2019.
284 | SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO
INFORM WITH VISUALS

Name: Matt Kelso

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 1. How much does your audience already know about your
      topic and how will you design your speech regarding
      their level of knowledge? Everyone knows a little bit
      about fire, but most don't know how to start one
      without the luxury of matches and lighters. I will
      try to focus the majority of the speech on
      information they don't already know.

 2. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? A
      couple audience members were avid outdoorsmen
      who didn't seem that interested, but several others
      seemed anxious to improve their fire skills. I'll try
      to maintain interest by stressing how useful fire-
      starting skills are for everyone.
                 SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS | 285

 3. What is your audience's attitude regarding your topic?
      How will you address that attitude in your speech? Only
      a couple seemed turned off by the topic, while the
      majority seemed curious and open to it. I will feed
      that curiosity with useful information.

 4. How will the audience demographics (not what you
      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? Most members of the
      audience are typical, college-aged students from
      North Idaho. This implies that they are somewhat
      interested in the outdoors and will find themselves
      camping, hunting, etc. at some time in the near
      future.

Title: Man's Best Tool
   General Purpose: To inform
   Specific Purpose: To inform my audience about fire

Introduction

 A. Grab Attention: (magnesium block demonstration)
      These little sparks that you see have mesmerized
      mankind throughout history. Imagine a world without
      heat, cooked food, boiled water, and light sources after
      dark. Fire provides all of this and more.

 B. Relate to Audience: Everyone in this class will at some
      time use fire for enjoyment, cooking, and possible
286 | SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

      survival. It is extremely important that we all know how
      to effectively create a fire with the tools available to us in
      any given circumstance.
 C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): Obviously, I'm
      an outdoors fanatic, and as such I have created literally
      hundreds of fires. Last year I took a survival course that
      taught me how to make a fire from scratch using
      primitive sources.
 D. Central Idea: Fire-building knowledge is crucial for
      everyone and could even save a life.
 E. Specific Purpose: I want to inform you about fire
      today.
 F. Preview Main Points: I'll do that by covering...

        I. The various uses of fire
       II. Both modern and primitive methods to create fire
      III. Steps needed to create a successful and safe fire

Transition to #I: Let's begin by discussing the history of fire
use.

Speech Body

  I. Our history has shown many uses for fire.
       A. Fire has been used for cooking and as a heat source.
       B. Fire has been used in blacksmithing.
       C. Many myths and stories have been created around
            the subject of fire.
                 SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS | 287

Transition to #II: Fire has obviously played a huge role
throughout the history of mankind, but let's turn to
examining the different methods for its creation.

 II. Fire can be created by using a number of methods.
       A. Primitive methods, such as magnesium flint and a
            bow drill, are still used today.
       B. Some modern methods include matches, lighters,
            lenses, or batteries. (AAA Wilderness Survival)
       C. Both sources require the use of good tinder
            material as the starting point.

Transition to #III: Now that we know how to create a fire,
let's look into the steps needed to create a successful and safe
fire.

III. Creating a successful and safe fire is essential.
       A. The teepee and log cabin style are both easy and
            safe.
       B. Use a shovel to clear a patch of land on which to
            build it.
       C. For safety purposes, always stay with your fire and
            maintain it.
       D. A fire of any size should be extinguished
            thoroughly. (Ken Long)

Signal End: It is now time to extinguish this speech.
288 | SAMPLE 2B: SPEECH TO INFORM WITH VISUALS

Conclusion

 A. Restate Central Idea: Fire-building knowledge is
      crucial to each and every one of you.

 B. Recap Main Points: Today, we have discussed the
      importance of fire and its various uses. We have gone
      over some basic ways to create a fire with limited
      resources available, and we have discussed how to build a
      safe fire and extinguish it properly.

 C. Clincher: There is only so much experience you can get
      from learning about fire, but to really hone your skills it
      takes nothing but repetition, practice, and
      experimentation. Now get out there and let your pyro
      side run wild!

Works Cited

"AAA Wilderness Survival: How to Light a Fire."
GeoCities.com. n.d. Web. 4 Nov. 2018. "Fire."
ComingBackAlive.com. n.d. Web. 4 Nov. 2018.

   Long, Ken. Fire Chief. Personal Interview. 3 Nov. 2018.
   "The Truth About the History of Fire." Buzzle.com. n.d.
Web. 4 Nov. 2018.
    CHAPTER 7: USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE | 289

PART VII

CHAPTER 7: USING
LANGUAGE TO
FRAME THE
MESSAGE
290 | CHAPTER 7: USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE
                      USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE | 291

USING LANGUAGE TO
FRAME THE MESSAGE

"The difference between the right word and the wrong word
is the difference between lightning and a lightning bug."
--Mark Twain Source: unattributed, Mark Twain seated
c1900s, marked as public domain, more details on Wikimedia
Commons
292 | USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE

    On December 7, 1941,

President Franklin D.

Roosevelt addressed a joint

session of Congress

following the Japanese

attack on Pearl Harbor. The

first sentence he uttered      President Roosevelt
                               addressing a joint session of
would later become one of      Congress following the
                               Japanese attack of Pearl
the most well-known            Harbor in 1941. Source:
                               United States
phrases from just about any    Government., Fdr delivers
                               speech, marked as public
speech within the 20th         domain, more details
                               on Wikimedia Commons
century. As with any

president, FDR had a staff

of  advisors  and

speechwriters, and one of his

assistants began the speech as follows:

    December 7, 1941: A date which will live in world history.

Just before he addressed Congress, FDR crossed out the words
"world history" and scribbled the word, "infamy," which led to
him starting his famous speech with:

    December 7, 1941: A date which will live in infamy.

Today, this phrase has become one of the most famous in
American history. Would the speech have had the same impact
if Roosevelt had used the original line? History will never
know for certain, but one thing is clear: Roosevelt's last-
              USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE | 293

minute edit demonstrated his understanding of the concept

inherent within the Mark Twain quote above. "World history"

technically communicated the same idea, but the substituted

word "infamy" added color and emotion to the phrase at a time

when the president needed it most. FDR's intended to request

a declaration of war on Japan from Congress, effectively

launching the U.S. into World War II, and he understood that

his words would indelibly have an outcome on that decision.

As speakers consider their

audiences for any given

presentation, they must also

consider how their language

will impact the perceptions

of their messages.

Remember,     effective

communication does not        FDR chose the word "infamy"
                              because it carried a more
take place if the audience    ominous tone, highlighting
                              the furor and anger felt by the
does not understand the       American people as they
                              watched the attack on Pearl
message as intended. When     Harbor in horror. Source:
                              Library of Congress Prints &
speaking at a pep rally or a  Photographs Division, Attack
                              on Pearl Harbor, marked as
motivational  speaking        public domain, more details
                              on Wikimedia Commons
event, the language selected

should move and uplift an

audience, while the delivery

of a the eulogy at a funeral

should sound respectful, yet somber. Speakers must choose
294 | USING LANGUAGE TO FRAME THE MESSAGE

the right words, for the right audiences, based on the needs of
the situation.
                                                    KNOW WHAT TO AVOID | 295

KNOW WHAT TO AVOID

                          "When in doubt, throw it

                          out."

                          In order to become a

                          mindful communicator,

                          especially with respect to

                          public speaking, consider

                          the audience when deciding

                          what words, terminology,

                          and phrases to use. Being

                          cautious and mindful about

                          the language used goes

                          beyond what some may call

                          "P.C." or politically correct,

                          which has become a loaded

                          term in contemporary

                          politics. If the language of a

                          speech triggers a negative

                          response from individuals in

Source: Photograph        the audience, then it is
by anaterate via Pixabay  highly likely that those

                          audience members will no

longer listen with the intent to understand. They have likely
296 | KNOW WHAT TO AVOID

either turned off their attention spans or started to listen with
the intent to defend themselves later.

   In keeping this goal in mind, stay mindful of the language
used and incorporate words that resonate with the audience.
Some categories of language to consider avoiding include
political, religious, racial, ethnic, or sexual references that some
may consider offensive or, at the very least, off-putting. For
example, words that may have once been acceptable may need
slight edits before using them in front of a potentially diverse
audience. These words include "stewardess" (flight attendant),
"fireman" (firefighter), and "cleaning lady" (housekeeper).

     Note to Self

     You can find more examples of words you should
     avoid by conducting some simple research.
                                                           VARIED MEANINGS | 297

VARIED MEANINGS

Be aware to keep the two types of meanings in mind when
composing language for a speech: connotation and
denotation.

   The denotation of a particular word refers to its factual/
literal meaning or common dictionary definition. Speakers
should confirm the meaning of all words they intend to use
that they are not 100% sure of the denotation by looking them
up, as some words could potentially have more than one
denotation. Sometimes certain terms or phrases may mean
something completely different to various audience members.
298 | VARIED MEANINGS

                              Alternatively,

                              connotation has more to

                              do with the additional

                              emotional or cultural

                              meaning associated with the

One of the denotative         word, term, or phrase. The
meanings of the word snake    connotation for the word
is "any of numerous scaly,    snake could mean "danger"
legless, sometimes venomous   or "evil." Consider the terms
reptiles having a long,       "swamp" and "wetland."
tapering, cylindrical body    One word conjures images
often found in tropical and   of bugs, snakes, and foul
temperate regions." Source:   stenches, while the other
American Lotus, Black rat
snake, CC BY-SA 4.0

                              inspires images of a

picturesque scene with graceful birds and beautiful foliage.

However, they could easily be used to refer to the same scene

since they both have similar denotations. Identify the

connotations of some words--or the attitudes associated with

them--by examining pairs of words that share essentially the

same meaning, but differ in the favorable or unfavorable

attitudes they evoke in most people. Examples include:

 refreshing--chilly
 plain--natural
 clever--sly
 terrorist--freedom fighter
 snob--cultured
                          VARIED MEANINGS | 299

 assertive--pushy
 skinny--slender
 statesman--politician
 smile--smirk
 domineering--assertive

Be aware of the potential connotation the choice of language
may have on diverse audiences. The word "diversity" implies
race or gender to some listeners, when the actual dictionary
definition simply means "difference"-- without any
connotation whatsoever.

   Describing a group of people gathered on the street as a
"rally" suggests a gathering of passionate, happy, and
celebratory participants, but calling it a "mob" connotes a
darker, angry, or perhaps violent gathering. For instance,
newscasts and articles by conflicting media organizations
sometimes interpret the same event differently. The
connotation applied by media can subtly imprint a particular
viewpoint in one's mind and shape public opinion about such
events (see framing theory).
300 | VARIED MEANINGS

                               Loftus and Palmer (1974)

                               conducted an experiment to

                               illustrate the impact that the

                               connotation of one's chosen

                               words can have on memory.

                               They showed two groups of

Source: Charles Edward         students a video of a car
Miller from Chicago, United    accident, and then, some
States, Car Crash 7-1-18 2245  time later, asked them
(42450608354), CC BY-SA 2.0

                               questions about what they

had seen. They asked the first group how fast they thought the

cars were moving when they "hit" each other, and the second

group was asked the same question with a subtle change: they

substituted the word "hit" with "smashed." The results

showed the group that they asked how fast the cars were

moving when they "smashed" into each other estimated much

higher speeds than those asked with a much more passive or

neutral verb. Additionally, the group using the word

"smashed" also reported seeing broken glass at the scene, yet no

evidence of broken glass appears in the video.

Lastly, review the meaning of unfamiliar words so as not

to accidentally communicate the wrong message. Most

importantly, make sure to master the pronunciation of the

word. This may take some practice and repetition, particularly

for tough medical terminology, but research online

pronunciation guides that will illustrate how to pronounce
                                                           VARIED MEANINGS | 301

such words. Many online dictionaries include an audio clip of
the word's pronunciation.
302 | CLARITY

CLARITY

Simply put, less means

more when it comes to word

choice. Audience members

from all walks of life have

probably endured at one

point or another a speech in  Shakespeare's famous
which the speaker             soliloquy from Hamlet ("To be
attempted to use "big         or not to be...") contains 261
words" to make themselves     words, and of those, 205 of
seem smart, when in reality,  them only have one syllable.
it only ended up frustrating  Source: anonymous, To be or
the audience and turning off  not to be (Q1), marked as
                              public domain, more details
                              on Wikimedia Commons

their attention spans.

Convey complex ideas easily by using simple, everyday

language.

Avoid using big words unnecessarily, as this can result in an

audience viewing the speaker as pretentious or disingenuous.

For example, one might say, "It is important to take immediate

and expeditious action to vacate the premises," when a simpler

and more direct way to say the same thing in a speech might

be, "Everyone get out of the building now!"
                              CLARITY | 303

Concrete Language

                              In addition to keeping

                              things simple, speakers

                              should use words that

                              clearly convey what they

                              mean. In other words, avoid

                              overtly abstract or vague

                              phrases. For example, when

                              describing a person's net

                              worth, don't say, "She is very

                              wealthy." Instead, use

                              concrete figures, such as,

Source: Photograph by         "She is currently worth $1.2
TemperateSage via Pixabay     million and owns homes in

                              four countries." This

provides the opportunity to practice the age-old writing

advice: show, don't tell. Use language to vividly describe people,

places, and things. Concrete, illustrious language can help

make the presenter's points more memorable. Stay precise

with language. Avoid overusing pronouns (he, she, it, they,

etc.). Some people quip that the most quoted "source" in the

world today is "They." For example, "They say we're going to

get rain soon" or "I hear they're predicting an early spring!"

Avoid generalizations and strive to provide concrete, precise

sources for all information.
304 | CLARITY

Accuracy

Audiences often judge the credibility of a speaker by her or
his adherence to the rules of grammar, as well as usage.
Grammatical errors annoy some listeners and may give the
impression that the speaker possesses less intelligence due to
poor word choice or syntax. Avoid common slang and regional
dialect in a formal public speaking event. Words like
"orientate" or "irregardless" may frequent informal
conversations, but they do not demonstrate correct grammar.
Likewise, audiences can find the usages of incorrect tenses and
pronouns equally annoying. To sound articulate and polished,
use "himself" instead of "hisself," "you were" instead of "you
was," or "I went" rather than "I had went." To older
generations, "busted" may mean having no access to monetary
resources; someone younger might find the same word implies
getting caught doing something embarrassing or illegal;
someone else might think the word simply means "broken."

Euphemisms

Beware of misusing euphemisms, which offer indirect
methods of restating unpleasant, blunt, or even offensive
statements, for they can quickly mislead an audience. For
example, "The proverbial excrement will strike the wind
oscillating device" may sound more polite initially, but a closer
inspection reveals the message's true intent, so it remains a
                                         CLARITY | 305

slightly nicer way of restating the old adage having to do with

serious trouble. Euphemisms have their place, though; for

example, speakers often refer to someone as having "passed

away" rather than saying that person is dead, because it softens

the blow of the terms.

                               Avoid the "dark side" of

                               euphemisms that occur

                               when people use them to

                               manipulate, distort, mislead,

                               or obfuscate the true

                               meaning of words and

                               phrases. George Orwell

Some euphuisms can lead to     coined    the  term
controversy. NASA and other
government officials referred  doublespeak to describe
to the coffins of deceased
Space Shuttle Challenger crew  this kind of language after
members as "crew transfer
containers," which caused a    publication of his novel,
swift backlash. Source:
Kennedy Space                  1984, where those in power
Center, Challenger explosion,
marked as public domain,       created a language they
more details on Wikimedia
Commons                        called    "newspeak."

                               Politicians and corporations

                               commonly       used

                               doublespeak when they

                               desire to equivocate in order

to avoid the emotional impact of more accurate language. For

example, a politician referred to a controversial pipeline bill in

Congress as the "Keystone jobs bill."
306 | CLARITY

Inflated Language

In a similar vein to

euphemisms, inflated language

has a similar tendency to come

across as disingenuous. Inflated

language occurs when someone

renames something to make it

sound greater than it really is,

such as when Rosanne Barr

famously referred to herself as a

"domestic goddess" instead of a

stay-at-home wife and mother.      "Domestic goddess"
Other examples of inflated         Roseanne Barr. Source:
language include: "corrosion       Leah Mark, Roseanne
control specialist" (car wash      Barr in 2010, CC BY-SA
                                   2.0

operator),      "reutilization

marketing facility" (junkyard), or "price integrity coordinator"

(sales clerk).

Jargon

Jargon refers to the technical language specific to a certain field
or profession. Such language often gets labeled as "esoteric,"
which means the words are intended to be understood by a
small group of people with highly specialized interest or
training. For example, the military frequently uses acronyms.
                                                                         CLARITY | 307

In the film, Good Morning, Vietnam, Robin Williams'
character pokes fun at this practice with the following
illustration:

      "Excuse me, sir. Seeing as how the V.P. is such a V.I.P.,
      shouldn't we keep the P.C. on the Q.T.? `Cause if it leaks to the
      V.C. he could end up M.I.A., and then we'd all be put out in
      K.P."

Of course, speakers will find using jargon like this is perfectly
acceptable if their audience is familiar with the jargon used.
However, someone delivering a speech full of such acronyms
to an audience that is completely unfamiliar with them would
have trouble maintaining their attention. Most industries,
such as restaurants, the military, or medicine, have terminology
used specifically by members of that group. Jargon can also
be regionally specific. In North Idaho, it is not uncommon to
hear people refer to their truck as a "rig."
308 | CLARITY

This is in addition to the

age-old debate surrounding

the use of the

interchangeable terms, pop,

soda, or Coke. This jargon is

regionally     specific.

Southerners prefer Coke          What do you call the pictured
(regardless if Coca-Cola
manufactured it or not); in      items? Source: HWUANGIAO
the Southwest and East, they     Maeomn, HK  Jordan 
use the word soda; and, in        219 Nathan Road 
the Northwest and                 Chuang's Jordan Plaza
Midwest, people prefer to        shop  Sun Sun
say pop.                         Restaurant   soft

                                 drink cans December 2021 SS2

                                 02, CC BY-SA 4.0

People who speak English as a second language find jargon

and slang especially confusing.
                                                             VIVID LANGUAGE | 309

VIVID LANGUAGE

Regarding the art form of

creating imagery using

language, American hip-hop

artist Yaslin Bey (who once

performed as Mos Def),

said: "The ability to have

somebody read something       Yaslin Bey Source:
and see it, or for somebody   Mikamote, Mos
to paint an entire landscape  def-11-mika, CC BY-SA 3.0

of visual imagery with just sheets of words--that's magical.

That's what I've been trying to strive for--to draw a clear

picture, to open up a new dimension."

Bring abstract ideas and concepts to life through the use

of vivid imagery. Take a look at the following passage written

by Dr. Josh Misner. He attempted to poetically capture the

feeling of experiencing a fleeting moment while out on a hike

with his two young children:

...then there are those magical moments
between worlds, when we wait upon the silence
310 | VIVID LANGUAGE

       and cast our gaze into the lights. The wind
       serenades us with the melody of a thousand
       years and trees dance to a rhythm of
       immemorial joy. Our palms caress crusted tips of
       wild grass as we comb through the meadow
       without words, yet mysteriously hearing their
       meanings echo among the chatter of nature. A
       smile and bright, wondrous eyes light the path
       ahead while we leave our cares behind for
       another day, another moment, but not this one.
       Today, we soak it all in, unfettered by definition
       or explanation. Today, we roam. Today, we
       marvel. Today is ours.

Misner could have described the exact same event in a more
factual manner as follows:

       We paused to take in the silence of the forest
       around us. The wind blew gently through the
       trees, while we ran our hands across the
       overgrown wild grass. We smiled at one another
       and continued our hike.
                                                              VIVID LANGUAGE | 311

The difference between the two descriptions of the exact same
event provides the reader (or listener, in the case of public
speaking) with a wholly different experience of the same
account. In the first passage, the imagery of bringing wind to
life, along with painting a picture of the scene, almost places
the audience there on the hike with them. While the second
passage effectively does the same job, the first attempt clearly
proves more effective at capturing the feel of the moment
through the use of vivid imagery.

   In addition to vivid imagery, consider using similes and
metaphors to illustrate unfamiliar concepts and points. A
simile provides a comparison between two seemingly dissimilar
items that uses the word "like" or "as" to draw the comparison.
For example, "That class session felt like a thousand years
long!" A metaphor behaves similar to the simile, but does not
use "like" or "as," effectively making a more direct comparison,
such as, "That class session was a thousand years of my life I'll
never get back!"

   Be careful not to use clich metaphors or similes, which
are phrases and comparisons that people overuse in regular
conversation, such as "last but not least," "better late than
never," or "stuck out like a sore thumb." These do not add
variety or spice to a speech, and, when speaking to a foreign
audience, these types of metaphors may end up creating
confusion since their intended meaning often gets lost in
translation.
312 | RHETORICAL DEVICES

RHETORICAL DEVICES

Rhetorical devices offer a way for speakers to arrange language
in an artful way so as to make the conversation more engaging
and subsequently, more memorable for audience members.
Professional and amateur speech writers can employ any
number of rhetorical devices to spice up the delivery of a
presentation (see Table 7.1).

Table 7.1 - Rhetorical Devices: Figures, Definitions,
                        Illustrations

Alliteration Allusion  Anadiplosis Analogy

Anaphora    Anesis     Antimetabole Antithesis

Aposiopesis Appositio  Assonance                  Asyndeton

Catachresis Climax     Conduplicatio Diacope

Distinctio  Enthymeme Enumeratio Epanalepsis

Epistrophe  Epitheton  Epizeuxis                  Eupemismos

Exemplum Expletive     Hyperbole Hypophora

Metaphor    Oxymoron Paradox                      Parallelism

Personification Polysyndeton Rhetorical Question  Scesis
                                                  Onomaton

Sententia   Simile     Symploce                   Synecdoche
                                                       RHETORICAL DEVICES | 313

Greek and Roman scholars in the classical period developed
and identified most rhetorical devices. Four of the most
popular ones used in speeches include alliteration, antithesis,
parallel structure, and repetition.

Alliteration

Alliteration occurs when the speaker uses the same letter or
sound at the beginning of adjacent or closely connected words.
Alliteration appears in everyday uses of language, such as
television shows (Mad Men), sporting events (Final Four),
company names (Dunkin Donuts), and in famous phrases
(home sweet home; right as rain). When used sparingly,
alliteration can spice up the language of delivery, such as "We
owe it to our city to help the hungry, the homeless, and the
helpless among us." However, speakers can overuse
alliteration, turning an otherwise innocuous statement into
an exercise in pure silliness: "Nick's nephew needed new
notebooks now."

Antithesis

The antithesis rhetorical technique juxtaposes two dissimilar
or contrasting ideas. Consider President John F. Kennedy's
famous example: "Ask not what your country can do for
you--ask what you can do for your country." Neil Armstrong
314 | RHETORICAL DEVICES

used an antithesis as he took his first steps on the moon:
"That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind."
Consider this technique when trying to draw attention to an
important point. Other examples include:

   Many are called, but few are chosen.
   We are taught to speak, but rarely how to listen.

Parallel Structure and Repetition

Parallel structure uses the technique of arranging phrases or
clauses of a sentence in parallel form, such as in the following
examples:

   Dogs make great pets; they show loyalty, they show
      obedience, and they show love.

   Our coach told us we should get a lot of sleep, we should
      eat well, and we should think positively about tonight's
      game.
                                       RHETORICAL DEVICES | 315

   Martin Luther King, Jr.
masterfully used parallel
structure and combined it
with repetition to add
engagement to his oratory.
Consider his famous I Have
a Dream speech:

I have a dream that one

day this nation will rise up

and live out the true

meaning of its creed: "We      Martin Luther King, Jr. Source:
hold these truths to be self-  NARA, Martin Luther King, Jr.
evident, that all men are      speech, CC0 1.0
created equal."

I have a dream that one

day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and

the sons of former slave owners will be able to sit down

together at the table of brotherhood.

I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi,

a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with

the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of

freedom and justice.

I have a dream that my four little children will one day

live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of

their skin but by the content of their character.

I have a dream today!

Repetition occurs when the speaker repeats certain words or
phrases to garner emotional effect. Those repeated phrases
sound pleasant to the human ear, because they carry with them
316 | RHETORICAL DEVICES

a certain rhythmic quality, adding emphasis and aiding in
memory retention. Repetition as an element of public
speaking works differently than it does in written
communication. In public speaking, presenters should use
repetition because it helps the audience remember key ideas. In
written communication, repetition often gets avoided because
a reader can review the original reference for memory and
comprehension.
                                                      CHAPTER 7 SUMMARY | 317

CHAPTER 7 SUMMARY

Source: University of the Fraser Valley, UNIVERSITY OF THE
FRASER VALLEY PHOTOGRAPHY (13633712724), CC BY 2.0

The nuance of language offers powerful options for
speechwriters. As such, speakers should masterfully assemble
the words of the speech with the audience in mind. Select the
right language and tone for those words based on the context
of the speaking arrangement; be sure the tone matches the
expected and appropriate tone for the situation.

   The language chosen when composing a speech should take
into account both the denotation (dictionary definition) and
318 | CHAPTER 7 SUMMARY

connotation (emotional implication) of the words. Keep
words simple, clear, concrete. Avoid overusing abstract
language and generalizations. Be aware of other types of
language to avoid, such as euphemisms, inflated language, and
jargon. Finally, employ vivid language through the use of
metaphor, simile, and rhetorical devices such as alliteration,
antithesis, and parallel structure or repetition to keep
audiences engaged and listening.
                 CHAPTER 8: PRACTICE, PREPARATION, AND DELIVERY
                                                                   TECHNIQUES | 319

PART VIII

CHAPTER 8:
PRACTICE,
PREPARATION, AND
DELIVERY
TECHNIQUES
320 | CHAPTER 8: PRACTICE, PREPARATION, AND DELIVERY
TECHNIQUES
       PRACTICE, PREPARATION, AND DELIVERY TECHNIQUES | 321

PRACTICE,
PREPARATION, AND
DELIVERY TECHNIQUES
322 | PRACTICE, PREPARATION, AND DELIVERY TECHNIQUES

           "Take advantage of every opportunity to
           practice your communication skills so that
           when important occasions arise, you will
           have the gift, the style, the sharpness, the
           clarity, and the emotions to affect other
           people." --Jim Rohn Source: Tajul Islam
           Apurbo, Jim rohn, CC BY-SA 4.0

As a general rule of life, learned skills require practice to refine,
develop, and perfect. Any dedicated athlete will confirm this
fact. The average person off the street cannot pick up a
textbook on the fundamentals of basketball, study it during a
caffeine-fueled all-nighter, and then show up for tryouts with
       PRACTICE, PREPARATION, AND DELIVERY TECHNIQUES | 323

an NBA team, expecting a starting spot on the team. The same
holds true for foreign languages, hobbies, crafts, and trades. It
takes time, effort, and a vigorous commitment to the process
of trial and error for a person to develop any skill.

   Communication in general, but especially public speaking,
essentially consists of a set of learned skills that speakers must
develop through regular, dedicated practice. Some people have
a seemingly natural talent for public speaking, while others fall
on the opposite end of the spectrum and become crippled by
the mere thought of standing up in front of an audience. This
chapter aims to help the latter become more confident public
speakers.
324 | WHY PRACTICE?

WHY PRACTICE?

Source: Photograph by RobinHiggins via Pixabay

As mentioned previously in Chapter 2, the element of
uncertainty sparks one of the primary sources for public
speaking anxiety. People fear all of the possibilities that could
go wrong, including saying the wrong thing, forgetting what
to say, or having the audience turn against them or view them
as incompetent. Practicing a speech helps eliminate many of
those sources of uncertainty, and with that practice, speakers
start developing self-confidence with respect to the message
they have to deliver. Practicing effectively trains their mouths
                                                              WHY PRACTICE? | 325

to say the words, bodies to deliver the accompanying nonverbal
communication to supplement the message, and brains to
perform under pressure.
326 | GETTING STARTED

GETTING STARTED

Source: Photograph by DariuszSankowski via Pixabay

Successful and effective practice sessions begin with the
outline, for a great speech depends on the quality and
completeness of the written foundation. Remember that the
outline will act as the roadmap for how to progress from the
attention getter (opening statement) to the clincher (final
statement). As with an actual road map, the speaker wants
the directions to be as clear, complete, and concise as possible.
                                                           GETTING STARTED | 327

Start practicing the speech after completing the rough draft of
the outline.
328 | STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE

STARTING TIPS FOR
PRACTICE

Source: Public Domain photograph via ph, CCO 1.0

Helpful Hints     Above all, avoid the practice of
               "cramming" when deciding on a
               practice strategy. While this
               strategy may work on a history
               exam when trying to memorize
               dates and facts at the last minute
STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE | 329

to regurgitate them before              Items missing
forgetting them, this strategy does     from an outline
not work as well for                    will not
communicators. Remember,                magically
public speaking acts like any other     appear during a
learned skill that individuals          speaker's
develop and refine, like                delivery in front
performing a saxophone solo,            of the audience.
shooting a free-throw shot, or          For example, if
learning a new language. Practice       the outline
should begin well in advance of         neglected to
the speech and spread out over          include a
time, rather than concentrated all      central idea,
in one or two sessions. Brief yet       and the speaker
frequent practice sessions held         used the
over a period of time works best.       outline to
                                        practice the
   When beginning to practice,          speech, then it
understand the vast, yet subtle         is likely the
difference between memorization         central idea will
and learning. For example, people       ever get
asked to tell the story of their first  revealed during
kiss, the time they learned to ride     the speech. Be
a bike, or the first time they flew
in an airplane could most likely
recall and tell others that story
with relative ease. They did not
need to memorize these stories or
330 | STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE

                  write down lines, study them, and

                  then repeat them until they could

sure to           recite them perfectly each time.
complete the      People find these stories easy to
outline (this     tell without much advance
means taking      preparation because they
into account all  represent learned experiences.
speech            The speaker knows the material;
components        telling the story involves putting
outlined in       the concepts into words. At most,

Chapter 6)        notes for telling these types of

before            stories would consist of a few

beginning to      keywords and phrases to jog the

practice.         memory and keep it on track.

                  Memorization, on the other

                  hand, refers to the process of

                  storing and recalling exact phrases

and words. Actors use this process to recall exact lines in

prewritten scripts, but for a public speaker, whose primary

goal consists of having a fluid conversation with an audience, it

will not suffice. Audiences, first of all, can easily see through a

speaker with a scripted speech. From eye contact to vocal tone,

rate, and variety, everything about that speaker's delivery will

seem canned or manufactured, anything but genuine and

authentic. Additionally, what would happen if the speaker

forgot a line? Potentially, that could cause what some might

refer to as a "speech fatality"--an unrecoverable error that
                                           STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE | 331

causes extreme anxiety, resulting in panic and possibly failure.
As opposed to memorized speeches, learned speeches offer
speakers a backup plan, because they know the concepts they
are trying to convey, so the words they choose to convey those
concepts may vary, but the essence of the message remains the
same. For that reason, avoid rote memorization at all costs, and
instead, get to know the material and use notes to help provide
guidance through that material.

   When practicing, remember to recite certain phrases
differently each time. Not only does this prevent
memorization as a result of repeated practice, but it also
effectively "trains" speakers to deliver their message in a variety
of ways, developing multiple phrases for saying the same thing.
That way, if they get stuck trying to remember how they
planned on phrasing a certain point, they will have numerous
options from which to draw, keeping the speech fluid and
conversational.

   Remember that, during practice sessions, speakers should
practice in the exact same way they intend to present when in
front of the audience. This means that, if they plan to stand
and move around, they should not practice from a seated
position, staring at a computer screen, and going through the
lines in their head. They will want to stand up, move around,
gesture, and practice saying phrases out loud, projecting their
voice just as they will in front of the audience. This practice
method trains the body (the delivery vehicle) via muscle
memory. In the same way a professional golfer practices
332 | STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE

hitting a drive hundreds of times to develop and refine the
swing, a public speaker needs to train the muscles of the body
like the neck so he or she remembers to move the head around
the room, effectively maintaining eye contact with the entire
room. This also includes the diaphragm, which is needed to
expel enough air through the vocal cords to project the voice to
the back of the room.

   For instance, what would happen if a speaker only practiced
from a seated position? That person will likely stand to deliver
the message feeling uncomfortable due to the unfamiliar
method of delivery, which leads to uncertainty and generates
natural anxiety. In the same way, practicing phrases internally
instead of speaking them out loud only teaches a person to
remain quiet and reserved.

   Lastly, consider conducting at least one practice session as
a full-dress rehearsal. The last place speakers want to discover
that their heels hurt or that their shirt doesn't fit quite right is
when they are standing in front of an audience and trying to
concentrate on delivering the message.

   Athletes, musicians, actors, dancers, or other performers
who perform their craft in front of spectators often use a
valuable technique called positive visualization (also called
positive imagery). This technique involves engaging one's
imagination to visualize a positive outcome from the
upcoming performance. For example, a basketball player
preparing to take a crucial free-throw shot to win the game at
the last minute might dribble the ball a few times, then pause
                                           STARTING TIPS FOR PRACTICE | 333

and visualize the shot before taking it, imagining the ball going
through the air in a perfect arc and sinking through the hoop,
touching nothing but the net. Only after that visualization
will the player physically take the shot. Public speakers should
imagine themselves successfully delivering the speech as close
to an ideal reality as possible. One of the worst things a speaker
can do prior to the speech is engage in negative self-talk, such
as thinking "I'm not ready for this" or "This is going to stink!"

   While everyone will have a different "best practice" number
of practice sessions to effectively learn a speech, it requires
some trial and error to find out what will work best. Some
people have the good fortune to possess photographic
memories and can recall written information effortlessly, and
for them, perhaps one practice session will work fine. Others
may end up on the opposite end of that spectrum, requiring
30 or more practice run-throughs before they feel comfortable
enough to deliver their speech. Despite most people falling
anywhere along this spectrum, many novice public speaking
students suggest that the following three practice "sessions"
outlined in this chapter provide a recipe for success.
334 | PRACTICE SESSION #1

PRACTICE SESSION #1

Source: Photograph by Bru-n0 via Pixabay

Before practicing at all, the speaker must absolutely have a
solid foundation established in the outline. Prepare the outline
as fully and completely as possible before beginning. The only
other tool required for this practice session is a timer. Most
cellular phones have stopwatch apps readily available, but in a
pinch, one could easily find a relatively cheap stopwatch or use
the kitchen timer function on just about any microwave.

   Speakers can take two approaches to using the timing
during practice sessions. First, they can start the stopwatch,
                                                      PRACTICE SESSION #1 | 335

deliver the speech, and then see how much time has elapsed,
adjusting as necessary from that point. Another method is
to use a countdown-style timer, setting the timer for the
maximum amount of time allowed and delivering the speech
after starting the countdown. If the timer beeps before the
speech concludes, the speaker can note on the outline how
much material in the speech remains, which informs them
how much needs to be cut from the final draft. Regardless
of how the timer gets used, the speech's likelihood for success
relies on it. Practicing with a timer trains the brain to recognize
how much time has elapsed, helping speakers to develop
almost a "sixth sense" regarding the time, so that they will
automatically know how long the speech has lasted while
delivering it in front of the audience. When people experience
situations that induce high levels of stress and anxiety, their
perception of time becomes distorted. After a ten-minute
speech, one student may sit down and feel like only two
minutes have passed, while another student may sit down after
three minutes and think that more than eight minutes
transpired. Using this method provides critical biofeedback,
which helps the body determine much time has elapsed,
helping the speaker finish the message within the allotted time.

   In this first practice session, the speaker should start the
timer and deliver the speech from the outline, vocalizing it as
closely as if delivering it in front of the intended audience.
336 | PRACTICE SESSION #1

     Important Note to Self

     If you mess up, stumble over your words, or forget
     to say something, keep going! These things happen
     when speaking in front of an audience, so train
     yourself how to adapt and recover.

After the conclusion of the first run-through of the speech,
stop the timer to determine whether the speech ran under
time, over time, or within the range allowed for this specific
speech. Ideally, speakers will fall within the upper-middle
point within the time range allotted. For example, the practice
run for a 6-8 minute speech should aim for the 7:30-7:45
mark. As people get increasingly nervous, their vocal rate has
the tendency to follow their heart rates. Increased heartrates
will likely lead to increased speaking rates. Good speakers take
this into consideration and give themselves a little extra room,
just in case.

   If this practice session ends up over time, go back through
the outline and determine what information to edit out of the
speech. Don't randomly remove content. Prioritize removing
any information that does not seem to fit with the audience's
needs. If the speech falls under the time limit, go back to the
                                                      PRACTICE SESSION #1 | 337

outline and consider elaborating further on some of the
points. Again, utilize the audience analysis to determine which
points would better suit their needs.

   Speakers should continue practicing the speech in this
manner until they confidently deliver the speech while making
sure the timing comes out consistently. At that point, they
should put the speech aside and walk away. There is a point
of diminishing returns when it comes to practicing a speech.
Practice too much, and it will become too rote and rehearsed.
This first practice session serves only one purpose: testing the
time limits and determining if the amount of information
included fits within the parameters of the speaking
engagement. Once that has been accomplished, any further
practice could actually damage the ability to remain
conversational.
338 | PRACTICE SESSION #2

PRACTICE SESSION #2

Source: Photograph by AnnasPhotography via Pixabay

By now, the outline has neared final draft status and should
require very few changes, but it still has its uses for this practice
session. Bring the timer once again, but include note cards.
Begin transcribing the outline to the note cards at this point
using only short phrases and keywords that will jog the
memory regarding what information to deliver. To
demonstrate what this could look like, consider the main point
from one of the sample outlines in Chapter 6:
                                                      PRACTICE SESSION #2 | 339

  I. Part of attraction is due to what our mind perceives as
      physically appealing.
       A. The human body is the first thing we notice in
            another human.
              1. Females are generally attracted to males that
                  are sexually appealing and have good fatherly
                  traits such as height, muscles, facial features,
                  some hair.
              2. Males are generally attracted to females that
                  have sexually appealing features such as large
                  breasts, waist-to-hip ratio, face, legs, and butt.
       B. Symmetry plays a role in figuring out if the person
            has good genes.
              1. When we see a person, we are subconsciously
                  analyzing if they have the features that would
                  make for good offspring. (Science of Sex
                  Appeal DVD)
              2. The better the symmetry, the more it shows
                  that a person doesn't have any visible gene
                  defects.

A note card for this main point could look like this:

       -Attraction - physical appeal
340 | PRACTICE SESSION #2

             Body noticed first
                      Women  Men with height,
                        muscles, face, hair
                      Men  Women with large breasts,
                        waist/hip, face, legs, butt

             Symmetry - genes
             Science of Sex Appeal DVD subconscious

                analyzing
                      Good symmetry - no gene defects

   Notice that this speaker has deliberately written the notes
on the card almost cryptically. Part of the trial-and-error
process of learning to be an effective public speaker involves
learning what basic keywords and phrases will jog the memory
in the midst of high anxiety. One thing, however, is certain and
must be remembered at this stage:

     Note to Self
                                                PRACTICE SESSION #2 | 341

The more text you write on a note card, the more
likely you will read directly from it instead of
maintaining eye contact with your audience.

   Speakers should only Include      Helpful Hint
the minimum amount of text
needed to jar the memory so that       Use only one
they can spend a majority of the       note card per
time making meaningful eye             section of
contact with the audience. The         information
only time speakers should write        within the
full sentences occurs when             speech. For
transcribing a full quote, at which    example, use
point, the audience almost             one card for
expects them to read from the          each point of
card to do justice to the original     the
source.                                introduction,
                                       one card for
   Also notice how the creator of      each main
the notecard above used a              point, and one
highlighter to identify the fact's
source? Using color, symbols,
bold font, etc. offers a great way
to immediately find important
information when needed. The
longer speakers look down at their
342 | PRACTICE SESSION #2

card for the               notes, hunting for the material
conclusion.                they need, the greater the chances
                           that anxiety could begin to rise.
Not only does
this minimize                 Speakers can also include notes
the number of              to themselves regarding how to
cards needed,              deliver the speech during certain
but it also                portions. For example, as long as
provides a                 the speech's topic is not heavy,
visual cue to              serious, or depressing, consider
another                    drawing smiley faces on the note
important part             cards to serve as a reminder to
of the speech: a           smile once in a while, or draw
transition.                arrows that point to the sides of
Flipping to a              the room to prompt movement or
new card when              eye contact with the audience.
stating the                These tips could prove
transition                 remarkably useful.
provides the
audience with a               After transcribing the outline
subtle                     to note cards, deliver the speech
nonverbal cue              from the note cards, but have the
that indicates             outline nearby. Make a note of
                           any difficult areas of the speech
                           and come back to those parts
                           later. If certain areas consistently
                           prove problematic, edit the note
                           cards to ensure they read as clear
                           as possible. Check the timer after
                                     PRACTICE SESSION #2 | 343

each practice round to ensure the    movement to
timing remains steady and toward     new material.
the upper-middle range of the
limit. Once the speaker can          Number the
effectively deliver the speech from  cards. This will
the note cards alone, they should    help reduced
stop there and practice no further   anxiety if they
until the next session.              get
                                     disorganized or
                                     dropped during
                                     the speech.
344 | PRACTICE SESSION #3

PRACTICE SESSION #3

Speakers who have the opportunity to practice at the
speaking venue should take the opportunity to do so if
economically feasible. Source: Photograph by
MiRUTH_de via Pixabay

For this practice session, use only the timer and note cards.
Start the timer, and just as with session #2, deliver the speech
solely from the note cards. During this session, speakers should
pretend they have an audience and interact with them during
delivery instead of the note cards.
              PRACTICE SESSION #3 | 345

Note to Self

     Want to maximize your chances for success?
     Preview the venue where you will speak in advance
     and imagine yourself in that room, looking at how
     you expect the audience to arrange itself. Continue
     your practice run-throughs, challenging yourself to
     wean away from the notes as much as possible.
     Ideally, you will spend a minimum of 70% of your
     speech not looking at your notes, but instead, at
     your audience. Remember to vary your phrases, so
     as not to memorize, but to learn your material well
     enough to deliver it as conversationally as possible.
     At this point, your note cards effectively become
     more like a parachute and less like a crutch.

The more speakers push themselves to get away from the notes
and use them only when they forget what to say next, the
more they will learn the speech and give off the impression of
credibility, preparedness, and confidence.

   During this third practice session, consider incorporating
one or more of the following techniques:

   Deliver the speech to a test audience of family or
346 | PRACTICE SESSION #3

      friends. Hearing feedback from familiar faces can offer
      perspectives that may help identify problem points.
   Deliver the speech in front of a full-length
      mirror without looking away. This helps to desensitize
      the part of the emotional brain (the limbic system) that
      controls the natural aversion to eye contact. This exercise
      helps build confidence to maintain eye contact with
      audience members.
   Record the delivery of the speech using a phone,
      camera, or webcam and watch it for self-review. As
      uncomfortable as this feels, it provides truly valuable
      feedback, leading to greater development as a speaker.

Following the techniques outlined for these three practice
sessions will provide speakers with a good starting point with
which to work. Some people may require more practice, while
others may be able to get by with less, but this much is certain:
Practice makes perfect and helps the speakers develop
confidence in their abilities to deliver a credible message to the
audience.
                                                 PLANNING THE DELIVERY | 347

PLANNING THE
DELIVERY

Source: delegateconnectimages, Speaking To An Empty
Audience - Public Speaking, CC BY 2.0

Once speakers have mastered the content portion of their
speech, they must next consider how to use the delivery of the
message to give it more impact among the audience members.
Remember the goal of an effective communicator at all times:
have the audience memorably understand the message as
originally intended. The best and most well-written speech
in the world will still fall short if not delivered effectively, so
during practice, take into account how to manage first
348 | PLANNING THE DELIVERY

impressions, as well as improving nonverbal communication,
which includes personal appearance, eye contact, vocal quality,
and movement.

First Impressions

Generating a positive rapport begins with setting a good first
impression with the audience. Always show up early and come
prepared. Arriving at the last minute, frantic and nervous, can
set a negative tone among audience members that may prove
difficult, if not impossible, to overcome. Prior to the
introduction, prepare all visual aids. Manage any nonverbal
cues, particularly when an outside party provides a formal
introduction. Stand tall and exude confidence, even if the
opposite feels true. When it comes to confidence, great
speakers "fake it until they make it," which eventually
transforms nerves into confidence. After the introduction, it
is time to "take the stage." Walk tall and slowly up to the
podium, all the while remembering that nothing else matters
but the message in this moment.

     Note to Self
                                                 PLANNING THE DELIVERY | 349

     Remember all the preparation and practice that has
     led up to this moment and remind yourself that you
     can do this. As you take your place at the podium (or
     wherever you plan on beginning), pause for a
     moment and smile, ensuring you have the
     audience's attention.

Take a deep, cleansing breath and exhale slowly before
beginning, and then begin strong. Avoid saying unnecessary
phrases like "All right..." or "Okay..." or greeting the audience.
Time restrictions limit the amount of time it takes to convey
very important message to the audience, therefore devote every
last word toward delivering that message. Pausing before
commencing the introduction demonstrates self-control and
respect for the audience.
350 | PLANNING THE DELIVERY

Appearance

                                       The speaker's appearance

                             should them apart from

                             audience members. To

                             achieve this goal, keep two

                             general rules of personal

                             appearance in mind: 1)

Source: Photograph           Anticipate the audience's
by marcusappelt via Pixabay  attire and dress about one or

                             two steps more formally

than that so as to project a professional, credible image to the

audience; 2) Use clothing as a visual aid if it enhances the

message. When in doubt with respect to rule #1, aim for

business casual attire by wearing appropriate clothes for a

professional job interview, such as an interview for an office

manager, a supervisory position, or a marketing specialist.

Additionally, avoid wearing anything that might distract the

audience from focusing on the message, such as hats or shirts

with text of any kind and/or flashy logos. Ignore this advice if

such clothing serves as a visual aid.

Finally, speaker should take the following aspects into

consideration when planning their personal appearance: the

occasion, audience, topic, and the image/persona desired.

First, note the occasion for the speech. Presenters delivering

a commencement address should look totally different than

those eulogizing at a funeral or celebrating a wedding, so the
                                                 PLANNING THE DELIVERY | 351

occasion sometimes dictates what the speaker needs to wear.
Second, consider the audience. Sometimes dressing one level
more formally may involve wearing jeans and a T-shirt,
especially if the audience is going to be wearing shorts, sandals,
and tank tops. Generally speaking, plan on dressing at least
as nice as the nicest-dressed person in the audience, but when
in doubt, err on the more formal side. Thirdly, speakers can
sometimes look to their topic to find inspiration for their
wardrobe. For example, a Hawaiian print shirt, shorts, and
sandals serve as perfect attire for explaining tourist attractions
on Oahu, while yoga pants and no shoes work great for
demonstrating yoga poses. Lastly, speakers should take into
account what type of persona they want their audience to see.
Trying to emulate power and authority? Dress more formally
in darker colors. Going for more lighthearted humor or an
upbeat, positive tone? Wear lighter colors. Dressing more
formally helps make the audience take the speaker more
seriously.

Eye Contact

Eye contact, according to Andersen (2007), performs several
interactional functions, including the following:

   Regulate and monitor human interactions
   Signal cognitive activity
   Express a desire for involvement
352 | PLANNING THE DELIVERY

   Signal attentiveness

The number-one reason novice speakers fail to engage their
audiences with sufficient meaningful eye contact occurs due to
relying too heavily on reading notes. Such speakers use their
notes even when they are well prepared, simply because they
find it more comforting to look down at the notes, rather than
at all those pairs of eyes staring. A lack of eye contact with
an audience damages the possibility to create rapport because,
as mentioned above, if eye contact stays poor or inconsistent,
it cannot regulate or monitor interaction, nor can it generate
a desire for involvement or engagement with the presented
material. Audiences most likely will tune out a speaker who
fails to engage them with consistent eye contact.

   Eye contact means much more than merely scanning the
audience, however. "Lock on" each person in the audience
for at least a couple of seconds before moving on to the next
person. Do this randomly to individual members of the
audience, so as to feel more natural in the interaction with
them. One technique that may help with this is to look at
the person in the front corner of the room, then move to the
audience member in the opposite rear corner, then the other
rear corner, then the opposite front corner, and then fill in the
gaps between them all randomly. Speakers should aim to reach
every audience member meaningfully at least once.
                                                 PLANNING THE DELIVERY | 353

Movement and Use of Space

                                Most novice speakers,

                                quite frankly, forget that

                                they possess bodies,

                                complete with working

                                limbs, particularly legs.

                                They become so heavily

                                focused on delivering the

                                message that they neglect to

Source: Or Kaplan, Roie Galitz  utilize the space they have at
Speaking 09, CC BY-SA 4.0       the front of the room. Still
                                others choose to remain

glued to the podium, because the podium provides a feeling of

"cover" in such a hazardous situation as public speaking in

front of a crowd. Movement, however, as mentioned earlier,

provides people with a way to dispel much of their nervous

energy. It does not take much in the way of movement to burn

off excess adrenaline that pools in the cells of muscles, resulting

in involuntary trembling and twitching. Walking around can

help the speaker move past the initial wave of anxiety.

Additionally, an animated speaker becomes more engaging

and easier to follow than one who never moves from the same

spot. However, keep movement intentional and use it to

supplement the speech's main points.

Movement from one side of the room to another can be

used while transitioning from one point to the next, providing
354 | PLANNING THE DELIVERY

the audience with a physical reminder to expect new material.
State the transitional phrase when beginning to walk to the
other side of the speaking space. When emphasizing an
important point, consider moving toward the audience.
Closing the physical gap between the audience generates more
immediacy, or sense of urgency to listen or interact, among
audience members. Moving away from the audience can signal
an impending conclusion. Above all, avoid pacing like an
animal trapped in a cage. While pacing may make the speaker
feel better, excessive, uncontrolled movement actually creates a
distraction for the audience.
                                                              VOCAL QUALITY | 355

VOCAL QUALITY

Source: Photograph by quimuns via Pixabay

In a speech, obviously, the human voice delivers the majority of
the message. While other nonverbal qualities may complement
or supplement that message, the vast majority of the literal
message gets delivered via the voice, and as such, the speaker
must consider all of the qualities of the voice to ensure the
most effective and memorable delivery possible.
356 | VOCAL QUALITY

Volume vs. Projection

Ever gone to a concert one night and noticed a difference in
vocal quality the following day? The hoarse voice that resulted
is most likely due to the strain placed on the vocal cords due
to an increase in volume, which can be avoided by using the
art of projection. Actors refer to projection as having a "stage
voice," which they employ by filling the diaphragm with air
while breathing. This shifts that strain away from the vocal
cords. Most people when they want to be heard loudly, simply
increase the volume of their voice. Do this often and sustain
it long enough and the throat will suffer. Learning to project
the voice, however, involves using the diaphragm, the muscle
below the lungs that fills and contracts the lungs during
breathing, to expel more air through the vocal cords as they
work. This effectively projects the voice throughout the room.
Projection removes strain from the vocal cords and prevents
the feeling associated with having a tired, hoarse voice the next
day.

   To develop projection, practice the presentation with a
partner who slowly increases the volume of background music
during the speech's delivery. As the volume of the music
increases, try projecting the message over the music,
concentrating on expelling more air while speaking.
         VOCAL QUALITY | 357

Clarity

During conversations, most people are relaxed enough not to
have to think about the clarity of their enunciation, and as
a result, they tend to slur their words, drop syllables off the
ends of words, and mumble. During practice session, slow
down and pronounce consonant sounds sharply and crisply.
Speakers that exaggerate effectively train their voice to
articulate the sounds more clearly when it comes time to
deliver the speech.

   Additionally, certain words may present problems with
pronunciation, such as the word phenomenological (go ahead,
try to say it five times fast). Devote extra time to practicing
these words to ensure proper pronunciation of them
effortlessly and correctly. Look up the words using a tool such
as YouTube to hear others use the words organically. Don't
settle for one source. Look up several in this manner to ensure
the correct pronunciation, especially when using foreign
language-based words or medical/science-based terminology.
Saying words correctly improves the credibility of a speaker.

Pitch and Intonation

Pitch refers to the highs and lows of a vocal tone, while
intonation indicates variations of pitch. When a speaker reads
an entire speech off of a prewritten manuscript, things like
pitch and intonation often get sacrificed, while in everyday
358 | VOCAL QUALITY

conversation, pitch and intonation vary widely, leading to
often engaging conversations that draw people in and keep
them hooked. Even a staggering statistical fact could end up
lost on the audience if the speaker used a monotonic voice
while presenting it. However, adding enthusiasm and the right
amount of emphasis will help the audience recognize the sheer
importance of the fact.

Intensity

Speakers demonstrate intensity by varying the loudness and
softness of their voice.

     Note to Self

     To experience this, try saying the following aloud, as
     directed:
     (Softly) "Are we going to put up with this?"
     (Switch to loudly) "No! Today, we fight!"
     As you tried this exercise, did you notice the
     meaning change as you altered the intensity?
                                                              VOCAL QUALITY | 359

Playing with intensity can drastically alter the mood or feel of
the message. Try to vary the intensity throughout a speech.
Start soft at first, but then build toward a climax near the
end of the speech. This technique works especially well when
utilizing narratives (stories) to convey important points.

Rate

Most people speak at a conversational rate of around 150
words per minute (roughly two words for every heartbeat),
and as the heart rate increases, so will the rate of speaking.
Auctioneers have the capability to say up to 300 words per
minute, but in doing so, they sacrifice clarity and complexity in
order to deliver their messages rapidly. Public speakers should
want to keep their rates down to around the 150-word range.
Keeping the rate of speech conversational helps demonstrate
confidence and control to the audience. Breathing offers an
effective solution to combat anxiety and regulate the heart rate.
Novice speakers often forget to breathe, and instead, take
short, choppy breaths that often lead to an oxygen deficiency
that quickens the heart rate, leading to an increased rate of
speaking. By using controlled breathing and pauses in between
sentences to take deeper and purposeful breaths, the speaking
rate should sound comfortable and relaxed.
360 | VOCAL QUALITY

Pauses and Fillers

During regular conversations, people often insert filler words,
such as "um," "uh," "you know," and others while talking.
Filler words serve as a sort of placeholder for the conversation,
used when someone needs to retreat into her or his mind to
think of a word or what to say next. People insert those filler
words or paralanguage, which represent the sounds people
make that are not necessarily language, to let the other person
know they have not finished their thoughts yet. In a speech,
however, such words provide no function since the audience
will not interrupt the delivery of the speech (unless dealing
with a hostile audience). The audience will likely forgive the
usage of some filler words. They may make the speaker come
across as more natural and conversational, but at some point,
too many of them becomes a distraction from the message.
Instead of filler words, allow silence to fill the void between
thoughts and sentences. Silence sounds much more eloquent
and provides the audience with the impression that the speaker
remains in control of the speech's delivery, helping them to
exude confidence.

     Note to Self
                                                               VOCAL QUALITY | 361

     To reduce your use of filler words, first become
     aware of what fillers you use and at what points in
     your speech you use them. Invite a friend to one of
     your practices and have them bang on something or
     make a loud noise whenever you use a filler word.
     This kind of feedback, though somewhat jarring at
     first, provides invaluable data because, as you
     become more aware of the fillers, you quickly
     become more able to control them and use pauses
     instead.

Source: Photograph by HugoAtaide via Pixabay

Using pauses regularly augments the message's impact. Short
362 | VOCAL QUALITY

pauses (two seconds or less) add emphasis by using the silence
to draw brief attention to the previous point. They can also
separate ideas, serving almost as a nonverbal transition.
Speakers should employ long pauses (3-4 seconds) more
sparingly, such as following a rhetorical question or after
making a powerful or provocative point. Long pauses
command audience attention in dramatic fashion, but used
too frequently, can give the audience the impression that the
speaker's unprepared or overly nervous. Save long pauses only
for the most powerful moments within the message. Speakers
may also try to use the "spontaneity pause," a planned pause
that appears unplanned from the perspective of the audience.
When using such a pause, stop for a moment to consider the
right word or way to phrase a point, only to miraculously come
up with the perfect word at the last moment.
                                               ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS | 363

ADVANCED DELIVERY
TIPS

Speakers should incorporate all of the above tips into their
delivery planning. At some point, they may choose to take
their public speaking skills to the next level, so this chapter
provides additional tips to help refine the speech's delivery and
increase the power of the message.
364 | ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS

Pronoun Consideration

Martin Luther King, Jr.

was well known for his

frequent use of inclusive

pronouns (we, us, and our)

instead of singular

pronouns (I, you, your, me,

or mine). He understood

that to invite an audience

into his message, he needed

to rearrange the language to  Source: Rowland
make it subtly more inviting  Scherman creator
to them. Take a look at the   QS:P170,Q7372186, Martin
following examples:           Luther King - March on
                              Washington, marked as public
 1. Today, I will show you    domain, more details
                              on Wikimedia Commons

what I mean by

inclusive pronouns being inviting.

2. Today, we will look at how inclusive pronouns help us

become more inviting.

Although each sentence essentially states the same core
message, the second one has the tendency to draw an audience
into it through its inviting language, while the first one almost
creates a sort of psychological divide between the speaker and
                                               ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS | 365

audience members. Strive to use inclusive pronouns when
possible.

Balance

Strive for balance in all aspects of the speech's delivery. When
presenting serious or heavy material, seek to balance it out
with lighter, more positive material. For instance, what if a
person wished to discuss the atrocities of the Holocaust? Such
a weighty topic needs to be treated seriously, but at the same
time, an audience may find this topic emotionally draining,
so how might the speaker balance it out? Though the speaker
might spend the majority of the time speaking to the atrocities,
near the end of the speech, however, the person could share an
uplifting story of perseverance and survival despite the odds.
Similarly, if the speech topic focuses on a humorous and
lighthearted subject, seek to include research-based
information that has serious value to it.

   People that speak softly should look for ways to increase
their intensity during important talking points. Likewise,
those who have a booming voice that projects well should
attempt to soften it a bit for more variety and impact. Stand
still often? Try to get out from behind the podium and use
the space. If the opposite's true, then attempt to balance
movement out patterns by standing still more often.
366 | ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS

WOW Factor

Source: Illustration by stux via Pixabay

Every speech, at some point within the delivery, should
attempt to deliver what some refer to as a "wow factor." Think
of this as a moment of highly memorable and profound
brilliance that captivates the audience and potentially makes
the hairs on their arm stand straight up. A wow factor could
include any one of the following or a combination thereof:

   A powerfully gripping story, well told, that builds
      suspense and pays off with a satisfying ending. Such a
      story could begin in the intro, continue through the
      body of the speech, and conclude with an epic finish in
      the conclusion.

   A memorable and striking visual aid that perfectly
      encapsulates the main idea of the message and drives it
      home within the audience's minds.
                                           ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS | 367

 The speaker's personal appearance could potentially
   provide a wow factor, such as a speaker dressing and
   speaking like a zombie to discuss the importance of
   preparing for disasters.

 A startling fact that resonates with audience members,
   especially if it is powerful enough for them to want to
   share the fact with others outside of the context of the
   speaking engagement.

 A practical demonstration that shows people the
   content of the message, rather than merely telling them,
   such as a black belt in karate demonstrating a flying
   roundhouse kick.

 The general tone of the delivery could also provide a
   wow factor. A comedian named Anthony Griffith has a
   speech on YouTube, delivered for the storytelling project
   The Moth, where he talks about the year he lost his
   young daughter to cancer. His delivery covers a wide
   range of extreme emotions, using varied levels of
   intensity from soft-spoken to all-out rage, leaving
   audience members in tears by the end--and it lasts only
   nine minutes.
368 | MORE ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS

MORE ADVANCED
DELIVERY TIPS

Source: Professor Martin Trentin, RMS - July 2013 - Passo
Fundo, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil - At the UPF, CC BY-SA 3.0

Momentum vs. Accuracy

Sometimes speakers may forget important points of their
speech. Even worse they might forget entire sections! However,
if they get to the recap point in their conclusion and suddenly
realize that they may have forgotten something back in the
                                      MORE ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS | 369

first main point, it is generally best to continue with the
conclusion. Sacrificing the momentum or "flow" for the sake
of delivering all planned information does little for audience
information retention. The audience, unless they have a copy
of the outline, will not know that information accidentally got
left out, so it is best to save it for another time. Try to sneak
the missing information into the Q&A portion of the speech
when answering audience questions.

Using "Bits" for Practice

In public speaking terminology, a "bit" refers to a smaller
section of interrelated material from a larger speech, such as
a main point, an introduction, or a conclusion. Professional
speakers do not memorize their talks, but instead, practice
their speeches using the concept of bits. They break up their
speeches into these bits and then spend time practicing each
bit, often out of order. This manner of practice more closely
plays to the brains' strengths since people tend to
compartmentalize information when processing it. For
example, memorizing a 9-digit number may seem daunting at
first, but people do it all the time when remembering their
social security number. Most people separate the 9 digits into
three bits: a three-digit bit, a two-digit bit, and another three-
digit bit. People also do the same for telephone numbers,
addresses, and many more important unforgettable items.

   Learning a speech in this way helps speakers rapidly and
370 | MORE ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS

efficiently get away from their notes so as to maintain their full
attention on the potential audience. In doing so, the speaker's
credibility automatically rises, since the audience gains the
impression of the speaker as a person who knows the material
so well that notes become unnecessary. Learning bits to get
away from notes also has other benefits, like freeing the speaker
from trapping themselves behind the podium. Instead. he or
she has the ability to move around the room without carrying
anything, placing them closer to the audience, which increases
the tendency to create rapport. Learning bits also tends to help
people speak more naturally and conversationally. This can
also increase confidence by helping the speaker get to know the
material more intimately. As a result, practice times become
shorter and more efficient as the speaker works on the speech
in 3-5 minute increments rather than running through the
entire thing all at once.

Mental Preparation Before the
Speech

On the day of the speech, public speakers may take certain
steps to help put them in the right frame of mind. For exciting
and upbeat speech topics, consider listening to music that
shares these characteristics. The faster rhythms tend to help
establish the right mood for such an occasion. Similarly,
speakers with a somber speech topic should consider listening
to music that projects the same emotional feeling, likely
                                      MORE ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS | 371

something slower and more downbeat. Some people choose
to develop their passion and vocal power through listening
to speeches from famous or powerful orators, such as those
found on TED.com or even historical heavyweights such as
Martin Luther King, Jr., Malcolm X, John F. Kennedy, or
Eleanor Roosevelt. Visit www.americanrhetoric.com to hear
what some consider to rank as the greatest and most significant
speeches ever presented.

Expressing Emotion

When speaking about

potentially emotionally

heavy topics, speakers must

prepare themselves for an

emotional flood. As

adrenaline hits the

bloodstream, it alters the   Source: Ed Mays, Peggy
way people experience their  Orenstein on Boys and Sex, CC
emotions by magnifying       BY 3.0
their effects. Someone

experiencing an adrenaline rush due to the fight-or-flight

response that comes with public speaking will be more likely

to experience overwhelming emotions than the same person in

a normal state of rest. Therefore, if the speech topic, for

example, will reference a close and well-loved family member

who recently died, that person should be prepared to cope
372 | MORE ADVANCED DELIVERY TIPS

with the inevitable emotional reaction that could bubble up
to the surface. Even if such emotions did not surface during
practice sessions, it remains highly likely that the same speech,
when given in front of an audience, will result in tears that
well up, seemingly out of nowhere. If this happens, let it. One
of the worst things people can do is to fight the tears if and
when they arise, because that will only hinder their ability
to continue speaking. Though emotions may arise and
overwhelm speakers, if they persevere through the emotion
regardless, the audience will likely sympathize with them and
respect their decision to continue. Audiences are remarkably
empathetic and supportive in such situations.

     Note to Self

     Don't allow yourself to end the speech prematurely
     because your emotions bring you to tears. Be
     prepared for such situations by having a tissue
     handy, just in case, and consider how you will
     respond in such an eventuality in advance.
                                      QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD | 373

QUESTION AND
ANSWER PERIOD

Source: U.S. Department of State, Audience Member Asks a
Question at the U.S.-German Futures Forum Moderated
Discussion in Germany, marked as public domain, more
details on Wikimedia Commons

While first impressions are incredibly important--and it is the
speaker's job to maintain these impressions throughout the
speech via effective delivery methods--it is also vitally
important to maintain a positive final impression as well. This
can be accomplished through effective moderation of a Q&A
374 | QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD

period. As the conclusion wraps up with the final clincher,
prepare for the audience to applaud. Absorb the applause, but
don't rush the audience by interrupting their ovation, however
uncomfortable it may feel to receive public praise.

   As soon as the applause dies down a bit and before leaving
the podium to remove any visual aids setup, announce the
opportunity to field audience questions. As a general rule, try
not to allow the Q&A to run any longer than about 25%
of the total time allotted for the speech. For an hour-long
presentation, allow up to 15 minutes for questions. For a
10-minute speech, allow up to two minutes. After announcing
the Q&A, it becomes a matter of calling on people in the order
they raised their hands. However, with some topics, it may take
the audience a while to think of questions, but show patience.

   If nobody raises a hand, don't take this as an indicator that
the speech performed poorly; it could mean the audience
simply needs a moment to digest the information. Wait for
at least 10 seconds before deciding to end without a single
question.

   When fielding questions, answer fully, yet briefly. This is not
the time to dive headfirst into a whole different speech topic.
Maintain eye contact with the question-asker while he or she
asks the question, but when answering, return to making eye
contact with the entire audience.
                                      QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD | 375

     Note to Self

     Do not make up an answer. If you do not know the
     answer to a question, simply say so, and then offer
     to find out the information for that person. More
     importantly, actually follow up with the answer later
     to increase your credibility with that audience.

Speakers who try to bluff their way through a Q&A run the
risk of having an audience member who knows the correct
answer, in which case, her or his hand will likely immediately
go up to correct the speaker, which will hurt credibility.

   If someone asks a "gotcha question" designed to entrap or
directly points out misinformation from the speech, avoid
getting defensive with that audience member. Instead,
acknowledge the possibility, be humble, and promise to look
further into the matter later. If certain questions end up too
far off-topic, it is perfectly acceptable to decline to answer.
Consider offering to meet with that audience member
afterward to discuss the question.

   As the time comes to a close, end the Q&A session even
if the audience has further questions. Respect the audience's
376 | QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD

time, as well as other speakers. Politely announce the end of the
Q&A and thank the audience for their time and attention.
                                                     CHAPTER 8 SUMMARY | 377

CHAPTER 8 SUMMARY

                               Speakers can memorably

                               connect their message to an

                               audience through careful

                               planning, practice, and

                               strategy regarding how they

                               will deliver that message.

                               Practice and preparation

                               must be undertaken early

                               and often. Start with a

                               minimum of three separate

Agricultural scientist and     practice sessions. The first
inventor George Washington     session tests the amount of
Carver once stated, "There is  time the speech will take to
no shortcut to achievement.    deliver. The second session
Life requires thorough         transfers the information
preparation." Source: Arthur   from the outline to note
Rothstein creator              cards. The third session
QS:P170,Q711226, George        familiarizes the speaker with
Washington Carver-crop,        his or her notes while
marked as public domain,       working on delivery style.
more details on Wikimedia
Commons

Any and all sessions of practice after that help to refine the
378 | CHAPTER 8 SUMMARY

delivery and potentially add many of the advanced tips offered
in this chapter.

   Public speaking and communication in general are learned
skills that require dedication and commitment to refine and
perfect.
 CHAPTER 9: LISTENING SKILLS AND CRITICAL EVALUATION | 379

PART IX

CHAPTER 9:
LISTENING SKILLS
AND CRITICAL
EVALUATION
380 | CHAPTER 9: LISTENING SKILLS AND CRITICAL EVALUATION
                   LISTENING SKILLS AND CRITICAL EVALUATION | 381

LISTENING SKILLS AND
CRITICAL EVALUATION

            "We have two ears and one mouth so
            that we may listen twice as much as we
            speak." --Epictetus Source: Theodoor
            Galle creator QS:P170,Q178329, Epictetus
            from L. Annaei Senecae philosophi
            Opera, 1605, title page detail, marked as
            public domain, more details
            on Wikimedia Commons
382 | LISTENING SKILLS AND CRITICAL EVALUATION

Listening effectively provides a challenging task. It acts as
essentially one-half of the communication process, yet it
remains the more neglected half that fails to get taught or put
into practice. This chapter examines the practice of listening
as a learned skill and demonstrates how critical listening in
the context of public speaking involves complex processes that
people can perfect through practice.
                                                   HEARING VS. LISTENING | 383

HEARING VS. LISTENING

"Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears..." If
Brutus and his fellow conspirators in Shakespeare's Julius
Caesar listened to this message instead of merely hearing it,
they may have acted much differently. Source: George
Edward Robertson b. 1864, Marc Antony's Oration at
Caesar's Funeral by George Edward Robertson, marked as
public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

Ever spend time sitting in an audience, "listening" to a speaker,
only to realize moments later that the speaker's message has
been lost due to a distraction? Most likely yes, because
everyday life seems to offer many ways to distract, especially
384 | HEARING VS. LISTENING

with the rise of digital technological innovations. As a result,
attention spans have become fragile and easy to manipulate.

   This highlights the difference between hearing and
listening. Hearing operates as a passive process. Changes in
air pressure in the form of sound waves enter the ear, pass
through the ear canal, and vibrate the structures within the ear,
creating nerve impulses that get sent to the brain and processed
as sound. People do not need to do anything active for this
process to take place; as long as the ears function and remain
unhindered by barriers such as headphones or earplugs, the
sound will register. That explains the practice of hearing.
Listening, on the other hand, requires individuals to take
hearing a step further and process or interpret the sounds they
hear. Listening requires an active cognitive component that
works with the hearing process.
                                                     PREPARING TO LISTEN | 385

PREPARING TO LISTEN

Source: Pete Souza creator QS:P170,Q2073333, Audience
members listen to the President Obama's speech on India
and America at the Siri Fort Auditorium, marked as public
domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

As mentioned in Chapter 1, humans listen with a set of
preconceptions or filters through which they interpret what
they experience. For example, a fanatical devotee to the world
of science fiction will likely process everything he or she hears
through a science-fiction lens. Likewise, a political junkie will
view various experiences through a politically charged
viewpoint. To truly listen, people must be willing and able to
386 | PREPARING TO LISTEN

set aside these preconceptions, at least initially, so that they can
take in what they are experiencing nonjudgmentally. People
can analyze the message through their personal frame of
reference after they have received the entire message.

   Listening requires people to clear their minds of
distractions, both external and internal. Focusing on a message
can prove challenging when a message competes with a loud
air conditioner in the room, a train passing by outside, or noisy
next-door neighbors, but it is necessary to decipher the
message. Similarly, any internal interference, such as anxiety
about a future exam, a job interview, or a fight with a loved
one, must get set aside for the time being, or else such
distractions will impede listening.

   In addition to setting aside filters and distractions, listeners
should remain aware of nonverbal signals that they send to the
speaker.

     Note to Self

     While you might be tired or have a sore neck, and
     your hand and forearm offer you a handy kickstand
     to rest your head upon, remember how the speaker
     might view your resting pose: "I must be boring the
     audience!" Or, you might feel perfectly comfortable
                                                     PREPARING TO LISTEN | 387

     tying up your arms in a knot to keep them from
     dangling about, but to a nervous speaker, your pose
     may appear defensive. Lastly, if you are nervous
     about an upcoming interview or have an urgent
     appointment after the speech, and you keep
     glancing up at the clock, to the speaker it may
     appear as though you cannot wait for the speech to
     end.

Be aware of how posture, gestures, or facial expressions could
possibly be interpreted by the speaker, and practice behavior
that remains supportive and attentive.

   Recognize that listening is an active process that requires
energy. When people listen, their brains perform work and
burn calories. The harder people listen and the more effort
they expend, the more draining the process can become. This
stands in stark contrast to binge-watching an interesting
program, where the person acts more passively and simply
absorbs the material without contemplation. Critical listening
requires listeners to remain alert, undistracted, attentive, and
focused. External or internal factors may challenge a person's
ability to pay attention, so try to stay aware of these tendencies
and attempt to break these habits through self-awareness and
empathy.
388 | PREPARING TO LISTEN

     Activity

                          One or more interactive elements has
                          been excluded from this version of the
                          text. You can view them online here:
              https://nic.pressbooks.pub/
              messagesthatmatter/?p=443#oembed-1

     Watch Five Ways to Listen Better by author and
     orator Julian Treasure, who postulates that people
     have lost their ability to listen. In a world bombarded
     by sound and visual stimuli, a person's ability to
     listen will continues to dwindle. Treasure suggests
     improving listening skills by sitting in silence for
     three minutes a day and removing all distractions.
     Try this exercise. It may prove challenging due to the
     addictive qualities of cellular phones and social
     media content. These few minutes of silence may
     help to, as Treasure calls it, "recalibrate" the listening
     process to help gain appreciation for the variety of
     sound that permeates the world.
                                    STRATEGIES FOR LISTENING WELL | 389

STRATEGIES FOR
LISTENING WELL

Source: George Serdechny, A lecture at the ITM, marked as
public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

As speaking begins, focus on individual portions of the
message, rather than examining the overall message itself.
Identify main ideas and supporting points. Listen for oral
citations that often begin with the phrase "according to..." and
evaluate the credibility of the statement. Listen analytically
when piecing together all of the components of the speech
individually. Consider paraphrasing the speaker's message
390 | STRATEGIES FOR LISTENING WELL

internally. The average person may speak conversationally at a
rate of about 150 words per minute, but the average listener
possesses the capability to think at the much faster rate of
around 400-500 words per minute. Taking this into
consideration, listeners can use "down time" in between words
and sentences to paraphrase speakers' points into their own
words, adding to their ability to retain and understand them.

   Kinesthetic or tactile
learners find taking notes
during the speech provides a
valuable tool for retaining
information, even if they
never refer back to those
notes again. The physical Source: Photograph
action of writing the notes by difisher via Pixabay
helps the brain register and
record the consumed information. On the other hand, a visual
learner who needs to see the speaker during the presentation
may find taking notes detrimental to their ability to listen.

   One of the hardest things to do while listening involves
resisting distractions. Auditory distractions include a loud fan
or buzzing noise, people talking loudly in the hallway, or
someone sitting nearby with a cold and the sniffles. Visual
distractions may consist of a compelling visual aid left up by
the previous speaker, someone with a visually striking outfit or
item of clothing seated nearby, or a speaker who wears clothing
with a distracting message emblazoned across the front.
                                    STRATEGIES FOR LISTENING WELL | 391

Physical distractions include hunger, leg cramps, a headache,
sinus pressure, or fluctuations in temperature, not to mention
the worst distraction of all: a vibrating cell phone! Lastly,
mental or internal distractions could impair the ability to
listen. To resist these distractions requires self-discipline and
careful preparation before the speech begins. Turn off the
phone. Do not arrive to the speech hungry. Set aside
distracting thoughts. Use the moment to focus on the art of
paying attention on purpose.

   Give each and every speaker the benefit of the doubt.

     Note to Self

     Some speakers may come out with "guns blazing,"
     so to speak, and deliver their message bluntly,
     almost as though they are trying to get a rise out of
     the audience. If you tune out these speakers initially,
     you may not have the wherewithal to notice when
     they take an unexpected turn or twist. Likewise, if a
     speaker takes a while to warm up into the speech
     and you tune out due to boredom, you may miss out
     on incredibly valuable information that the speaker
     simply failed to deliver in a sufficient manner.
392 | STRATEGIES FOR LISTENING WELL

Keep emotions in check. It is highly likely that a speaker will
say something at some point that will evoke a question, and
this could easily lead to temptation to dwell on that question,
allowing it to ruminate, or circle round and round in the mind.
If this happens, consider writing the point or question down
to save it for later. Some speakers skillfully evoke questions
that they end up answering later in the speech. This technique
requires a lot of practice to perform successfully, but effectively
keeps audiences listening closely for the answers.
                                 ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER | 393

ACTING AS A
RESPECTFUL LISTENER

Source: anonymous, Golden rule sign - DPLA -
dc36bf3cafa422023a790c77caebc235, marked as public
domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

The Golden Rule suggests that people treat others how they
would expect others to treat them, and in public speaking, this
rule holds especially true.
394 | ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER

     Note to Self

     Ask yourself, how would you feel if someone leaned
     over and started talking to a neighbor during your
     speech? In such a moment of high anxiety, you
     would likely assume these two people were making
     fun of you, resulting in a pretty serious distraction.
     However, the person could have just as likely leaned
     over to remark on your amazing performance, but
     when individuals experience high levels of self-
     doubt, that is the last thing that runs through our
     minds. Would you want someone texting under the
     table as you talked, or would that come across as
     rude and disrespectful? What if someone yawned or
     fell asleep during your speech? What might that do
     for your self-esteem? How would you feel in this
     situation if the roles were reversed?
                                 ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER | 395

Electronic Distraction

Source: Photograph by terimakasih0 via Pixabay

During speeches, avoid phone, tablet, or laptop use, unless
previously arranged with the speaker in advance due to a
special and documented accommodation need. With
electronic devices, it is almost impossible not to check email,
the internet, or social media. Studies indicate that this kind
of multitasking impairs learning (Murphy Paul, 2013); once
people engage with electronic devices, they no longer pay
attention to what happens in the room.

   Shouldn't audience members have the choice about
whether they want to use their time engaging actively with the
material at hand, or whether they would prefer to multitask?
After all, they think they are not bothering anyone as they
396 | ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER

quietly read email or check social media platforms. This
assumption has flaws. First, such activity damages the learning
environment for others, even when conducted in silence. A
study (Sana, Weston, & Cepeda, 2013) found that, not only
did the multitasking student in a classroom do worse on a post-
class test on the material, so did the peers who could see the
computer. In other words, the off-task laptop use distracted
not only the laptop user, but also the group of students
surrounding the laptop user.

   In addition, the speaker can find multitasking on a laptop a
bit distracting because sometimes the audience member does
not type at the most opportune times. Typing suggests the
"listener" has more important things to do than engaging with
the topic and listening to the speaker. That thought alone
serves to distract the speaker's attention.

   Also consider the speaking environment. When working on
a laptop, the speaker's attention gets drawn to the back of the
computer screen, rather than sustaining eye contact with the
user. Learning in communication happens best when everyone
actively engages with one another in the exchange of
information. This can mean looking up from taking notes
to listen, which means making strategic decisions about what
to write down. Note taking should support the learning and
retention of material; note taking itself does not qualify as
learning.

   A 2014 study (Mueller & Oppenheimer, 2014) that got a
lot of attention in mainstream press suggests that taking notes
                                 ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER | 397

by hand rather than typing them on a laptop improves
comprehension of the material. While students taking notes
on a laptop (and only taking notes--they were not allowed to
multitask) wrote down more of the material covered in class,
they often typed what the instructor said verbatim, which
seems to have led to them process the material less. Meanwhile,
the students taking notes by hand had to synthesize and
condense as they wrote because they could not get everything
down. As a result, they learned and retained the material
better. Handwritten pages also permit the opportunity to
easily create visual connections through the use of arrows,
flowcharts, etc.

   In public speaking scenarios, it's best to break addictive
patterns with regard to email, texting, social media, and
internet usage. It may seem a bit silly to find it difficult to
go for an hour without checking a phone or other electronic
devices, but it happens quite often. Modern life offers many
distractions, and though checking devices may have become a
force of habit, people can use the opportunity as a listener to
create or reinforce a habit of not checking them as well.
398 | ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER

Provide Encouragement

Source: Elizabeth Warren, New Years Eve Speech Boston,
MA - 49649420251, CC BY 2.0

One of the best ways to support a speaker is to provide solid
nonverbal encouragement while staying mindful of the
nonverbal messages sent. First, start with eye contact. Full,
consistent, and prolonged eye contact tells speakers they have
garnered attention. Also, sit up straight or lean forward, as this
posture also suggests a higher sense of immediacy or intention
to become involved in the communication taking place. If the
speaker mentions something agreeable, smile in approval and
show support with a head nod, though do not make it appear
fake or forced.

   Speakers, like many other performers (singers, athletes,
                                ACTING AS A RESPECTFUL LISTENER | 399

dancers, etc.) derive their energy from supportive crowds.
When crowds lack energy, it tends to deflate the impact of
the message. The more encouragement the audience provides
to the speaker, the more confident the presenter becomes. In
return, as the speaker's performance improves with the
audience's encouragement, their return on investment grows
larger as well, since they witness a much higher caliber of
speech.
400 | PEER EVALUATIONS

PEER EVALUATIONS

Source: Photograph by annazuc via Pixabay

Learning to evaluate a speaker is a valuable skill to have and
should be practiced even beyond a public speaking class.
Evaluation employs the skills involved with critical thinking to
listen to, dissect, analyze, and critique a message. This provides
an opportunity to commend what worked well in the speech,
as well as list areas of improvement for future speeches.

   Essentially, a peer evaluation serves as a formal critique based
on a set of pre-established criteria used to evaluate the speaker.
To complete this task requires practice of all that has been laid
                                                         PEER EVALUATIONS | 401

out within this chapter, including setting aside all distractions,
focusing on individual portions of the speech objectively, and
maintaining a laser-sharp focus.

   Good evaluators act like good coaches, and a good coach
encourages good behaviors. In a quest for excellence, good
coaches also point out areas that need improvement. When
good coaches can express their opinions accurately with good
interpersonal skills, the participants can excel and feel good
about that important teaching moment. Encourage good
behaviors, and help the speaker become even better in the
future.

     Note to Self

     Here are some points to keep in mind:

         1. Be prepared to evaluate. Bring peer
             evaluation forms (if required) to class on
             speech days. These forms offer invaluable
             guidance to help evaluate the various
             components of the basic speech
             organizational pattern.

         2. Learn how to evaluate correctly early on
402 | PEER EVALUATIONS

             in the semester. During speeches, your
             evaluations will count toward your grade.
             Bottom line: learning how to do a proper peer
             evaluation will not only help your grade, but
             will also help you become a better speaker!
         3. Know the "criteria" for evaluating
             speeches. The criteria are the standards by
             which you will judge the speech. Look over
             the assignment objectives and the
             appropriate evaluation forms for criteria.
         4. Write while the speaker presents the
             material. This may seem rude at first,
             especially if you are not accustomed to note
             taking. It may seem difficult initially, but you
             will soon feel that it comes naturally as you
             learn to listen for and provide constructive
             feedback. Most students don't take long to
             become efficient and effective at completing
             evaluations.
         5. Read over and study the samples at the
             end of this chapter. These were taken from
             actual student evaluations. Use them as a
             model for your own evaluations.
         6. Use the "3-2-1" method of evaluation:
                                    PEER EVALUATIONS | 403

1. Begin by listing three positive
    aspects of the speech, or three things
    you think the speaker did very well. Be
    sure to support these with specific
    examples. Do not just say, "Good
    speech," or "I really liked it." Take it
    further and articulate not only which
    details you found effective, but why.

2. Follow this up by discussing two areas
    that need improvement. What could
    the speaker have done better? List and
    then support your assertions with clear
    and specific details. How might the
    speaker improve upon these areas or
    learn from them for the next speech?
    For example, if you found the speaker's
    opening statement rather lackluster,
    provide a suggestion or strategy for
    how to improve it, such as, "In future
    speeches consider opening with
    something such as a quote or
    staggering statistic for improved
    impact." This last component is
    essential to growth; the speaker must
    not only know what needs
404 | PEER EVALUATIONS

                      improvement but also how to improve
                      it.
                 3. Lastly, include your overall
                      impression. If this was an informative
                      speech, how well informed did you feel
                      afterward? How unique and innovative
                      was the speaker's treatment of the
                      topic? How well did the speaker relate
                      the topic to you as an audience
                      member? Again, support this
                      impression with details from the speech
                      itself.

Above all, remember that the peer evaluation process helps
others learn from their experiences to become better
communicators, so all feedback provided during this process
should pursue that purpose. Positive feedback should
encourage speakers to capitalize on those strengths.
Constructive criticism should not break a speaker down, but
instead, point to areas where further development and
refinement are required to communicate more effectively.
                                                     CHAPTER 9 SUMMARY | 405

CHAPTER 9 SUMMARY

Source: Rashid Aghamaliyev, Animafilm's audience 2019, CC
BY-SA 4.0

Listening is an active process that requires preparation, effort,
and commitment--the same skills required for effective public
speaking. Listening is vastly different than the passive process
of hearing, so take steps to resist or eliminate common
distractions and set aside any personal bias. This alone takes
practice to develop, refine, and eventually perfect, but through
a process of trial and error, this increase in self-awareness leads
to becoming a sharp, focused listener.
406 | CHAPTER 9 SUMMARY

   Also, remember the Golden Rule. Avoid disrespectful
behaviors such as side-talking, cell phone interactions, or
falling asleep. Also avoid behaviors that could possibly derail
the speaker, such as an unintentional nonverbal signals like
folded arms. Be mindful of how a nervous speaker might
interpret such nonverbal signals, so focus on activities that
support them instead.

   Lastly, the process of conducting critical speech evaluations
provides listeners with a skill that's useful in many other
situations throughout life. Learning to recognize the strengths
and weaknesses of a speaker can motivate the evaluator to
apply the same concepts to their future speeches.
                      COMPLETING IN-CLASS PEER EVALUATIONS | 407

COMPLETING IN-CLASS
PEER EVALUATIONS

Source: Tulane Public Relations, Student in Class
(3618969705), CC BY 2.0

At a minimum, write five comments: three positive
comments and two areas for improvement. Address only one
criterion per comment.

   Use a "+" or "-" sign in front of each comment to help
      identify them easily. Address one criterion per
      statement.
408 | COMPLETING IN-CLASS PEER EVALUATIONS

   Start with a positive comment. Always begin by
      commenting on a strength.

   Use "you," not "he" or "she."
          What is good? Describe using specific examples.
          Why is the behavior positive? Explain.

   After stressing good aspects of a speech to ensure the
      person will continue to do what works well, point out
      two weaknesses/areas of improvement so the person can
      improve. While pointing out areas of weakness of a
      speech can help the speaker improve in the future,
      accompany each comment with a constructive
      alternative. Be sure to word each comment
      demonstrating interpersonal skills.
          What was not so good? Describe the behavior using
            specific examples.
          Why was the behavior considered an area of needed
            improvement?
          How can the speaker improve that behavior? Give a
            helpful coaching suggestion.

   Be specific. Study the differences between the two
      samples provided at the end of this chapter when it
      comes to specificity. What critique provides more
      valuable insight? What makes a comment effective or not
      effective?
  SAMPLE 1: GOOD PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM | 409

SAMPLE 1: GOOD PEER
EVALUATION - SPEECH
TO INFORM
410 | SAMPLE 1: GOOD PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM

Speaker: Zeke              COMMENTS

Evaluator: Zelda           + When you previewed your main
   CRITERIA TO             points, I liked how you repeated the
                           phrase, "Alternative schools are..." and
CONSIDER:                  then added the point. That is what the
   Introduction            text talks about to keep your audience
                           focused. Good job!
   Gain attention
   Give audience             + Your visual aids were well done and
                           followed the guidelines outlined in the
      incentive to listen  book. They added to your speech rather
   Establish              than becoming a speech by themselves.

      credibility             - You use the phrase "and stuff"
   Introduce subject;     like some use the filler "uh." Such fillers
                           become noise interference. You may
      central idea         begin to eliminate that by just
   Preview main           becoming aware of it.

      points                  - I don't believe you had a real
   Transition to          attention getter. In fact, I think you
                           began with a purpose statement,
      body                 "Today I'm going to talk about..." The
                           text says avoid such starts! Starting with
Body                       the purpose statement doesn't really
                           pull me into your speech. You've had so
   Clear,                 many experiences with troubled kids,
      well-developed       you could have started with a
      organization         story--one that connects with us.

   Sufficient support        + I really liked the way you followed
      material             the speech recipe. When I listened to
                           you, I could follow you easily, especially
   Related topic to       when you made your transitions clear.
      audience             You made me think you really wanted
                           us to understand your message.
   Oral footnotes
   Transitions               After listening to this speech, the
                           degree to which I feel informed (1
      between main         represents "Not at all," 3 "Somewhat,"
      points               and 5 "Very"):

Conclusion                    1 2 3 4 5
                              What was the central idea of this
   Signal the end
   Recap main

      points
SAMPLE 1: GOOD PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM | 411

 Clincher

Delivery

 Eye Contact:        speech? I'm not 100% sure, but I think
   Looked at          the C.I. was "Alternative schools have
   everyone in        several unique benefits over traditional
   audience and held  schools."
   eye contact

 Notes: Used to
   jog memory; did
   not read from
   notes

 Vocal/Verbal:
   Volume, rate,
   fluency

 Appearance:
   Appropriate
   attire, posture
412 | SAMPLE 2: POOR PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM

SAMPLE 2: POOR PEER
EVALUATION - SPEECH
TO INFORM

Speaker: Hilda
   Evaluator: Jake
   CRITERIA TO CONSIDER:
   Introduction

   Gain attention - Was OK but could have been better
   Give audience incentive to listen
   Establish credibility - yes
   Introduce subject; central idea - yes
   Preview main points
   Transition to body

Body

   Clear, well-developed organization - OK-I followed it
      pretty good

   Sufficient support material
   Related topic to audience - OK
   Oral footnotes - Kind of awkward
   SAMPLE 2: POOR PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM | 413

   Transitions between main points

Conclusion

   Signal the end - ? Needs work!
   Recap main points - Not sure
   Clincher - OK

Delivery - good

   Eye Contact: Looked at everyone in audience and held
      eye contact

   Notes: Used to jog memory; did not read from notes
   Vocal/Verbal: Volume, rate, fluency
   Appearance: Appropriate attire, posture

COMMENTS

After listening to this speech, the degree to which I feel
informed (1 represents "Not at all," 3 "Somewhat," and 5
"Very"): 1 2 3 4 5

   What was the central idea of this speech? Alternative
schools
414 | SAMPLE 2: POOR PEER EVALUATION - SPEECH TO INFORM
              CHAPTER 10: DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL
                                                                                AIDS | 415

PART X

CHAPTER 10:
DESIGNING AND
USING EFFECTIVE
VISUAL AIDS
416 | CHAPTER 10: DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL
AIDS
                 DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL AIDS | 417

DESIGNING AND USING
EFFECTIVE VISUAL AIDS

"Create your own visual style...Let it be unique for yourself
and yet identifiable for others." --Orson Welles Source:
Stage Publishing Company, Inc., no photographer
credited, Too-Much-Johnson-Welles-5, marked as public
domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

Even the most well-written and carefully crafted speech has
the potential to tax an audience's collective attention span.
In this media-rich society, images tell stories and help people
retain information more effectively than mere words alone.
In creative writing, an old saying--Show, don't
418 | DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL AIDS

tell--demonstrates the importance in engaging an audience
to help them see whatever point the author wishes to convey.
Visual aids serve this critical purpose in public speaking.

   First, ruminate on the components of the term, visual aid:

   Visual: Of, or pertaining to, the sense of sight
   Aid: To help, add support, or give relief

Combining these two terms together suggests that the primary
purpose of such a presentation tool is to give visual support to
a speaker. All too often, novice or unprepared speakers treat
visual aids as though they were the speech itself.

     Note to Self

     Think back to a time when you witnessed
     "PowerPoint karaoke"--when a speaker lost your
     interest because he or she turned away from the
     audience and, instead, read everything off the
     screen to you.

Not only does this tend to challenge audience's attention
spans, but in the worst cases, it can insult their intelligence.
When this happens, the visual aids overtake the speaker as the
                 DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL AIDS | 419

central focus in the room, meaning that they no longer provide
aid, help, support, or relief, but have become the speech itself.
Speakers should strive to create engaging visual aids that will
hold the audience's attention and add tremendous value to
the main idea behind the message. Keep this in mind when
designing visual elements for a speech.

   A well-designed set of visual aids offers many advantages
over mere words alone. Visual aids enhance:

   Clarity: Think about how difficult it would be to
      explain how to tie a shoe without a visual aid!

   Interest: It would be one thing to discuss the after-
      effects of an oil spill, but another entirely to show images
      of catastrophic environmental damage.

   Credibility: Well-designed visual aids dramatically
      increase how audiences perceive the credibility (or
      believability) of a speaker; unfortunately, the inverse
      equally applies when speakers design poor visual aids, as
      an audience may perceive the speaker as having far less
      credibility in that case.

   Information retention: Audiences presented with
      visual representations of information recited orally are
      considerably more likely to remember that information.

   Brevity: Using visual aids can cut down on the amount
      of time required to explain difficult concepts.

   Appeal to a broader array of learning styles:
      Different people learn in different ways. Some people
420 | DESIGNING AND USING EFFECTIVE VISUAL AIDS

      prefer to learn visually, some through sound, and others
      through their sense of touch. Using visual aids when
      speaking provides an added dimension for the audience
      by providing elements that will enhance their ability to
      retain the information presented.
                                                     TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 421

TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

Source: Victuallers, Children's Hearing presentation at
Rotary meeting in Scotland 2021, CC BY-SA 4.0

Before designing visual aids for a speech, do not forget about
the importance of thinking about the best type of medium to
use to communicate the message. Some media may work better
than others, depending upon the subject matter or desired
effect of the speech. Ultimately, visual aids can be divided into
two major types: active and passive visual aids. Speakers use
and interact with an active visual aid throughout the
422 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

presentation of information. For instance, when someone
discusses how a car's engine works while utilizing the actual
engine as a visual aid. A passive visual aid, for the most part,
remains in the background during the presentation, but its
presence in the room still adds value to the information, such
as an image of a person being displayed on a screen while the
speaker talks about that person.

   Generally, speakers want to utilize more active visuals than
passive, but the ratio of active to passive visuals will depend
upon the topic of discussion.
                                                     TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 423

Poster Boards, Flip Charts, and
Tri-Folds

Poster boards have their

time, place, and purpose,

but when attempting to

establish credibility, speakers

need to think critically

about the impressions each

visual aid imparts on the

audience.

A poster board made at

home with markers and cut-

outs from a magazine simply

will not do the job; a           Though the speaker obviously
                                 put a lot of effort into creating
professionally  printed          this visual aid, do you think an
                                 audience would find it useful
poster has a more likely         during a public speaking
                                 engagement? Source:
chance of creating a positive    Ncharamut, UNC QEP Expo
                                 Presentation, CC BY-SA 4.0
impression.     However,

creating such posters are

fairly expensive in

comparison with other visual options, so use a poster board or

tri-fold as a last resort or when no other option will suffice. For

example, a poster would likely work well at a convention or

trade show, which would allow passers-by to stop and review

information for themselves, up close, at their leisure. They

could also work in a smaller meeting with limited access to
424 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

electronic media. Everyone in the meeting could easily view the
poster, but for larger audiences and rooms, however, posters
simply will not work.

Static Displays

                          A static display offers a

                          visual accompaniment to

                          the presented information,

                          and serves mostly as a passive

                          visual aid. For example,

                          while delivering a

Source: Photograph        biographical speech on a
by JulieMc44 via Pixabay  well-known author, a

                          speaker could set up a static

display of some of her or his most popular books on a table

near the center of the room. This adds value to the

presentation because it adds listener interest and reinforces the

speech's subject matter.
      TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 425

Maps

Source: Stefan Mller (climate stuff) from Germany, Melissa
Ingaruca Moreno climate researcher, currently guest at TU
Berlin (50213127296), CC BY 2.0

When discussing a location that may be unfamiliar to
members of the audience, consider using a map to show the
location. For example, if a speaker discussed how to take a
family road trip with an audience, he or she could use a map as
an active visual aid to explain the process of designing a route,
which would effectively reinforce the topic's main point.
Speakers can use maps for anything from explaining historical
trade routes to how to navigate to a scenic hiking path. When
incorporating a map, be sure to avoid overcomplicating the
visual. This keeps listeners from straining to read captions.
426 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

Graphs/Charts

Graphs and charts

present a highly effective

method for showing an

audience how statistics and

figures affect them

personally. As with maps,

remember to keep them

simple and clear, allowing

the listeners to digest all the

information at once.             Sample Pie Chart Source:
   A pie chart uses regions      Aflafla1, Maine Electricity
                                 Generation Sources Pie
of a circle to show how the      Chart, CC0 1.0

proportion of each

component represents the whole. Use this type of graph to

show how elements relate to one another, giving the audience

an idea of size and relationship.

A line graph is a useful type of visual aid to show trends

over time. An effective line graph must have a clearly labeled

x- and y-axis, along with data labels showing how the numbers

change over time.
                                                     TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 427

Sample Line Graph Source: CoffeeWithMarkets, U.S.
Households By Total Yearly Income (Line Graph), CC0 1.0

A bar graph effectively demonstrates quantity relationships
between items (as with pie charts) and and how things can
change over time (as with a line graph). Bar graphs present a
method for potentially detailing a large and complex amount
of information using a single image.
428 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

Sample Bar Graph Source: RCraig09, 20210827 Global
surface temperature bar chart - bars color-coded by El Nio
and La Nia intensity, CC BY-SA 4.0

Physical Objects

An object, whether large or small, can bring an element of
presence to the visual presentation of information. It is one
thing to present a picture of the topic of discussion on a two-
dimensional screen, but it is another to allow the audience to
physically see the object in question.

   For example, in a speech on breast cancer and early
detection, a student utilized a set of marbles of varying sizes
to show the audience the scale of real-life tumor sizes when
discussing breast cancer detection. The student walked the
                                                     TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 429

samples around the room as she talked, allowing listeners to see
what she discussed, before returning to the front of the room,
where she displayed the very same marbles using a picture on
the screen. Had this student only used the visual on the screen,
the audience may have had difficulty formulating a sense of
proportion when discussing the size of the items in question.
Since size represented the most important characteristic of the
visual aid, this student thought critically about how best to
present it.

   Avoid passing around physical objects during the speech
unless absolutely necessary. When most listeners receive an
object, their attention span is broken momentarily, causing
them to miss out on potentially important information in the
speech. Instead, as in the example above, presenters could walk
around with the object, still allowing everyone the
opportunity to see it, but maintain focus on the speaker.

Video/Audio                          Helpful Hint

If one believes the old saying, "A     When using
picture is worth 1,000 words,"         video or audio
then a brief video clip can be         clips, try to
worth 100,000 words! For
example, if delivering a speech
about the importance of
supporting a specific charity, look
into the charity to determine if
430 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

keep the clip               they have a brief promotional
length to less              video or commercial to
than 10% of the             supplement the main talking
total amount of             points within the presentation.
time for the
speech. For a                  When using a clip, preface it
10-minute                   with some sort of introduction,
speech, keep                pointing the audience in the right
the total time              direction and priming them to
of clip(s) to one           watch for or listen for specific
minute or less.             information. Also, avoid talking
For an hour,                over the sound in a clip, as
keep them to                competing for the audience's
less than 10                attention during such a viewing
minutes total.              could prove difficult at best.

                            Handouts or
                            Leave-Behinds

                                A handout is something, usually
printed material, given to audience members to remind them
of what they learned during the presentation. Sometimes,
these are called "leave-behinds." For example, in a speech on
the science behind chocolate chip cookies, the speaker might
want to hand out a copy of a favorite recipe. If speaking on
donating blood, a handout might include a summary of the
steps involved and where audience members can go to donate
blood. Regardless of the leave-behind, be sure that, as with
                                                     TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS | 431

physical objects, that they do not get passed out during the
speech, as they can create an unneeded distraction.

Yourself

                          When can the speaker

                          become the visual aid?

                          Consider a speech on

                          firefighting. Such a student

                          could show up in full

                          protective gear, and

Source: Photograph        although it would likely feel
by Kollinger via Pixabay  pretty hot for that student

                          to deliver the full speech in

uniform, it would provide for a powerful visual aid. Similarly,

a student doing a speech on yoga may choose to demonstrate

certain poses and may want to dress appropriately to do so.

Note to Self

In addition to yourself, there may be times when
you need a volunteer's help, such as in
demonstrations of martial arts techniques or, as one
432 | TYPES OF VISUAL AIDS

     student courageously attempted, a blood draw to
     demonstrate phlebotomy. Be cautious in using other
     people (or animals) as they could become
     problematic or unpredictable. Always have a backup
     plan, just in case, and be sure to prearrange any
     volunteer activities to ensure smooth operation and
     use as little time used as possible.
                                                        POWERPOINT/PREZI | 433

POWERPOINT/PREZI

Source: Mozel W., Snjezana Kordic keynote presentation
Hokkaido University, CC BY-SA 4.0

Presentation software, such as PowerPoint or Prezi, allows
relative newcomers to design to create powerful and engaging
visual aids of all types. Tools such as Prezi often offer free
access for educational purposes and can offer a fresh, unique
take on the classic presentation slides. However, it can come
with a much steeper learning curve, though they offer pre-
made templates available for use. Other free open-source
presentation software options include Google Slides and
LibreOffice. Many of these offer simplified design templates
and provide video tutorials on getting started.
434 | POWERPOINT/PREZI

PowerPoint/Prezi Tips

Regardless of the software used, make all elements on a slide
large enough to be seen by anyone in the room, also referred
to as "aiming for back-row comprehension." Make the font
choices easy and large enough to read without making the
audience squint. In general, choose fonts for screen projection
that do not have serifs, such as Arial, Verdana, or Tahoma.
Exotic fonts or word art can be used to accent the presentation,
but don't overdo it. Other tips include:

   Make it simple. Too many novice speakers try to do too
      much with their visual aids when something simple
      would have done the job just as well. Do more with less.

   Make it clear. Try not to assume the audience will "get"
      the point of the speech. Make sure to fill in the blanks
      with missing information and leave nothing open to
      random interpretations.

   Make it consistent. Avoid changing up the slide design,
      background, animations, or font styles halfway through
      the speech.

   Think critically about the chosen colors. A bright
      white background with plain black text may look simple,
      but for listeners up front, it may strain their eyes.
      Similarly, a black background with red text without
      sufficient contrast could be difficult to see.

   Use images wherever possible, instead of text. A
                                                    POWERPOINT/PREZI | 435

   picture is worth 1,000 bulleted points!
 Do not use images for decoration. All images chosen

   should support the information presented in the speech,
   whether they do so actively or passively.
 Avoid using disturbing or offensive photos. They
   might evoke a strong emotional reaction from the
   audience. If it is necessary to use graphic images, first,
   warn the audience before showing them. This helps
   them overcome the shock factor and pay attention
   instead to the message. Second, do not display them for
   any longer than necessary to make the desired impact.
   Once speakers gross someone out or overly shock them,
   they have lost their attention for the remainder of the
   speech. There is a fine line between shock value and
   shock overload.

  Note to Self

  Ask someone to look over your images to give you
  an outsider's perspective and help determine
  whether a photo adds value to your speech or
  whether it becomes a distraction.
436 | POWERPOINT/PREZI

Source: Valerio Bozzolan, Maja Massarini presenting Packit
and project integration in Fedora 005 - Linux Day 2022 in
Milano, CC0 1.0

   Keep to a single message per slide. Make sure that the
      slide matches the topic of discussion.

   Use the 5  7 rule (or 5  5 or 6  6, depending
      upon the specific professor's advice) rule: Avoid
      having excessive lines of text on each slide (5-6 lines
      total. This general rule helps prevent slides from
      becoming too wordy.

   Use black slides in between points as filler slides.
      This can help prevent the blinding light from the
      projector.

   Don't allow the slides to take the place of the
                                                    POWERPOINT/PREZI | 437

   speaker. If the audience becomes too focused on the
   visual aids and the speaker fades into the background,
   then the visuals have no longer provided aid but have
   stolen the spotlight.
 Use only high-resolution images. To avoid pixilation,
   fill the space on each slide with the image.
 Do not talk to the screen. There is a natural human
   tendency for people to look in the same direction as
   others in their vicinity, so when the audience looks up at
   the screen, resist the urge to turn toward the screen as
   well. However, maintain eye contact with the audience
   while explaining the visual, or at least as much as
   possible.

  Note to Self

  If you must look, try not to turn your whole body
  away from the audience and look only briefly, for
  about 1-2 seconds. Helpful tip: Plant your foot that is
  closest to your visual aid solidly. When you look
  back at your visual, leave your foot planted, and you
  will naturally spring back toward the audience.
438 | POWERPOINT/PREZI

   Use progressive revelation. When using multiple lines
      of text on a slide, reveal only one point at a time. By
      doing so, only one subpoint get revealed at a time,
      helping to build suspense and maintain attention.
                                 WHEN/WHERE TO USE VISUAL AIDS | 439

WHEN/WHERE TO USE
VISUAL AIDS

Source: Farajiibrahim, Runion Wikimedia Maroc ph1 -
Stratgie 2030, CC BY-SA 4.0

Try using visual aids at key, critical, or confusing points in
the message. Consider using a powerful visual aid when
attempting to gain attention in the beginning of the speech. In
addition, using visual aids during transitions can prove quite
effective. Think of these visual aids as mini attention getters
to keep the audience engaged with the material. Visual aids
can also be used to clarify difficult, complex, or potentially
confusing information, as well as to reinforce main ideas.

   Be mindful of how well the audience can see the visual aids.
440 | WHEN/WHERE TO USE VISUAL AIDS

It may become necessary to move furniture or objects around
to ensure every audience member can easily view the visual
information.
                                                           PLAN EVERYTHING | 441

PLAN EVERYTHING

Source: sanjorgepinho, WikiCon Portugal 2020 - 04, CC
BY-SA 4.0

Even the greatest speakers make mistakes, but the hallmark of
a great speaker rests in how well he or she adapts when such
mistakes occur. For example, if the battery to a presentation
remote fails mid-speech, a great speaker has already thought
of the "what ifs" and adapts accordingly, walking calmly over
to the computer keyboard and using the space bar to advance
the slides instead, without skipping a beat. Or, in the worst-
case scenario, perhaps a projector light bulb burns out and a
speaker has only brought a PowerPoint presentation. A great
speaker will have a backup plan in place, having brought
printed copies of the slides to hand out in such a situation.
442 | PLAN EVERYTHING

While handouts might not seem ideal and break the rule of
handing things out during the speech, they offer a better
alternative than having no visuals at all. Additionally, as the
audience sees this level of preparation and foresight, it
automatically increases the perceived level of credibility.

   Test all technology before the presentation. Often, what
works on a personal computer at home may not work on the
computer available at the presentation venue. Differences in
operating systems such as Mac vs. Windows, versions of
presentation software, or even different browsers (Firefox vs.
Chrome vs. Safari) can cause drastic differences in the way a
presentation appears (or even whether or not it will function).
Not only should speakers test everything before speaking, but
they should also preset the system volume, ensure all links to
outside media work, and have a backup plan ready in case of a
system failure.
                                                    CHAPTER 10 SUMMARY | 443

CHAPTER 10 SUMMARY

                                Remember that a visual

                                aid's primary purpose is to

                                assist the speaker in

                                delivering the core meaning

                                of a message. They should

                                supplement the message,

                                working with the speaker

                                rather than against them.

Source: Jaccris, EllieSeal, CC  Too many speakers try to
BY-SA 4.0                       make visual aids (especially

                                PowerPoint) overly complex

in an attempt to wow their audiences, but end up missing the

mark because audiences often become overwhelmed by flashy

visual aids. Start with a well-written speech and design visual

aids around the core of the message, focusing all efforts on

designing visuals that will clarify the message, add credibility to

the presentation, and provide the audience with a memorable

visual experience. Above all, when inserting a visual aid, ask if

the presentation benefits from its inclusion. Will it help

further the specific purpose and reinforce the central idea? If

the answer is no, throw it out. Do more with less.
444 | ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

ADDITIONAL
RESOURCES

   Dribbble--https://dribbble.com/
   Prezi--http://www.prezi.com
   Six Minutes Blog--http://sixminutes.dlugan.com/

      contrast-repetition-alignment-proximity
                    PART III - CHAPTER 11: PERSUASION THEORIES | 445

PART XI

PART III - CHAPTER
11: PERSUASION
THEORIES

Source: Creator:James Pan, Jill Biden visits Argentina, June
2016 04, marked as public domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

Chapters 11 and 12 outline how to prepare for speeches to
persuade.
446 | PART III - CHAPTER 11: PERSUASION THEORIES
                                                    PERSUASION THEORIES | 447

PERSUASION THEORIES

"They may forget what you said, but they will never forget
how you made them feel." --Maya Angelou Source:
Clinton Library, Angelou at Clinton inauguration, marked as
public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

The first two parts of this book have covered strategies and
techniques for preparing to speak informatively to audiences.
The final portion focuses on speaking to persuade. Whereas
an informational speech seeks to impart new, unique, and
innovative messages to an audience, persuasive speaking takes
it a step further by attempting to influence audience members'
ways of thinking or motivate them to action. In this respect,
448 | PERSUASION THEORIES

the art of persuasion requires careful planning and strategic
composition, as well as delivery, to succeed. This chapter will
explain why some strategies work and why others fail, as well
as cover tips for refining an audience analysis to work more
efficiently for a persuasive presentation.

   People use persuasion to influence another person's values,
beliefs, attitudes, or behaviors. When thinking about
persuasion, note the difference between influence and power.

     Note to Self

     A professor may threaten to fail you if you do not
     complete an important assignment, but if you
     choose not to do it anyway, then, despite the
     professor's attempt to exercise power, he or she has
     not necessarily persuaded you to complete the
     assignment. Influence often remains divorced from
     power. Unlike direct measures, influence can come
     across as subtle, often so subtle as to barely get
     noticed. The same professor could choose not to
     employ power tactics to convince you to complete
     the paper, but instead, share with you the benefits
     of the paper on your education, as well as the
     consequences tied to not completing the
                                                    PERSUASION THEORIES | 449

     assignment, leaving the decision to you. In that case,
     the information may compel you enough to
     influence your decision to act in the way the
     professor wanted you to act.

Persuading others is truly an art form, which, when wielded
properly and ethically, wields a unique power of its own--the
power of communication that can change the world, even if it
only changes it one person at a time.
450 | SPECIFIC PURPOSE AND PERSUASION

SPECIFIC PURPOSE AND
PERSUASION

Before diving too deeply into persuasion theory (which is
regularly offered as a full semester-long college course in
communication studies), this chapter will examine the
different types of specific purposes available to choose from
within the domain of persuasion.

   Speech to influence belief or attitude: In this type of
speech, the speaker attempts to win over audience members to
adopt a thought, attitude, or belief.
                                SPECIFIC PURPOSE AND PERSUASION | 451

If a speaker felt passionately about climate change, she could
present facts, figures, and examples, before working toward
a conclusion attempting to persuade the audience that
climate change poses a serious problem. Keep in mind that
changing deeply held beliefs provides an extremely difficult
challenge in any situation, let alone a 10-minute speech.
Source: fabola, Youth Climate Strike- North Bay -
46482421715, CC BY-SA 2.0

Speech to influence behavior: This type of speech uses the
elements of persuasive speaking to inspire the audience to
participate in some action as a result. Using the prior example,
if the speaker wanted to convince the audience that, not only is
climate change a real phenomenon, but that they should begin
carpooling to help curb carbon emissions, then the speaker has
spoken to influence behavior. This type of speech sometimes
gets referred to as a speech to motivate to action.

   Regardless of the speech's specific purpose, get to know the
452 | SPECIFIC PURPOSE AND PERSUASION

audience before preparing a persuasive presentation. Failure to
gather knowledge about the audience diminishes the speech's
chances to successfully persuade. With persuasion, learning
information about the audience become even more critically
important, for an audience will not change their minds, take
action, or become inspired if the speaker knows nothing about
their existing attitudes, opinions, values, or beliefs. Start with
an audience analysis, but this time, focus on gathering
attitudes, opinions, values, and beliefs with respect to the
chosen topic. Use this information to formulate a strategy for
the speech.

     Note to Self

     For example, if you have an audience that strongly
     opposes the information you want to present to
     them, then you know you need to prepare for an
     uphill battle, so try considering the most realistic
     strategy possible.
                                                    PERSUASIVE STRATEGY | 453

PERSUASIVE STRATEGY

The following example below showcases a semantic
differential scale, which might not look like much, but serves
as a useful tool for a persuasive speaker:

   The numbers represent levels of agreement, with strongly
disagree (-3) at one end, neutral (0) in the middle, and
strongly agree (+3) at the opposite end. When designing
audience analysis questions, use something similar to this to
determine what attitude the audience currently holds
regarding the topic. An example question may look like this:

       Climate change is a scientific certainty (circle
       one):
       Strongly Disagree (-3) Disagree (-2)
454 | PERSUASIVE STRATEGY

        Somewhat Disagree (-1) Neutral (0)
       Somewhat Agree (+1) Agree (+2) Strongly
       Agree (+3)

After collecting the completed audience surveys, simply add
up the total responses for each segment along the scale. Then,
divide each result by the total participants in the survey to
find out the percentages for each one. From there, use this
information to determine the best strategy to present the
message.

Strongly Opposed (-3)

For an audience that (unfortunately) registers toward the
strongly opposed side of the semantic differential scale, try to
create uncertainty in their minds. At this point, accept that, no
matter how effectively the message gets delivered, the audience
may be too firmly entrenched in their beliefs to convince them
to act upon something related to the topic. Think realistically
and only attempt to create an element of uncertainty. Plant a
seed for the future that may one day grow into a full-fledged
idea. Provide the audience with information that will sway
them to adopt the viewpoint.
                                                    PERSUASIVE STRATEGY | 455

"I know you haven't given me an allowance before, and I
know I haven't done much to earn one, but that could all
change. I'm not opposed to working to earn an allowance, so
maybe this is something we could discuss." Source:
Photograph by blueMix via Pixabay

Moderately Opposed (-2)

For audiences not entirely opposed to the idea, first seek to
create uncertainty in their opposition, as above, but then
follow that up with attempts to reduce resistance to the
proposed topic. Spend energy on refuting objections.
456 | PERSUASIVE STRATEGY

"Perhaps you think I am not responsible enough to complete
my chores, but I've already made my bed and fed the dog.
Or, maybe you don't think you have enough money to pay
me allowance; however, you will actually save money. I
know I'm not going to convince you to give me an allowance
of $20 a week right now, but perhaps you could consider
meeting me in the middle at $10 a week." Source:
Photograph by blueMix via Pixabay

Neutral or Weak Opinions (-1, 0,
+1)

For relatively unknown topics, the audience may end up
somewhere along the midpoint of the semantic differential
scale, having either neutral/no opinions, or they may slightly
lean to one side or the other. In such cases, ignore the previous
two strategies and begin striving for actual changes in attitude
                                                    PERSUASIVE STRATEGY | 457

and behavior. Simply put, if the audience has no opinion, the
speaker can provide them with information leading to opinion
shift resulting in behavioral or attitude change. Spend energy
on explaining the problem.

"You know, Mom, I was just thinking the other day about the
possibility of earning an allowance. Right now, any time I
want to buy something, you have to buy it for me. If I had an
allowance, I wouldn't have to bug you for money." Source:
Photograph by blueMix via Pixabay

Moderately Favorable (+2)

Public speaking starts getting more fun when dealing with
audiences that register on the positive end of the scale. When
an audience already holds a moderately favorable attitude
toward the presented material, then all the speaker needs to do
458 | PERSUASIVE STRATEGY

is amplify their attitudes. Focus on showing the audience why
the solution provided offers the most desirable outcome. Use
inspiration to craft a masterful message.

"I've really been enjoying helping out around the house
lately, Mom. I always feel so accomplished whenever I finish
a chore, but, as I was thinking about it, I remembered that
there was this sort of expensive toy I really wanted to start
saving for, so what are the chances I might be able to earn
some money for the chores I've been doing?" Source:
Photograph by blueMix via Pixabay

Highly Favorable (+3)

The ideal setting for a public speaker as the speech resembles
the proverbial "pep rally." At this point, the audience is ready
to commit to action, so it is merely a matter of capitalizing on
those attitudes to gain behavior or action. As with the previous
                                                    PERSUASIVE STRATEGY | 459

step, begin by amplifying attitudes before connecting those
attitudes to the desirable action they need to take.

"Remember when you mentioned the other day how proud
of me you were for all the work I've been doing around the
house lately, Mom? Also, remember when you were
mentioning to Dad how you would like to teach me how to
save money? Well, do I have a suggestion for you..." Source:
Photograph by blueMix via Pixabay

Knowing these strategies in advance help speakers devise a
suitable message for a particular audience, whatever its current
beliefs may be. Approaching a strongly opposed audience
overconfidently and seeking to get them to commit to action is
doomed from the beginning. Likewise, approaching a strongly
favorable audience sheepishly and attempting to reduce their
resistance to the idea will quickly lose their attention. Match
460 | PERSUASIVE STRATEGY

the level of persuasive approach to the level of audience
agreement. Refer to Table 11.1.
Table 11.1 Persuasive Strategies

LEVEL OF AUDIENCE      PERSUASIVE STRATEGY
     AGREEMENT

Strongly Opposed       Plant the Seed. Provide
                       information.

Moderately Opposed     Refute objections.

Neutral or Uninformed  Explain the issue.
Moderately Favorable
Highly Favorable       Show why your solution is most
                       desirable.

                       Get the audience to take action.
462 | PERSUASIVE STRATEGY
                                                    RHETORICAL TRIANGLE | 463

RHETORICAL TRIANGLE

Over 2,300 years ago, the

Greek philosopher Aristotle

developed a three-pronged

strategy for persuading

others. He suggested that

speakers employ a careful

balance of all three vertices

of his rhetorical triangle to

achieve effective and          Source: ChloeGui, Rhetorical
successful persuasion. He      Triangle, CC BY-SA 4.0
labeled the three elements of

that triangle as ethos, pathos, and logos, which students have

probably encountered before in a writing class at some point.

Looking at each concept individually will help demonstrate

how each fits together with respect to persuasion in oral

communication.
464 | ETHOS

ETHOS

The 2002 film My Big Fat Greek Wedding reminded
audiences that many words in the English language derive
from the Greek language, and their word ethos forms the basis
for several words, including ethics, ethology, and ethnicity.
Literally translated from the Greek, it means "spirit" or
"character" and forms the basis of a speaker's credibility or
persona. A speaker's ethos essentially represents personal
appeal, or how an audience views a speaker or the speaker's
image that he or she portrays outwardly. Think of ethos as the
first impression imparted by a speaker.

     Note to Self

     Ask yourself these questions to help think critically
     about how to establish a solid ethos:

           How will you generate respect from your
             audience?
                                                               ETHOS | 465

 How will you create a connection or rapport
   with your audience?

 How will you build trust with your audience?

To begin, one way to gain

the respect of an audience is

to establish expertise, a

reputation, or a closeness

with respect to the topic.

Biology majors speaking

about biological pathogens     Source: Jami (Wiki
should establish their         Ed), American Society of Plant
experience in the beginning    Biologists annual meeting
                               2017 9, CC BY-SA 4.0

of a speech. If a person with

extensive experience working on cars speaks about changing

oil, he or she better explain that early in the speech as well.

Speakers discussing the dangers of drunk driving who have

unfortunately lost a close family member to the practice forge

a that closeness that can earn the audience's respect if they

reveal that detail about themselves.
466 | ETHOS

Source: Web Summit, 2022 - Planet-tech BE6 7921
(52476293881), CC BY 2.0

Secondly, generate rapport with the audience by seeking out
similarities with them. Students talking to students should use
that knowledge to their advantage. Be sure to adapt to the
"style" of the audience, similar to the way a chameleon changes
color to adapt to its environment. This includes adapting the
style of the visual aids, the language used, clothing and
appearance, and even mannerisms to reflect the audience.
Essentially, the more similarities the audience notices between
the speaker and themselves, the easier the speaker will find it to
establish rapport.
Trust remains one of the most difficult items regarding ethos
to build and maintain. Begin the quest to earn trust before the
audience can even begin to formulate a first impression. Show
                                                                            ETHOS | 467

up early. Dress for the occasion. The way a speaker looks will
make a strong first impression. Be prepared, and demonstrate
that readiness in advance. Stand tall and confidently (even if
nervous--revisit Chapter 2 for techniques to help moderate
this) to establish credibility early in the speech (third step in the
introduction) and do so sincerely. While progressing through
the speech, use easily identifiable stories to illustrate the main
points, and even better, share personal stories to help the
audience form a connection. Use familiar language to avoid
overwhelming the audience with an impressive vocabulary;
using "big words" can often turn an audience away. Reference
the people in the audience, such as referring to an earlier
speech, highlighting similarities or parallels between the topics,
or referencing the audience survey, if possible.

     Note to Self

     Above all, speak with conviction, for if you don't
     believe yourself, why should your audience?

Trust is built one step at a time, but combining these seemingly
minor details together interlock with one another to build a
trustworthy and inherently believable sense of ethos.
468 | PATHOS

PATHOS

Source: Zarik Boghossian, Mike Michalowicz Keynote
Speaker & Author, CC BY-SA 4.0

Pathos, like ethos, inspired a significant number of words in
the English language, such as pathogen, pathetic, pathological,
sympathy, empathy, apathy, and many more, all derived from
the Greek for "suffering" or "experience." Pathos refers to
emotional appeal in the context of the rhetorical triangle.
Human beings act as highly emotive animals, and they base
their decisions primarily on their emotions. In fact, almost
all decision making takes place in the limbic brain, which is
                                                                          PATHOS | 469

responsible for those "gut feelings" and yet, this region of the
brain has no capacity for language. For public speakers, this
means that tapping into the audience's emotions can persuade
them to take just about any action desired. However, that also
means pathos is often the most easily manipulated of the three
components of the rhetorical triangle.

   To begin thinking about how to utilize emotional appeals
in a persuasive speech, first consider how the central idea ties
to specific emotions, as well as how each individual main point
evokes emotion. For example, a speaker wanting to persuade
people to work on their public speaking delivery would not
name the speech "How to speak in public better" when
naming it "How to conquer your fears of public speaking"
evokes a much stronger emotional response.

     Note to Self

     Always try to find the emotional tie-in with the
     material you plan on presenting by asking yourself,
     "How do I want my audience to feel about this?"

Next, think about the emotions evoked by the language within
the speech, for certain words have stronger emotional
connotations, such as the difference between "injured veteran"
470 | PATHOS

and "wounded warrior." Language can potentially frame the

message in such a way as to encourage development of certain

emotions in the audience. Consider the use of rich analogies

and/or metaphors here as well, such as stating "Terrified, you

suddenly feel like you're drowning in quicksand," versus

saying "When fear hits, you feel as though you cannot move."

As with establishing

ethos, using stories can also

build an emotional

connection to the message.

Consider the difference

between two speeches on

cancer, where one revealed

nothing but facts and          Source: Laadi, Sumita
statistics to demonstrate      Prabhakar at Breast Cancer
advancements in cancer         Awareness Program 2017, CC
                               BY-SA 4.0

research, while the other one

told deeply rich and emotionally heavy stories about people

who had survived bouts with cancer thanks to research

breakthroughs. Which one would potentially be more moving

to convince an audience to donate money to research? Odds

are, the money goes to the speaker who told the most

compelling story.

Not only can speakers make that connection through the

usage of stories, but they can also enhance pathos through

the variety of visual aids displayed during the presentation.

Imagine telling the story of a cancer survivor and seeing images
                                                                           PATHOS | 471

of that person going through treatment, only to come out
the other side of that treatment looking happy, healthy, and
surrounded by loved ones. When people can see such emotions
being played out in front of them instead of simply having
information told to them, they naturally feel a significantly
greater connection to the topic.

   Above all, when dealing with pathos, be genuine and
authentic, not forced. Speakers should allow their emotions to
come through in their delivery. The vocal tone should match
the level of emotion the speaker wishes to convey. Speakers
with a heavier, serious, or somber topic should slow down
their speaking rate, and be deliberate about how serious they
sound. On the other end of the spectrum, speakers intending
to deliver a more upbeat, positive, and happy speech might
want to avoid sounding as monotonic as the high school
teacher in the classic 1980s film, Ferris Bueller's Day Off.

   Lastly, when it comes to intentionally deciding which
emotions to evoke, consider this: associate the message and its
point of view with positive emotions (happiness, satisfaction,
contentment, love, belonging, etc.), while lumping competing
perspectives with more negative emotions (guilt, fear,
obligation, jealousy, sadness, disappointment, etc.).
472 | LOGOS

LOGOS

Source: astro_matt, Public Speaking (34092554626), CC
BY-SA 2.0

Logos, as with the previous two Greek words, provides the
English language with several words, with the most obvious
one being logic. Literally translated, logos means "word" or "to
reason." People use logos to invoke logical, rational arguments
to make an appeal to reason. The most important element
to logos is whether or not the argument makes sense to the
audience. Establishing strong logos involves using credible
                                                                            LOGOS | 473

facts, statistics, and evidence that supports the various claims
of the speaker.

   Sometimes people find themselves subjected to a persuasive
argument that did not make much sense, leaving them
wondering why they became persuaded at all. Perhaps a
salesperson convinced them to purchase a product that they
would never likely use, leaving them wondering how the
salesperson arrived at the conclusion that it would be a natural
fit. This offers a glimpse pf what it feels like to experience
arguments based in poorly constructed logos.

Types of Reasoning

To construct well-reasoned logos, understand the two types
of reasoning people may use to develop arguments: inductive
reasoning and deductive reasoning. According to the Internet
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, inductive reasoning is:

      ...an argument that is intended by the arguer merely to
      establish or increase the probability of its conclusion. In an
      inductive argument, the premises are intended only to be
      so strong that, if they were true, then it would be unlikely
      that the conclusion is false.

For example:

   Two witnesses claimed they saw Eric commit the
      murder.

   Eric's fingerprints are the only ones on the murder
474 | LOGOS

      weapon.
   Eric confessed to the crime.
   Therefore, Eric committed the murder.

Though unlikely, certain scenarios exist where Eric did not
commit the murder. Deductive reasoning, on the other
hand, tends to be more grounded and possible to prove true.
According to the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy, a
deductive argument is:

      ...an argument that is intended by the arguer to be
      (deductively) valid, that is, to provide a guarantee of the
      truth of the conclusion provided that the argument's
      premises (assumptions) are true. This point can be
      expressed also by saying that, in a deductive argument, the
      premises are intended to provide such strong support for
      the conclusion that, if the premises are true, then it would
      be impossible for the conclusion to be false.

For example :

   All members of the Honor Society must have a 3.8 GPA
      or higher.

   Sarah is the a member of the Honor Society.
   Therefore, Sarah must have a GPA of 3.8 or higher.

Deductive reasoning, therefore, offers a more concrete way of
arriving at logical conclusions, whereas audiences will often
                                                                            LOGOS | 475

use inductive reasoning in response to a deductive argument
when they create objections to the speaker's reasoning.

   To explain this concept using a real-life scenario, pretend a
speaker is trying to convince an audience to try a new weight
loss program or diet:

                                This new diet will reduce

                               your hunger. (Premise A)

                                This reduction in hunger

                               will reduce the amount you

                               eat. (Premise B)

Source: Photograph by           Reducing the amount you

PublicDomainPictures via Pixa  eat will result in weight loss.
bay                            (Premise C)

 This new diet will, as a result, cause weight loss. (This is

a sound, deductive conclusion that must be true if

premises A, B, and C are true.)

While using sound, concrete deductive reasoning, what could
the audience be thinking?
476 | LOGOS

 "Every time I have tried

something like this in the

past, I failed miserably."

(Premise D)

 "This new program is

   just like those failed   Source: Photograph
   diets." (Premise E)      by RyanMcGuire via Pixaba
 "This new diet will fail  y

miserably." (This is a

reasonable inductive conclusion drawn from premises D

and E.)

Because the audience based their conclusion on strongly
ingrained emotional experiences tied to failure, it presents a
high degree of pathos and probably outweighs the strength
of any deductive conclusion. If the audience has to resolve
conflicting emotional conclusions, then they will look for flaws
amid the speaker's arguments, often resulting in imaginary
flaws that do not even exist. Regardless of the sound deductive
conclusion, the audience will doubt the premises:

 "But I'm always hungry when I am on a diet!"
   (Counters premise A)

 "But if I reduce how much I eat, I won't have enough
   energy to exercise, and I'll gain weight anyway!"
   (Counters premise C)
                                                                            LOGOS | 477

How could a speaker remain persuasive in this challenging
scenario?

     Note to Self

     Remember, that in persuasion, your success
     depends greatly on your ability to make your
     argument stronger while, at the same time, making
     opposing arguments sound weaker.

A speaker has a couple of options:

   Boost the argument by providing supporting facts,
      research, or even a personal success story with the new
      diet program.

   Show why this new program is unlike past failures.

If successful, the speaker would cast a shadow of doubt on
premise E, and therefore, the audience's entire inductive
argument.
478 | ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS

ADDRESSING
OBJECTIONS

Source: Mark Beatty, 20190117 ATL Coffee&Byte MDickison
003, CC BY 4.0

Speakers must remain vigilant to address potential objections,
rather than allowing them to take root in the audience's minds
to create barriers to the persuasive message. The longer the
speaker allows an objection to sit and ruminate (or swim about
inside an audience member's head), the greater the chance that
objection will prevent that listener from becoming persuaded.
              ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS | 479

Note to Self

     Ask yourself the following question to determine
     which objections to address: Why would any
     member of my audience not want to take this action
     or adopt this position?

For example, speakers attempting to convince their audience to
take additional courses in communication studies to improve
their skills in interaction with others and build a stronger
rsum would need to consider all of the possible reasons why
someone would not want to take these classes, which may
include:

   "I'm terrified of public speaking."
   "There's not enough room in my schedule with all other

      degree requirements."
   "I'm not a communication major."

Any speaker could discover these objections fairly easily with
the right audience analysis (see Chapter 4), and once known,
compose refutations to these objections to include in the
480 | ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS

speech as a way of heading off objections before they can take
root, as follows:

   "Not all communication classes focus on public
      speaking. In fact, most courses, outside the public
      speaking course, focus on in-class discussions, writing
      papers, and performing fascinating activities outside of
      class."

   "Students can use communication courses to fulfill a
      wide variety of degree requirements, including social
      sciences, arts and humanities, and of course, oral
      communication."

   "You don't need to be a communication major to refine
      your communication skills, seeing as how, regardless of
      industry, all employers consistently rank communication
      skills as their #1 most desired soft skill in a potential
      employee."

Syllogisms

Syllogisms and fallacies relate very differently to public
speaking versus writing an argumentative essay. A syllogism is
typically defined as a deductive argument with two premises
and one conclusion, essentially the most basic kernel/nugget
of deduction. This intuitive reasoning structure gets used
quite often without most people even realizing it. For example,
"All dogs are mammals. Fido is a dog. Ergo, Fido is a mammal."
                                  ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS | 481

A syllogism can represent a sort of mathematical formula

devised for analyzing persuasive speaking points. A syllogism

uses reasoning to arrive at a conclusion based on two or more

propositions (premises) that may or may not necessarily be

true. For example, "All ordinary men are mortal. Bruce Wayne

is no ordinary man. Therefore, Bruce Wayne is immortal."

With respect to public speaking, for a syllogism to work

effectively, the audience need only perceive it as true and

accurate. A speaker who has established a strong ethos has

a significantly higher chance of the audience expecting a

syllogism as true, regardless of its accuracy.

Naturally,           such

syllogisms could show

evidence of relying on

fallacies, so critical listeners

need to understand how

they work and how people

use them. A fallacy, simply

defined, demonstrates faulty

reasoning or a deficiency in

one's       attempt  at

formulating a rational

argument.   Common                What type of fallacy do you
                                  think this sign represents?
fallacies include the             Source: Smallbones, Illiterate
                                  Dinos, CC0 1.0
following:

 Ad hominem: Derived from the Latin for "to the
482 | ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS

      person," this type of fallacy gets used when a person
      directs criticism at the person, rather than that person's
      position. Example: "Why would anyone believe
      someone that dresses like that?"
   Ad populum: Derived from the Latin for "appeal to the
      people," this fallacy often gets referred to as the
      bandwagon effect, which implies someone should do
      something because everyone else does it. Example:
      "Everybody knows the Earth is flat, so why do you
      persist in your crazy claims?"
   Hasty generalization: This type of fallacy involves
      making an inductive argument without sufficient
      evidence for the conclusion, or using a single instance to
      generalize a much larger group of people. Example:
      "My grandmother smoked a pack of cigarettes a day and
      lived to be 95, so I don't think smoking is really
      hazardous."
   Red herring: This fallacy involves misdirection, or
      distracting someone from the argument at hand with
      something completely unrelated. Example: "While we
      understand your frustration with not getting a raise in
      the last five years, we do work hard to provide great
      customer service."
   Straw man: This fallacy involves substituting an actual
      position or argument with a distorted, exaggerated, or
      misrepresented version of the position of the argument
      so as to make it easy to refute. Example: "After John said
                                           ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS | 483

   we should spend more on health and education, Dave
   responded by saying he was shocked that John hates our
   country so much that he wants to leave it vulnerable to
   attack by cutting military spending."
 Post hoc: This fallacy is short for the Latin phrase, post
   hoc ergo propter hoc. When translated from Latin, it
   means "after therefore because of." Also called the "false
   cause" fallacy, this occurs when someone assumes that
   correlation automatically means causation. Example:
   "Incidents of shark attacks correlate directly to increases
   in ice cream sales; therefore, we should reduce our ice
   cream intake before swimming in the ocean." In this
   example, no cause-effect connection exists between the
   rates of ice cream sales and shark attacks. The high
   temperatures associated with summer likely caused both
   of these independent effects.
 Slippery slope: This fallacy (also called the domino
   fallacy) occurs when someone claims that A will lead to
   B, which will lead to C, and so on, all the way to F,
   without providing good reasons for predicting all the
   cause-effect connections between A and F. Example: "If
   we let our teenage son leave the house, the next thing we
   know, he will be running with the wrong crowd,
   drinking alcohol, and doing drugs!"
 Weak analogy: Similar to the hasty generalization in a
   specific context, the weak analogy attempts to connect
   two items based on a thin or irrelevant thread of
484 | ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS

      similarity. Example: "Guns and hammers are both made
      of metal and can kill people, so if you want to regulate
      guns, then you might as well regulate hammers, too."
      Analogies provide a good way to help an audience
      understand information. However, when using an
      analogy to support a conclusion, the similarities need to
      be both strong and relevant.
   Appeal to authority: Just because someone famous or
      credible said it, then it must be true. Example:
      "Abraham Lincoln once warned us that we should not
      believe everything we read just because we see it on the
      internet." Far too many quotes are attributed to figures
      such as Einstein, when in reality, he may have never
      weighed in on the topic. Advertisers have keyed into this
      fallacy when they select celebrities to endorse their
      products.
   Burden of proof: This fallacy occurs when the person
      putting forth the argument suggests that the burden of
      proof lies with someone else to disprove the argument.
      Example: "There is currently a truck orbiting Venus,
      but because you cannot disprove it, then it must be
      true."
   False dichotomy: When someone suggests that
      two--and only two--possibilities exist, they have set up
      a false dichotomy, which sometimes gets called the black-
      or-white or either-or fallacy. Example: "You're either
      with us or you're against us!" or "My way or the
                                               ADDRESSING OBJECTIONS | 485

      highway--there's no in between!" FYI: There is no
      fallacy if only two options truly exist. It's only a fallacy
      when two are offered but more than two actually exist.
   Genetic fallacy: Related to the old saying, "Don't
      throw the baby out with the bathwater," this fallacy
      occurs when someone doubts the validity of a claim
      simply on the basis of who said it. Example: "The
      president suggested that this year has 365 days, but
      everyone knows how much of a liar he is."
   No true Scotsman: Often used as a last resort out of
      desperation, this fallacy proposes an appeal to purity, as
      if to suggest criticism is invalid if certain "pure"
      conditions aren't met. Example: "No real man would
      drink his coffee with a pink straw" or "They must be
      from California; a true Idahoan would not do that."

Fallacies might sound highly persuasive to the untrained eye
or ear; however, an ethical speaker would never knowingly
use fallacies to persuade an audience. A speaker might
unintentionally or accidentally use fallacious reasoning, but
only unethical speakers knowingly trick an audience with poor
reasoning.
486 | BLENDING ETHOS-PATHOS-LOGOS TOGETHER

BLENDING
ETHOS-PATHOS-LOGOS
TOGETHER

Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Preston Keres/Office
of Communications-Photography Services
Center, 20170605-OSEC-PJK-0130 (34270791134), marked as
public domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

Think about what a speech would look like if a speaker focused
solely on one of these three elements.

   A speech employing pure ethos, but no pathos or logos,
                  BLENDING ETHOS-PATHOS-LOGOS TOGETHER | 487

would likely sound charismatic and enjoyable, but upon
reconsideration it would appear empty, vapid, and devoid of
substance. In the end, audiences would find it hard to make
an emotional connection to the topic and likely doubt the
information due to the lack of logical arguments made to
support the claims.

   A speech using pure pathos, but little ethos or logos, would
come across as emotionally manipulative.

   A speech utilizing pure logos without ethos or pathos
would likely sound dry and boring due to the barrage of
factual information and lack of emotional or personal
connection to relate those claims to the audience.

   These points illustrate effectively why Aristotle was so
adamant about the need to present balanced arguments. Think
of ethos as setting the stage for engaging the audiences to earn
their trust and respect while maintaining their attention.
When it works in conjunction with ethos, it helps nurture the
emotional connection necessary to generate action based on
the persuasive messages. Logos effectively balances out pathos
by providing substance to those emotional connections and
makes good on the promises made by the use of ethos. Using
all three elements in careful consideration with one another
provides not only a more balanced persuasive message, but a
more effective one as well.
488 | COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES

COMMUNICATION-SPEC
IFIC PERSUASION
THEORIES

Source: Andisrado, OSCAL2019 Presentation 71, CC BY-SA
4.0

While many theories surrounding effective persuasion exist,
several of them apply specifically to the field of
communication studies. This chapter will conclude by
discussing two of those theories: the Elaboration Likelihood
          COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES | 489

Model (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986) and Social Judgment Theory
(Sherif, 1963).

Elaboration Likelihood Model

This theory, abbreviated as ELM, attempts to describe why
certain methods of persuasion work, even though mysterious,
and why others fail. Known as a dual-process model, ELM
describes a central route to persuasion and a peripheral route to
persuasion. According to communication theory expert, Em
Griffin (2014) :

      Message elaboration is the central route of persuasion that
      produces major positive attitude change. It occurs when
      unbiased listeners are motivated and able to scrutinize
      arguments that they consider strong. Message-irrelevant
      factors hold sway on the peripheral path, a more common
      route that produces fragile shifts in attitude.

Source: U3100080, Elaboration Likelihood Model, CC BY-SA
4.0
490 | COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES

In the central route, the persuader practices many of the
techniques described in this chapter. For someone to utilize
the central route, ELM suggests that audience members need
motivation in order for persuasion to work. In other words,
each person the speaker's attempting to persuade must
commit the mental energy required to listen to the persuasion
process. ELM also suggests that, at the beginning of a
persuasive interaction, listeners decide almost immediately if
they will continue to listen or not. This showcases why the
speaker's initial persuasive communication remains of critical
importance. The listener may find the central route
cumbersome and difficult, as it requires 1) mental effort, 2) use
of logic and rational support, and most often, 3) more time
and commitment than the peripheral route. Its use can result
in significantly larger attitude or behavior changes.
In the peripheral route, the message recipient has little to no
interest in the subject material, and as such, has no desire to
commit the mental energy to go through the central processing
route. If the listener takes the peripheral route, he or she will
look for information that "feels right" and often make
decisions solely based upon first impressions. In the peripheral
route, listeners become swayed more by irrational appeal to
emotion than logical and balanced messages. Advertisers
frequently rely on the peripheral route, as most commercials
last only 30-60 seconds. Celebrity endorsements or unrelated
humor in commercials highlight examples of advertisers
attempting to engage its audience using the peripheral route to
           COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES | 491

persuasion. Consumers making purchases based on factors like
these means that the persuasive message was effective, however
these effects are often short-lived and vulnerable to outside
influence, unlike the central route. For example, a person may
purchase car insurance based on a funny advertisement, but
will likely stop laughing when their first bill does not match
the quoted price.

Social Judgment Theory

This theory, developed by Muzafer Sherif, attempts to explain
how people evaluate and rationalize various ideas and
positions. According to SJT, every new idea individuals hear
from a persuasive message gets weighted and evaluated against
their current points of view before being placed on an attitude
scale. SJT explains how people subconsciously sort out ideas as
they occur at the instant they perceive them. Em Griffin (2014)
explains SJT as follows:

      The larger the discrepancy between a speaker's position and a
      listener's point of view, the greater the change in attitude--as
      long as the message is within the hearer's latitude of
      acceptance. High ego-involvement usually indicates a wide
      latitude of rejection. Messages that fall there may have a
      boomerang effect.

As people assess the feasibility of new ideas, they place those
ideas within one of three zones, or latitudes:
492 | COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES

   The latitude of acceptance (agreement with the idea)
   The latitude of noncommitment (no opinion)
   The latitude of rejection (opposition to the idea)

When individuals have a high level of interest or involvement
with the idea, their scale reduces to two, as the latitude of
noncommitment shrinks with more rigidly held opinions. If
the idea falls within the latitude of acceptance, they will adjust
their attitude or behavior to match the idea, but if the idea falls
inside their latitude of rejection, they will adjust themselves
away from the idea.

   Em Griffin (2014) suggested that persuaders wishing to
achieve the greatest level of influence should choose a message
on the edge of the audience's latitude of acceptance or
noncommitment.

     Note to Self

     In other words, if your audience has a high level of
     interest, find out what minimum acceptable
     connections you can make between their current
     attitudes regarding your topic and the action you
     want them to take, and then tailor your message
     along that idea.
           COMMUNICATION-SPECIFIC PERSUASION THEORIES | 493

Griffin also noted that persuasion often occurs at a slow and
gradual process that most often consists of small movements.
494 | CHAPTER 11 SUMMARY

CHAPTER 11 SUMMARY

Source:
SamRichter, Sam-richter-motivational-sales-keynote-speake
r, CC BY-SA 4.0

Persuasion is truly an art form, one that often takes years of
trial and error to develop into a natural habit. However, people
can actively learn this art and practice it by first considering
the speech's specific purpose: persuading, motivating, or
inspiring? Next, focus on getting to know the audience and
what motivates them based on their attitudes, opinions, values,
                                                     CHAPTER 11 SUMMARY | 495

and beliefs. Without this critically important information
about the audience, even the best and most carefully worded
persuasive message has the potential to fail miserably. A poorly
worded persuasive message that is mindfully tailored to the
audience for which it is intended will achieve more success
than a well-polished message that does not take the audience
into consideration.

   After researching the audience's attributes, compose the
persuasive message by considering how to balance ethos,
pathos, and logos. Draw connections with the audience by
tapping into mutual similarities, establishing rapport, and
earning their respect and trust as a speaker. What emotions will
the speaker evoke to resonate emotionally with the message's
listeners? What facts, statistics, figures, and evidence will the
speaker mention to add substance and ensure sound and well-
reasoned arguments? Answering these questions carefully and
methodically can set a speaker up to become a powerful and
dynamic, yet ethical and authentic, persuader.
496 | ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

ADDITIONAL
RESOURCES

   Thou Shalt Not Commit Logical
      Fallacies--http://www.yourlogicalfallacyis.com

   Internet Encyclopedia of
      Philosophy--http://www.iep.utm.edu/
                    CHAPTER 12: MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION | 497

PART XII

CHAPTER 12:
MOTIVATING
OTHERS TO
ACTION
498 | CHAPTER 12: MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION
                                      MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION | 499

MOTIVATING OTHERS
TO ACTION

"Motivation is the art of getting people to do what you want
them to do because they want to do it." --President Dwight
D. Eisenhower Source: State Library and Archives of
Florida, Dwight Eisenhower landing a grouper
(8056378483), marked as public domain, more details
on Wikimedia Commons

In the middle of the 1930s, Purdue University communication
professor Alan H. Monroe began noticing that successful
500 | MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION

persuasive messages all shared a strangely common pattern. He
defined "success" as instances where a speaker could motivate
one or more listeners to take action, even in situations where
it would seem that the listeners appeared to oppose the core
of the message itself. Monroe examined the psychological
principles of these successful messages and, from analysis of
these messages, derived a five-step speaking process,
affectionately named Monroe's Motivated Sequence.
Evidence of this sequence can be found just about everywhere,
from static display advertisements like billboards or print
publication ads, to more active marketing such as television
or internet commercials. Experts estimate that modern
individuals living in an urban society subject themselves to
anywhere from a conservative estimate of 300 to a more
realistic estimate of 1,000 persuasive messages every single day
(Gass & Seiter, 2019).

   This five-step pattern shares similarities with the earlier
pattern of speaking for the purpose of speaking to inform,
which has an introduction, three main points, and a
conclusion. Monroe's Motivated Sequence also contains an
introduction, three main points, and a conclusion, but in
using this specific method, each of these steps provides more
direction and structure regarding what the speaker should
address during each step. As a result, Monroe relabeled the
five-step process as follows:

 1. Gain Attention: This first step performs essentially the
                                    MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION | 501

    same function as the introduction discussed earlier in
    Chapter 6, but in a speech to motivate others to act, this
    step becomes even more critical. Failing to grab the
    audience's attention up front will limit the effectiveness
    of all subsequent steps.
2. Present the Need: Also referred to as the "problem"
    step, this establishes the first main point of the speech
    and immediately follows the introduction. In this step,
    the speaker presents a need to satisfy or a problem to
    solve. Show the audience the importance of the need and
    how it affects every listener.
3. Satisfy the Need: In the second main point, speakers
    should attempt to satisfy the need or present a solution
    to the problem framed in the first main point. They
    must show the audience not only how to apply the
    solution in a concrete, step-by-step fashion, but they
    must also show them that what they suggest will
    adequately satisfy the need or solve the problem.
4. Visualization: In the final main point, speakers verbally
    paint a picture of the benefits associated with their
    proposed solution to satisfy the need. Conversely, they
    may also present the consequences of not applying the
    solution should the audience choose to ignore the
    proposal.
5. Call to Action: Structured more or less the same way as
    in the speech to inform from Chapter 6, but this version
    incorporates a slight twist. The speaker should signal the
502 | MOTIVATING OTHERS TO ACTION

      end and recap each main points, but instead of
      concluding with a "clincher" that reinforces the central
      idea, the speech ends with a final call to action, where the
      speaker directly calls on the audience to act upon the
      presented solution.
                                                      PLANNING THE TOPIC | 503

PLANNING THE TOPIC

Source: Ayorinde Ogundele, Planning Ahead, CC BY-SA 4.0

To examine each of these steps more closely, this chapter
provides a sample speech topic to demonstrate how the
principles of persuasion theory discussed in Chapter 11 apply
to Monroe's Motivated Sequence as outlined above. Pretend
a speaker wishes to deliver a speech to persuade audience
members not to text and drive. After selecting a topic, the next
step involves answering a number of questions that will help
lay the groundwork for a persuasive strategy, and help compose
significant portions of the speech.
504 | PLANNING THE TOPIC

     Note to Self

     Answering these questions can potentially help you
     head off a number of creative roadblocks later in the
     speechwriting process:

         1. What is the action you want your
             audience to take? Answering this question
             prevents a disastrous public speaking
             occurrence from unfolding. By definition, a
             speech to motivate others to act necessitates
             the inclusion of an action, and if you do not
             have 100% clarity on what that action entails,
             then you will run into major difficulties later
             on. For example, you may be passionate
             about speaking out against the death penalty
             and may want to persuade your audience that
             it does not belong in a civilized society, but
             what action do you recommend the audience
             take? As written, the topic works as a speech
             to influence others' thoughts. If you had a
             petition for audience members to sign as a
             way to send a message to lawmakers, then it
                                           PLANNING THE TOPIC | 505

    would become a speech to motivate others to
    act.

    Example answer: I want my audience to stop
    texting and driving. Source: Intel Free
    Press, Texting while Driving (March 28, 2013), CC
    BY-SA 2.0

2. Why do you want to deliver this speech?
    By answering this question, you discover your
    motivation behind the speech. By
    understanding your motivation to deliver the
    speech, you can better understand what
    motivations you may want to use to tap into
    your audience's motivation. Answering this
    question also prepares you to establish your
    credibility within the Gain Attention
506 | PLANNING THE TOPIC

             (introduction) step.

               Example answer: I was struck by a driver who
               was texting while driving, which resulted in my
               hospitalization and a six-month rehabilitation
               before I could walk again. Source: Damnsoft
               09 at English Wikipedia, Head On Collision, CC BY
               3.0

         3. Why does your audience need to take
             the action you propose? Be careful with
             answering this question. Many novice
             speakers approach this question by describing
             the benefits to their proposed actions, but
             that only answers the "what" of the speech,
             not the "why" motivating it. Benefits result
             from an action, they do not spark the driving
                                           PLANNING THE TOPIC | 507

    force behind it; you need to understand the
    need behind your action. Ideally you will state
    this as the problem you will attempt to solve
    through the action you propose.

     Example answer: Texting and driving, an
     all-too-common occurrence on roads today,
     drastically reduces driver attentiveness and creates
     life-altering hazardous driving conditions. Source:
     Photograph by StockSnap via Pixabay

4. How will your audience satisfy this need?
    Answer this question with your concrete,
    step-by-step set of solutions to the problem
    you established as a need. State not only your
    solution, but also specifically how the
    audience will enact this solution. Be detailed
    and clear.
508 | PLANNING THE TOPIC

               Example answer: To stop texting and driving, my
               listeners will need to shut off their phones
               whenever they start their cars, put them away in
               the trunk or glove compartment, or pair their
               phone with a compatible Bluetooth hands-free
               system before putting it out of sight. Source:
               Photograph by jan3933 via Pixabay

         5. If your action satisfies the need, then
             why is your audience not already doing
             it? Answering this question often guides the
             research approach for your proposed
             solution(s) and may require you to conduct an
             audience analysis survey. If you find your
             audience already does what you propose,
             then you may need to refine your topic.
                                           PLANNING THE TOPIC | 509

     Example answer: Using mobile technology to
     stay socially connected to others is remarkably
     addictive, and even the most moral person can find
     her or himself succumbing to the temptation of
     glancing down at a recently received notification.
     Source: Ed Poor, Hand held phone in car, CC BY-SA
     3.0

6. What obstacles will likely prevent your
    audience from doing what you propose
    and what counterarguments could you
    raise against those objections? As
    mentioned in question 5 above, audience
    members likely have reasons for not enacting
    your proposed solution, so prepare for those
    arguments. As mentioned in Chapter 11, you
    must not allow potential objections to take
510 | PLANNING THE TOPIC

             root in your audience's minds, so you need to
             refute these objections early.

               Example answer: "Checking a text only takes a
               second, and I'm a good driver." Refutation:
               "According to a recent study, the average person
               glances at their phone for 5 seconds to check a
               message, and the average crash happens within 3
               seconds of driver distraction." Source: Photograph
               by reynaldodallin via Pixabay

         7. What are the benefits of doing what you
             ask? Identify the benefits early, before you
             even write the speech. This may require some
             research and even a little creativity, but task
             yourself to identify the most tantalizing
             benefits possible for your audience. Also,
             consider what benefits may matter most to
             your specific audience members. Think
                                            PLANNING THE TOPIC | 511

    critically about where their priorities lie and
    what motivates them.

     Example answer: The benefits of putting your
     phone away while driving go beyond staying safe,
     as you will be able to feel free from distraction and
     worry. You won't need to worry about your phone
     dinging every few seconds and feeling pressured
     to respond immediately. You will feel responsible
     and alert. Source: Kchorst, Bus Driver in Kigali
     Rwanda, CC BY-SA 4.0

8. What are the consequences of your
    audience not acting on your proposed
    solution? Sometimes you may find covering
    the consequences of not listening to your
    advice can have far more impact than listing
    the benefits. Depending on the topic, you may
    struggle to list benefits, such as with the
    sample topic. In those instances, cover the
512 | PLANNING THE TOPIC

             negative aspects of the consequences
             individuals could face if they choose not to
             follow your proposed solution.

               Example answer: Text messaging while driving
               puts you at a higher risk of getting into a serious
               crash. Nearly two million auto accidents a year are
               caused by texting and driving. According to the
               Virginia Tech Transportation Institute, texting while
               driving is six times more likely to cause an auto
               crash than driving when intoxicated. Source:
               Daniel Boothe, U.S. Marine Corps, Two-car collision
               in the USA, marked as public domain, more details
               on Wikimedia Commons

By identifying all eight of these responses, speakers can
complete nearly half or more of the work involved in
composing a motivational speech. They can now confidently
compose a specific purpose, such as "My specific purpose is to
motivate my audience to stop texting while driving," as well as
the central idea, such as "Texting and driving is dangerous, not
                                                       PLANNING THE TOPIC | 513

only to yourself, but to all other drivers sharing the road with
you." From here the speakers needs only to fill in the blanks
of the outline and starting working on the details within each
of the five steps: Gain Attention; Need; Satisfaction;
Visualization; and Call to Action.
514 | GAIN ATTENTION

GAIN ATTENTION

Source: DFID - UK Department for International
Development, Hilde Salvesen delivers her speech
(10839969336), CC BY 2.0

While the attention step served an important purpose in an
informational speech by setting the tone and providing the
audience with a reason to listen, it serves an even more critical
role in the speech to motivate others to action. As mentioned
earlier in the chapter, if this step does not capture the
audience's attention, subsequent steps will not have the
psychological effect needed to make the message persuasive.
                                                             GAIN ATTENTION | 515

Fortunately, the introduction outlined in Chapter 6 shares the
subcomponents of the Gain Attention step with this speech
type:

   Grab attention
   Relate topic to audience
   Relate topic to self (establish credibility)
   State central idea and specific purpose
   Preview main points

Look at how the sample topic might look using this formula:

   Grab attention: On February 19, 2011, a young girl
      named Ashley Jones-Davis was killed in a gruesome
      automobile accident. She was texting and driving when
      she swerved out of the center lane and drove head-on into a
      box truck. Ashley died on the scene. Since that time, her
      family has dedicated countess hours and emotional energy
      telling Ashley's story, because they don't want other
      families to go through the trauma and sense of loss they
      experienced.
          Notes: This speech begins with a story that many
            can relate to, whether audience members consist of
            parents, students, women, or simply drivers who
            have texted while driving before. While brief, the
            story sets the stage for subsequent information by
            sharing a personal connection to the topic. This
516 | GAIN ATTENTION

            speaker could also show Ashley's photo, juxtaposed
            with a photo from the crash for added appeal to
            emotion.
   Relate topic to audience: According to my audience
      survey, nearly 100% of you stated that you have read and/
      or answered a text while driving before. Though many of
      you stated that you try to save phone use for stoplights,
      statistics show that you are not alone. According to the
      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, more
      than 11% of drivers on the road at any given time are
      distracted by phone use.
          Notes: By appealing to the audience survey, this
            speaker connects directly to the people in the room,
            but then broadens out the appeal by relating
            statistics from a credible national organization.
   Relate topic to self (establish credibility): Two years
      ago, I saw my light turn green, and as I started to drive
      through the intersection, I was struck from the side by a
      driver who ran a red light because he was texting while
      driving. This accident not only totaled my car, but also
      resulted in extended hospitalization and a six-month
      rehabilitation before I could walk again.
          Notes: Copy and pasted from prep question 2
            (Why do you want to deliver this speech?), this
            speaker clearly has a vested interest in sharing a
            story that motivates others to avoid texting and
            driving, but more than that, it also relates to the
                                                         GAIN ATTENTION | 517

         initial story and the statistics shared in the previous
         step, carefully weaving the three steps together with
         a common thread, adding to the flow of the
         message.
 State central idea and specific purpose: Texting and
   driving is dangerous, not only to yourself, but to all other
   drivers sharing the road with you. Today, I would like to
   motivate you all to stop texting while driving before stories
   like mine and Ashley's become the norm, rather than the
   exception.
       Notes: The central idea and specific purpose
         encapsulate the core of the speech's message, but
         they also tie together all threads present within the
         introduction so far.
 Preview main points: I will show you how big of a
   problem texting and driving has become today (point #1,
   Need step), what you can do to stop it (point #2,
   Satisfaction step), and how you can personally benefit
   from doing so (point #3, Visualization step).
       Notes: The speaker did not reveal too much
         information too soon, effectively sharing with the
         audience what they can expect to hear in the next
         few minutes or so and clue them in to the direction
         of the conversation.
518 | NEED STEP

NEED STEP

As opposed to the speech to inform, the first main point must
serve as the Need step. Here speakers will frame a need for
their audience so that they can follow it up with a satisfying
solution (i.e., the action they will propose later in this speech).
Also referred to as the "problem step," this main point involves
explaining the why behind the proposed action.

                   One or more interactive elements has been
                   excluded from this version of the text. You
                   can view them online here:
        https://nic.pressbooks.pub/
        messagesthatmatter/?p=427#oembed-1

In September of 2009, Simon Sinek, an author and speaker
in business and leadership studies, gave a TEDx talk in the
Seattle area, where he presented the idea of what he dubbed
"The Golden Circle." To explain this, Sinek used the following
diagram:
                                                                      NEED STEP | 519

   Using this model, Sinek explained that the majority of
persuasive messages that people see, read, or hear on a regular
basis work from the outside inward. They start with the what,
or the result, and then explain the how, which represents their
method or product, but stop there, expecting people to buy
into their idea, their services, or their products. The examples
Sinek used in his speech included: "Here's our newest model
of SUV (what). It has dual airbags, great gas mileage, and looks
sharp (how)." Sinek went on to explain that these messages
fail because they come across as uninspiring. They do not tap
520 | NEED STEP

into the decision-making center of the brain--the limbic
system--because they fail to inspire or engage by explaining
why people need to buy this product.

   Sinek then went on to describe the model used by Apple,
which uses a highly successful persuasive model because it
works from the inside out. As a company, Apple's messages
clearly begin with an explanation of why they conduct business
by communicating with the world that, in everything they
do, they believe in challenging the status quo and thinking
differently. Only after Apple finishes explaining the why do
they state that they achieve this goal by creating products that
are beautifully designed, easy to operate, and challenge the
limits of technology (how). Apple's message then ends with the
what by showing its audiences the products they can expect to
benefit their lives.

   In motivating an audience to action, speakers must tap into
their audience's why by explaining to them that a genuine and
relatable need exists. They can complete this task by addressing
the Need step in four components:

   Show the audience that a need or a problem exists and
      that it can and will affect each and every member of the
      audience in some way.

   Explain to the audience why it exists by providing
      context and history behind the need or problem. In
      other words, explain where the need arose and perhaps
      why nothing has been done about it until now.
                                                                      NEED STEP | 521

   Demonstrate to the audience that this problem needs to
      be solved or this need must be addressed
      immediately--that it will not simply disappear on its
      own if left alone.

   Overcome potential objections. Why might the audience
      not believe that this need or problem affects them
      personally?

Returning to the example speech from earlier, the breakdown
could look as follows:

Need Step

 A. Texting and driving is an all too common occurrence on
      our roads today.
       1. Using mobile technology to stay socially connected
            to others is remarkably addictive, according to a
            study performed by Dr. David Greenfield, founder
            of the Center for Internet and Technology
            Addiction, when cell phone users compulsively
            check their devices it is in an effort to stimulate the
            brain's pleasure centers.
       2. In this way, cell phone use can be compared to
            gambling or gaming addictions, making even the
            most moral person succumb to the temptation of
            glancing down at a recently received notification.
522 | NEED STEP

Note: This half of the Need step provides the audience
with context and background, effectively setting up the
problem. Additionally, it shows the audience that the
problem will not go away.

 B. Texting and driving drastically reduces driver
      attentiveness and creates life-altering hazardous driving
      conditions.
       1. According to a recent study, the average person
            glances at their phone for 5 seconds to check a
            message, while the average texting-related crash
            occurs within only 3 seconds of driver distraction.
       2. According to the Virginia Tech Transportation
            Institute, texting while driving is six times more
            likely to cause an auto crash than driving when
            intoxicated.

Note: This half of the Need step relates the problem to
the audience, while also demonstrating a severe and life-
threatening need to address the problem immediately.
                                                         SATISFACTION STEP | 523

SATISFACTION STEP

Source: Valerie Hinojosa from Washington DC, USA, Rapt
speech-listening audience (3004135943), CC BY-SA 2.0

Next comes the Satisfaction step, the second main point
within the body of the motivational speech designed to elicit
audience action. Here the speaker attempts to satisfy the need
or solve the problem presented in the previous step.
Demonstrate that the solution fully and adequately addresses
that need or problem for every aspect of the problem or need
that the speaker has presented up to this point.
524 | SATISFACTION STEP

     Note to Self

     For example, if you presented a need to cut down on
     fossil fuel usage because you painted a bleak picture
     of the Earth in 50 years resembling a toxic
     wasteland, then in this step, you must clearly and
     explicitly show how the audience's specific actions
     will avert such a scenario. It would not be enough to
     simply suggest the audience carpool or drive hybrid
     electric vehicles. If you make that suggestion, you
     would need to include credible research to show
     that this solution can reliably avert the problem you
     presented previously.

Avoid presenting a problem or a need that is larger than the
solution can fulfill. Ensure that the Need step and the
Satisfaction step complement one another perfectly.

   Speakers should prepare themselves to address potential
objections during this step. As with the eight preparation
questions discussed at the beginning of this chapter, think
of all the hurdles or barriers that might prevent audience
members from adopting the proposed solution to the
problem. Then, consider the best way to address and refute
                               SATISFACTION STEP | 525

those objections before they have a chance to take root in the

audience's minds.

Overcome objections by looking at the number of steps

involved in enacting the solution. Think of the solution as a

transaction, and find ways to make that transaction as easy and

straightforward as possible.

                               For example, if a speaker

                               wanted the audience to

                               write letters to their senators

                               and representatives, think of

                               how this person could

                               reduce the number of steps

Source: Photograph             involved. To write such a
by RazorMax via Pixabay        letter, one must: 1) find the

                               time to sit down and write;

2) compose the letter; 3) print the letter; 4) look up the address;

5) find an envelope; 6) address the envelope; 7) locate a stamp;

8) seal the envelope; and 9) drop it in the mailbox. Regardless

of the speech's impact, audience members may stop trying at

any of these nine steps due to the many distractions life can

manifest. To reduce these specific steps, the speaker could

prewrite the letters for them, place them in preaddressed,

stamped envelopes, hand them out to each audience member,

and then instruct them to sign them and drop the envelopes in

the mailbox after the speech.

Take a look back at the sample speech, and see how the

Satisfaction step plays out:
526 | SATISFACTION STEP

Satisfaction Step

 A. The first step in reducing and eliminating texting and
      driving is to increase your awareness of how much your
      phone's notification system controls you, and not the
      other way around.
       1. One way to do this is to instruct a partner to ride
            with you as a passenger and record the number of
            times you give in to the temptation of glancing at
            your phone.
       2. Another method involves the psychological
            technique of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT),
            where you shut off your phone completely when
            you get into the car, and as you drive, regularly
            assess your anxiety levels out loud. For example,
            every mile or so, talk your way through the anxiety
            or discomfort you experience as you wonder what
            you might be missing.

Note: This half of the Satisfaction step directly addresses
the first half of the Need step, employing highly specific
and guided actions to address the problem the speaker
previously established.

 B. To stop texting and driving, we need to cut it off at the
      source, which involves shutting off our phones whenever
      we start our cars.
                                                         SATISFACTION STEP | 527

       1. In addition to shutting them off, I recommend
            putting them away in the trunk or glove
            compartment so that they are completely out of
            sight.

       2. If you have the option available to you, you could
            pair your phone with a compatible Bluetooth
            hands-free system before putting it out of sight.

       3. Being out of sight significantly reduces the
            temptation to use a phone while driving, as you
            will not be able to physically get to it.

       4. If you find yourself feeling the effects of
            "nomophobia" (the fear of being without your
            phone), simply remind yourself that anything
            anyone has to say to you can wait, as it is not worth
            your life, your safety, or the well-being of others
            around you.

Note: This half of the Satisfaction step addresses the
second half of the Need step by providing a concrete
solution to the dangers presented earlier, but
additionally, it acknowledges and addresses the potential
objections (barriers) the speaker identified in the eight
preparation questions at the beginning of the chapter.
528 | VISUALIZATION STEP

VISUALIZATION STEP

Source: ALBERT ALCAIN/PPD, President Rodrigo Duterte
gestures during his speech at Camp Tecson, marked as public
domain, more details on Wikimedia Commons

The final main point within the body of the speech, the
Visualization step, attempts to motivate others to act on
a specific issue. Its purpose to help the audience "see" the
amazing benefits they can expect to enjoy if they apply the
solution to the problem or the satisfaction to the need does not
mean that the message must remain positive and rosy. Some
topics will require adopting a negative approach by outlining
undesirable consequences arising as the result of ignoring the
proposed solution. The best persuaders understand that
negative emotional appeals here act fast, meaning that people
                                                        VISUALIZATION STEP | 529

may easily get scared into immediate action, but such gains
are short-lived, while positive emotional appeal takes longer to
manifest but tends to last considerably longer.

     Note to Self

     How would you structure the Visualization step?
     Will you focus solely on benefits, solely on negative
     consequences, or a mixture of both? If you choose a
     mixture, will you start with the bad news and end
     on a positive note, or the other way around? These
     decisions will affect the flow and style of your
     delivery here, so think critically about this decision.

In this step, use colorful, rich, descriptive language. Also
consider saving some of the most prominent visual aids to use
here as well. The Visualization step becomes most persuasive
when the benefits appear so tantalizing the audience simply
cannot imagine life without them. Conversely, this step could
persuade audiences if the consequences seem terrifying or off-
putting enough to make them adapt the proposed solution
without hesitation. Think of this step of the speech as the
"What's in it for me?" stage. By this point in the speech, the
speaker has successfully presented a stark need and
530 | VISUALIZATION STEP

demonstrated to the audience how to satisfy that need, so now,
the time has come to show them what they can expect to
happen once they enact the solution, or what can happen if
they continue allowing the need or problem to persist and
worsen. Consider using a lot of vivid imagery, as well as "what
ifs" in this step. Engage the audience's imagination and help
them picture themselves applying the solutions.

   Take a look at this final main point using the sample speech
topic:

Visualization Step

 A. The benefits of putting your phone away while driving
      go beyond staying safe, as you will be able to feel free
      from distraction and worry.
       1. You won't need to worry about your phone
            dinging every few seconds and feeling pressured to
            respond immediately.
       2. You will feel responsible and alert, as a properly
            defensive driver should feel.

 B. If you choose not to put your phone away, however,
      understand that nearly two million auto accidents a year
      are caused by texting and driving. Text messaging while
      driving puts you at a 23% higher risk of getting into a
      serious crash.
                                                              CALL TO ACTION | 531

CALL TO ACTION

As with the previous speeches to inform, the speech to

motivate others to action on an important issue requires a

conclusion, and in Monroe's Motivated Sequence, the whole

conclusion is called the Call to Action. Begin the conclusion,

as before, by signaling the end of the speech, followed by a brief

recap of the three main points that address why the audience

needs to take action, what the speaker proposes to solve this

problem, and what advantages the audience will gain by

adapting the solution.

                                Also, recall that, in a

                                conclusion, the speaker

                                should not introduce any

                                new information or main

                                ideas in this portion of the

                                speech. This portion of the

                                speech serves as a recap, not

                                a chance to insert one more

Source:                         shocking fact that will drive
Yigitcanenginsenturk, Yigitcan
enginsenturk, CC BY-SA 4.0      the central idea home.

                                Bringing  in  new

                                information at this point

would only confuse the audience. After finishing the recap, the
532 | CALL TO ACTION

speaker should end with a clincher that makes the final call to
action. This clincher should clearly reinforce the central idea
from the beginning of the speech, while explicitly reminding
the audience in a simpler fashion what action to take. Be direct
and firm. Avoid vague or wishy-washy statements during this
step.

       A great acronym for assessing a Call to Action is
       C.A.S.T., or concise, achievable, specific, and
       tangible. A call to action should be concise,
       meaning that it doesn't take long to explain. It
       should be achievable by every single person in
       the room, and furthermore, they should be able
       to achieve the goal in a relatively short amount
       of time. It should be specific, and finally, it
       should also be tangible, meaning that the
       speaker outlined a concrete action for the
       audience members to take.

Take a look at the sample topic's conclusion:

Call to Action Step

Signal End: As you all leave here today, you will undoubtedly
check your phones to see if there are any new notifications. It is
likely that even I will do this as well.
                                                              CALL TO ACTION | 533

   Recap Main Points: However, remember what we talked
about today. I showed you how addictive checking our phones
can be, even while driving. I also showed you the dangers of
giving in to those temptations while operating a motor vehicle,
before I showed you some possible solutions, including shutting
your phone off when you get into your cars or using a Bluetooth
hands-free system. Lastly, I shared with you not only the benefits
of doing so, by becoming a safer, more responsible, and more
alert driver, but I explained how, if we all continue to do this, the
problem can only get worse.

   Clincher (Call to Action): Texting and driving is
dangerous, not only to yourself, but to all other drivers sharing
the road with you. Don't allow this (show picture of screen
capture from text messages) to lead to this (show picture of my
surgery scars while in a wheelchair). Turn off your phones while
driving, and keep your eyes on the road where they belong.
534 | CHAPTER 12 SUMMARY

CHAPTER 12 SUMMARY

Source: Frypie, Librarian presents 0938, CC BY-SA 4.0

Monroe's Motivated Sequence can be found just about
everywhere when analyzing the various persuasive messages
across all media. The formula employs five steps: 1) Gain
Attention, 2) Present the Need, 3) Satisfy the Need, 4)
Visualize, and 5) Call to Action.

   Successful persuaders that use Monroe's Motivated
Sequence start by explaining the why behind their message.
Answer the eight preparation questions before composing a
                                                    CHAPTER 12 SUMMARY | 535

persuasive strategy. Identifying the motivations behind the
topic beforehand can help speakers develop the why behind it.
Help the audience members identify and relate with the topic
by demonstrating why to care, which naturally leads them to
seek out the how: the proposed solution.

   Failing to motivate the audience to understand the why will
likely mean subsequent steps will fall flat, so concentrate on
presenting a need so pressing that the audience begins desiring
satisfaction for that need or a solution to the problem. Then,
ensure that the satisfaction or solution presents a realistic
solution clearly, explicitly, and concretely, with plenty of step-
by-step detail. Make the solution as easy as possible for the
audience to enact. Then, drive the persuasive message home by
showing (not telling) the audience what they can expect once
they have adopted the wonderful proposed solution. Tantalize
them with rich imagery, but again, do so realistically-- don't
advertise falsely.

   Lastly, follow through with a firm, direct, and clear call to
action, reminding the listeners why they need to take action,
how to do it, and what they can expect from doing so. Balance
this approach to ensure that each step builds upon one
another. Make sure to craft the Need step specifically for the
intended audience. Ensure that the solution adequately
addresses each aspect of the problem. This molds the message
to communicate directly to the audience's decision-making
centers of their brains, activating their limbic systems by
536 | CHAPTER 12 SUMMARY

providing information that satisfies all components of the
rhetorical triangle.

   For additional guidance, review the exemplary sample
outlines in the following pages to see how other students from
the past have approached Monroe's Motivated Sequence.
                   SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 537

SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO
MOTIVATE TO ACTION

Name: Kristopher Arnold

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 A. If what you are asking the audience to do is such a good
      idea, think about those in the audience who might
      object to your idea. How will you address possible
      objections in your speech? I am planning to hit head-
      on any varying objections within my speech, to
      refute the refuted. Some people think buying
      products made in other countries means they can
      have more stuff. I will show them how short-
      sighted this is.

 B. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? The
      audience didn't have a lot of interest in my topic
      since they like to buy "lots of cheap stuff." I will
      show them that by supporting American-made
538 | SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

      goods that their chances of high-paying jobs will
      increase when they graduate from college. That
      should get their interest.
 C. How will the audience demographics (not what you
      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? Being mostly students,
      it impacts my speech greatly. Most college-aged
      individuals do not have plenty of money floating
      around, nor are they usually working full-time, so
      they have good and feasible reasons to want to
      purchase cheap foreign products.

Title: Made in Chimericakorpan
   General Purpose: To motivate to act
   Specific Purpose: To motivate my audience to purchase

American-made products

  I. ATTENTION Step
       A. Grab Attention: My neighbor Pete is currently
            unemployed but is a hard-working American. He
            goes to bed at 11 pm and wakes up to his alarm
            clock (made in Japan). He turns on his coffee pot
            (made in China), stands on tile floor in the
            bathroom (made in Italy) while he shaves with a
            razor (made in Hong Kong). He puts on his dress
            shirt (made in Sri Lanka), designer jeans (made in
            Singapore), and tennis shoes (made in Korea),
          SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 539

    jumps into his car (made in Japan), turns on the
    radio (made in India), checks his watch (made in
    Switzerland), grabs his briefcase (made in Japan).
    And, Pete wonders why he cannot find a good
    paying job.
B. Relate to Audience: Actually, you all need to be
    thinking about this. This scenario likely hits close
    to home with most of you and you don't even
    know it (or don't really want to admit it). Most
    lower-priced items which so many of you are
    purchasing are not made in America. I would even
    go as far as to say that most of the possessions you
    have here with you today are not made in America.
C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): In the
    past I have simply not known what the
    consequences of purchasing foreign products does
    on a mass scale, but I will have you know that over
    the past several years I have changed my ways and
    have personally made a point to buy local and buy
    American-made. All of my automobiles and
    recreational vehicles are made in the good ol'
    U.S.A., and I now regularly make an effort to keep
    my money in America and so should you.
D. Central Idea: You should buy American-made
    products whenever possible.
E. Specific Purpose: Today, I would like to invite you
    to consider this option.
540 | SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

       F. Preview Main Points: I will go over...
             II. Need: Why we all need to buy American-
                  made products.
            III. Satisfaction: How you can implement this
                  behavior into your life.
            IV. Visualization: How your lives will be better
                  after implementing this solution.

Transition to #II: Let's begin exploration of this topic by
taking a good look at the problem.

 II. NEED Step
       A. Buying products from China affects employment
            in the U.S.
              1. Mr. Robert Scott indicates that it's a fact that
                  buying products that are made in China
                  decreases jobs in the U.S. (Economic Policy
                  Institute)
              2. Something you all know but probably
                  wouldn't want to admit is that buying
                  products made in China also supports the
                  abuse of exploited workers.
                  (Businessweek.com)
       B. China has become the world capital of
            contaminated goods.
              1. One million toys were recalled recently in
                  China because lead paint was used on the
                    SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 541

                  toys, and chewing on these toys can lead to
                  behavioral problems and sometimes death in
                  children. (USA Today)
              2. Chemicals that are used to make antifreeze are
                  being found in toothpaste from China.
                  (MSNBC.com)

Transition to #III: Now that you can see what you support
when you buy foreign products, let's look at solutions.

III. SATISFACTION Step
       A. With a little common sense, it's easy to find
            American-made products.
              1. Look at the packaging for the "made in"
                  sticker.
              2. Visit MadeInUSA.org for a list of American
                  manufacturers and a list of items that are
                  100% made in the U.S.
       B. Even though it is impossible to get around buying
            foreign products, we shouldn't use that as an
            excuse to avoid buying American-made products
            when possible.

Transition to #IV: Solving this foreign products issue for the
United States will take focus on my part (as well as each of
you), but the rewards are worth it.
542 | SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

IV. VISUALIZATION Step
       A. Imagine what it could be like searching for a job
            and actually finding many good-paying jobs to
            choose from.
       B. You will feel good knowing that the toys your
            children and grandchildren play with are safer than
            before.
       C. You will have the satisfaction of knowing you do
            not support the abuse of other human beings.

Signal End: If you have been listening, you now better
understand the benefits of spending your money a little more
wisely, so I will conclude now.

 V. ACTION Step
       A. Restate Central Idea: Buying products made in
            America leads to a better future for you.
       B. Recap Main Points: Today, I told you why we
            need to purchase American-made products, how
            easy it is to do, and what benefits you'll experience
            as a result.
       C. Call to Action (Clincher): I want to ask for a
            show of hands. I am going to ask each of you to
            raise your hand showing that you will just try...just
            try to pay closer attention to the things you are
            buying. Let's raise our hands for the future of our
            children and grandchildren. Let's fight this fight
                   SAMPLE 3A: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 543

            from our own soil and spread the word. Will you
            raise your hand for America today? Thanks. Please
            go from here today and purchase wisely, and you
            remember Pete, my neighbor? For Pete's sake, let's
            buy American.

Works Cited

"FDA to check toothpaste imports from China."
MSNBC.com. 24 May 2007. Web. 30 Apr. 2019.

   Kerr, Jennifer C. USA Today.com. 05 June 2018. Web. 25
Apr. 2019.

   MadeInUSA.org. 09 July 2018. Web. 25 Apr. 2019.
   Roberts, Dexter, and Aaron Bernstein. Businessweek.com.
02 Oct. 2016. Web. 28 Apr. 2019.
   Scott, Robert E. "Costly trade with China." Economic Policy
Institute. 01 May 2017. Web. 02 May 2019.
544 | SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO
MOTIVATE TO ACTION

Name: Justine Bunch

Audience Analysis

Answer in complete sentences and use examples from your
audience analysis questions.

 1. If what you are asking the audience to do is such a good
      idea, think about those in the audience who might
      object to your idea. How will you address possible
      objections in your speech? Some might object to that
      planning is yet another task to complete, but I will
      argue that good planning actually frees up time for
      the planner.

 2. How much interest did the audience have in your topic?
      How will you make the topic interesting to them? They
      were somewhat interested, but they've had people
      telling them how important time management is
      for most of their lives. I'll try to use some current
      statistical data/research to approach the topic from
      some unique angles to give them a new perspective
                   SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 545

      on it.
 3. How will the audience demographics (not what you

      learned on your Audience Analysis) impact the
      development of your speech? Since my audience
      consists of college students, my planning strategies
      will focus around the main items that college
      students must plan for.

Title: Time Management
   General Purpose: To motivate to act
   Specific Purpose: To motivate my audience members to

manage their time better

  I. ATTENTION Step
       A. Grab Attention: How well do you plan? I
            consider myself a generally good planner, but
            whenever I find myself writing a paper at midnight,
            I must pause to consider the effectiveness of my
            time management. Let us complete a short quiz
            from the Dartmouth College Academic Skills
            Center to determine your individual planning
            effectiveness before continuing on....
       B. Relate to Audience: As college students, each of
            us has procrastinated, prioritized poorly, and
            generally failed at planning. Even if you feel
            comfortable with your time-management abilities,
            it always helps to reassess your effectiveness and to
546 | SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

            find new strategies to plan well.
       C. Relate to Self (Establish Credibility): Being a

            person who struggles with procrastination as well
            as over-extensive planning, I went on a quest to find
            the most effective time-management strategies.
       D. Central Idea: You should improve your time-
            management strategies.
       E. Specific Purpose: Today, I would like to motivate
            you all to manage your time more effectively.
       F. Preview Main Points: Today I will cover...
             II. Need: The reasons why it is necessary to be an

                  effective time manager for the community
                  college student
            III. Satisfaction: The means by which each of us
                  can make better use of our time
            IV. Visualization: And the future benefits to our
                  time-management choices now

Transition to #II: First, why must we manage our time
better?

 II. NEED Step
       A. When we forsake effective time management, our
            present decisions do not serve to fulfill future goals.
              1. "Planning is about the future impact of
                  present decisions." (Warnick)
              2. Planning frees us up to focus on the
                   SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 547

                  important rather than the urgent.
              3. Planning allows us to focus on people, not

                  tasks.
       B. Not planning leads to anxiety.

              1. "Anxiety is the warning light on our spiritual
                  dashboard." (Warnick)

              2. If your daily routine is not going to complete
                  your goals, there is a problem with your daily
                  priorities.

              3. Planning allows us to complete necessary tasks
                  without stress.

Transition to #III: Now that we have assessed the reasons to
plan, let us determine the methods by which to plan.

III. SATISFACTION STEP
       A. Plan around your short-term and long-term goals.
              1. Plan tasks that follow the "Smart Tips"
                  strategy.
              2. Write a paragraph to determine your
                  individual mission statement, and make sure
                  your schedule is serving to follow your set of
                  values.
       B. Create a master/weekly schedule. (Dartmouth
            College)
              1. Write everything down.
              2. Create margin within your schedule. (Leave
548 | SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION

                  time for things you don't expect.)

Transition to #IV: In the end, what does it look like after
you've improved your time- management strategies?

IV. VISUALIZATION Step
       A. When good planning occurs in your life, you have
            time to do the things that are most important.
              1. Good planning allows you to have worry-free
                  rest.
              2. When short-term goals are fulfilled, it is
                  refreshing and fulfilling.
       B. When things are orderly in your daily life, you can
            pursue excellence in a carefree manner.
              1. If you're living to fulfill a long-term calling,
                  the end goal is what will motivate you in your
                  daily life.
              2. When your vision is for the long-term, the
                  worries of the short-term are only temporary.

Signal End: Let us review what we have learned and decide
what to do about it.

 V. ACTION Step
       A. Restate Central Idea: After listening to my
            speech, I expect that you will have taken away
            effective tools for better managing your time.
                   SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION | 549

       B. Recap Main Points: After discussing the reasons
            to plan, the means by which to plan, and what it
            really looks like to lead a time-managed lifestyle, I
            hope you will go out and add some more freedom
            through structure to your daily schedule.

       C. Call to Action (Clincher): Do not think of
            planning as yet another commitment, but as
            something that will free up time to do the things
            you want to do. "You do what you have to do so
            you can do what you want to do"--The Great
            Debaters.

Works Cited

Ellis, D. Becoming a Master Student. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin. 2014. Print.

   "Managing Your Time." Dartmouth. Trustees of
Dartmouth College. 10 Oct. 2018. Web. 2 May 2019.

   "Smart Tips." The University of Chicago. The University of
Chicago. 2018. Web. 2 May 2019.

   Warnick, David. Self Leadership. New Life Interns. New
Life Community Church, Rathdrum, ID. 21 Sep. 2018.
Lecture.
550 | SAMPLE 3B: SPEECH TO MOTIVATE TO ACTION
                                    REFERENCES | 551

REFERENCES

Chapter 1

Indeed Editorial Team. (2023, February 3). Top11 skills employers

look for in a job candidate.Career Guide: Resumes and Cover

Letters. https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/resumes-cover-

letters/skills-employers-look-for

Blair, A. (2010, Nov. 28). Information overload, then and now. The

Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from

http://chronicle.com/article/ Information-Overload-Then-

and/125479.

Davenport, T. H. & Beck, J.C. (2001). The attention economy:

Understanding the new currency of business. Cambridge, MA:

Harvard Business Press.

Harper, D. (2015). Online Etymology Dictionary. Retrieved

December 3, 2015, from http://www.etymonline.com/

index.php?term=communication.

McCornack, S. (2010). Reflect and relate: An introduction to

interpersonal communication. Boston, MA: Bedford/St.

Martin's.

Rieland, R. (2012, May 7). Big data or too much information?

Smithsonian.             Retrieved  from

http://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/big-data-or-

too-much-information-82491666.
552 | REFERENCES

Simon, H. A. (1971), Designing Organizations for an Information-

Rich World. In M. Greenberger (Ed.), Computers,

Communication, and the Public Interest (40-41). Baltimore,

MD: The Johns Hopkins Press.

Gillick, M. & Magoulias, C. (2020, November 9). Competing against

outside distractions in online classrooms for grade-school

students.         https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Mitchell-

Gillick/publication/

348741938_Competing_Against_Outside_Distractions_in_O

nline_Classrooms_for_Grade-School_Students/links/

600e85fea6fdccdcb87adba0/Competing-Against-Outside-

Distractions-in-Online-Classrooms-for-Grade-School-

Students.pdf

Wurman, R. S. (1989). Information anxiety. New York, NY:

Doubleday.

Chapter 2

Schlegel, A., Kohler, P. J., Fogelson, S. V., Alexander, P., Konuthula,

D., & Ulric Tse, P. (2013). Network structure and dynamics of

the mental workspace. Proceedings of the National Academy of

Sciences of the United States of America, 110(40). 16277-16282.

Chapter 3

Williams, J. R. (1998). Guidelines for the use of multimedia in

instruction. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics

Society 42nd Annual Meeting, 1447-1451.

Chapter 5

Burton, N. (2012). Is suicide more common at Christmas time?

Psychology            Today.  Retrieved              from
                         REFERENCES | 553

https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/hide-and-seek/

201212/ is-suicide-more-common-christmas-time.

Chapman, C. (2011). A brief history of blogging.

Webdesignerdepot.com.    Retrieved                   from

http://www.webdesignerdepot.com/2011/03/a-brief-history-

of-blogging.

Giles, J. (2005). Internet encyclopedias go head to head: Jimmy Wales'

Wikipedia comes close to Britannica in terms of the accuracy of

its science entries. Nature, 438(7070). 900-1.

Knoblauch, M. (2014). A brief history of the domain name.

Mashable.com. Retrieved from http://mashable.com/2014/03/

10/domain-names-history/#Wxnv32uQSqqt.

Chapter 6

Dukette, D., & Cornish, D. (2009). The essential 20: Twenty

components of an excellent health care team. New York, NY:

RoseDog Books.

McCroskey, J. C., & Teven, J. J. (1999). Goodwill: A reexamination

of the construct and its measurement. Communication

Monographs, 66, 90-103.

Chapter 7

Loftus, E. F., & Palmer, J. C. (1974). Reconstruction of auto-mobile

destruction: An example of the interaction between language

and memory. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior,

13,        585-589.      https://webfiles.uci.edu/eloftus/

LoftusPalmer74.pdf.

Chapter 8
554 | REFERENCES

Andersen, P. (2007). Nonverbal communication: Forms and functions
      (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Waveland Press.

Rapport [Def.1]. (2016). Google definitions. Retrieved from
      https://www.google.com/
      search?q=define%3Arapportandie=utf-8andoe=utf-8.

Chapter 9
Mueller, P. A., & Oppenheimer, D. M. (2014). The pen is mightier

      than the keyboard: Advantages of longhand over laptop note
      taking. Psychological Science, 25, 1159-1168.
Murphy Paul, A. (2013). You'll never learn! Students can't resist
      multitasking and it's impairing their memory. Slate.com.
      Retrieved from http://www.slate.com/articles/health_
      and_science/science/2013/05/
      multitasking_while_studying_divided_attention_and_technol
      ogical_gadgets.html.
Sana, F., Weston, T., & Cepeda, N. J. (2013). Laptop multitasking
      hinders classroom learning for both users and nearby peers.
      Computers and Education, 62, 24-31.
Chapter 11
Griffin, E. (2014). Theory resources. A first look at communication
      theory. Retrieved from http://www.afirstlook.com/
      theory_resources/by_type/overview.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. (1986). The elaboration likelihood
      model of persuasion. Advances in experimental social psychology,
      19, 123-192.
Sherif, C. W. (1963). Social categorization as a function of latitude
                                                                   REFERENCES | 555

      of acceptance and series range. Journal of Abnormal and Social
      Psychology, 67, 148-56.
Chapter 12
Gass, R. H., & Seiter, J. S. (2019). Persuasion: Social influence and
      compliance gaining. New York, NY: Routledge.
Sinek, S. (2009, September). Simon Sinek: How great leaders inspire
      action [Video file]. Retrieved from http://www.ted.com/talks/
      simon_sinek_how_great_leaders_ inspire_action.
556 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

APPENDIX A: SPEECH
GRADING RUBRICS FOR
COMM-101
     APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101 | 557

Instructor Evaluation Speech
1: Speech to Inform
558 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

Student:                                   Section #:
                                                  COMMENTS
SPEECH FORMAT (35)

Introduction (10)

Gain Attention       2

Give Audience incentive to listen 2

Establish speaker credibility 2

Assert Central Idea  1

Preview Main Points  2

Transition to Body   1

Body (20)

Clear, well-developed organization 5

Sufficient support material 5

Related main point to audience 4

Transitions between main points 2

Oral Footnote #1:    2

Oral Footnote #2:    2

Conclusion (5)

Signal Ending        1

Restate Central Idea; recap main points 2
APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101 | 559

Clincher                        2

DELIVERY (15)

Eye Contact: Looked at
everyone in audience and 6
held eye contact

Notes: Used to jog memory; did not read 4

Vocal/Verbal: Volume, rate, fluency 3

Appearance: Appropriate attire/posture 2

               Subtotal

Speech Time:

          Time Penalty

TOTAL POINTS (out of
                           50)
560 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

Instructor Evaluation Speech
2: Speech to Inform with
Visuals
APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101 | 561

Student:                              Section #:
                                             COMMENTS
SPEECH FORMAT (55)

Introduction (10)

Gain Attention       2

Give Audience incentive to listen 2

Establish speaker credibility 2

Assert Central Idea  1

Preview Main Points  2

Transition to Body   1

Body (40)

Clear, well-developed organization 7

Sufficient support material 7

Related main point to audience 5

Transition between main points 6

Oral Footnote #1:    5

Oral Footnote #2:    5

Oral Footnote #3:    5

Conclusion (5)

Signal Ending        1
562 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

Restate Central Idea; recap main points 2

Clincher                       2

DELIVERY (25)

Eye Contact: Looked at
everyone in audience and 10
held eye contact

Notes: Used to jog memory; did not read 6

Vocal/Verbal: Volume, rate, fluency 5

Gestures: Natural, appropriate 2

Appearance: Appropriate attire/posture 2

VISUAL AIDS (15)

Professional Design            6

Purposeful                     6

Set up; used appropriately 3

QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD (5) 5

               Subtotal

Speech Time:

            Time Penalty

TOTAL POINTS (out of
                         100)
    APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101 | 563

Instructor Evaluation Speech
3: Speech to Motivate Action
564 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

Student:                                    Section #:
                                                   COMMENTS
SPEECH FORMAT (80)

I. Attention (15)

Gain Attention           3

Relate to Audience       3

Relate to Self           3

Assert Central Idea      3

Preview Main Points      2

Transition to Need Step  1

II. Need (20)

Clear problem established/ supported 10

Related problem to this audience 8

Transition to Satisfaction Step 2

III. Satisfaction (15)

Audience-centered plan/ solution offered 5

Plan meets this audience's needs 5

Satisfy possible objections 3

Transition to Visualization Step 2

Oral Citations (15)
APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101 | 565

Oral Footnote #1:        5

Oral Footnote #2:        5

Oral Footnote #3:        5

IV. Visualization (10)

Relate benefits to audience 5

Vivid mental image of aud. involvement 5

V. Call to Action (5)

Signal Ending            1

Restate Central Idea; recap main points 2

Call to action/clincher  2

DELIVERY (50)

Eye Contact: Looked at
everyone in audience and 15
held eye contact

Notes: Used to jog memory; did not read 10

Vocal/Verbal: Volume, rate, fluency 10

Language: Adapted to audience/context 5

Nonverbal: Movement/

gestures, posture,       10

appearance

VISUAL AIDS (18)
566 | APPENDIX A: SPEECH GRADING RUBRICS FOR COMM-101

Design                         6

Purposeful                     6

Implementation                 6

QUESTION AND ANSWER PERIOD (2) 2

                Subtotal

Speech Time:

            Time Penalty

TOTAL POINTS (out of
                         150)
     APPENDIX B: COMMUNICATION ACADEMIC CERTIFICATE | 567

APPENDIX B:
COMMUNICATION
ACADEMIC CERTIFICATE

Communication skills, both verbal and nonverbal, are essential
to success, sustainability, and upward progression in the
workplace. Beyond the workplace, competence in
communication is an integral component of relationships as
well as positive local and global community citizenship. Good
communication skills are unfailingly ranked as one of the most
important attributes sought after by the business community.

   This program offers students an opportunity to develop
and refine communication skills in a variety of professional
and personal contexts which are critical to success in the job
market. The flexibility of the communication certificate. as
well as the range of classes offered, will allow students to hone
their communication abilities in areas specific to their needs
and desired career path. Few assets are more valuable to career
or community than a basic understanding of the dynamics
of communication. This program applies toward the
requirements for an associate degree in Communication.
568 | APPENDIX B: COMMUNICATION ACADEMIC CERTIFICATE

   Upon completion of the program, students will be able
to:

   Identify and explain foundational communication
      theories and processes.

   Select, demonstrate, and adapt appropriate forms of
      verbal, nonverbal, and mediated expression that support
      and enhance the meaning of messages across a variety of
      contexts.

   Monitor and present oneself to others across a variety of
      contexts.

Questions? Email the Communication Department at
commdept@nic.edu.
APPENDIX C: NORTH IDAHO COLLEGE COMMUNICATION COURSE
                                                                     OFFERINGS | 569

APPENDIX C: NORTH
IDAHO COLLEGE
COMMUNICATION
COURSE OFFERINGS

Communication courses involve much more than public
speaking! Remember, businesses consistently rank one's
ability to communicate effectively one of the most important
skills they consider when hiring a person. Good
communication skills complement any career choice or
relationship, and since most students must round out their
studies at North Idaho College with electives, why not receive
some additional communication training that could pay off
dividends? Here's a brief description of other communication
courses North Idaho College offers:

Oral Interpretation

COMM-103: 3 credits
   This course makes literature come alive through effective

reading and interpreting is the goal of this course. Students will
570 | APPENDIX C: NORTH IDAHO COLLEGE COMMUNICATION
COURSE OFFERINGS

learn to select, analyze, and perform literary pieces including
stories, plays, poems, and famous orations.

Interviewing Techniques

COMM-111: 2 credits
   This course provides practical experience in the

development of interviewing techniques for a variety of
settings and career applications. The process is analyzed and
practiced, including setting up, conducting, and assessing the
interview. Students learn to design and carry out effective
interviews through study and practice of the practical "do's
and don'ts" for several types of interviews. Skills gained are
helpful to those pursuing careers in journalism,
communications, law enforcement, psychology, oral history,
and counseling.

Dynamics of Social Media

COMM-207: 3 credits
   This course explores emerging and established social media

communication platforms and their impact on human
interaction. Topics discussed and explored include social
media history, structure, and functions; virality; and
persuasion and marketing via new media.
APPENDIX C: NORTH IDAHO COLLEGE COMMUNICATION COURSE
                                                                      OFFERINGS | 571

Argumentation

COMM-209: 3 credits
   Arguments are all around us. Learning how to use and

refute arguments will be beneficial to anyone's career and
personal life. This class will equip you with critical thinking
skills which will help you create and evaluate arguments. While
argumentation involves debate, this class is much more, as it is
an exercise in deciphering and delivering arguments in spoken,
written, and visual form.

Nonverbal Communication

COMM-212: 3 credits
   75% or more of all communication messages are nonverbal!

So, what you don't know about what you are not saying could
hurt you! This course introduces you to the basic concepts of
body language, symbols, and various means of communicating
without using the spoken language.

Introduction to Intercultural
Communication

COMM-220: 3 credits
   We live in a shrinking world, and our contact with other

cultures is inevitable. This may be the only course you can take
572 | APPENDIX C: NORTH IDAHO COLLEGE COMMUNICATION
COURSE OFFERINGS

in college that addresses the crucial issues of communicating
successfully with other cultures. (GEM 5 course)

Interpersonal Communication

COMM-233: 3 credits
   This course deals primarily with understanding one's own

communication in relationships, and how to improve
relationships through better communication. It is an excellent
course for developing skills necessary in everyday life and living
where relationships must be developed and maintained. It is
impossible not to personally benefit from this course! (GEM 6
course)

Small Group Communication

COMM-236: 3 credits
   This is an interactive and practical course that teaches you

how to become a more effective and productive member of
a small group/career team. As more organizations use small
groups to solve problems and conduct business, acquiring
team leadership skills can be an asset on any resume. This
course includes service-learning projects in our community.

Mass Media in a Free Society

COMJ-140: 3 credits
APPENDIX C: NORTH IDAHO COLLEGE COMMUNICATION COURSE
                                                                     OFFERINGS | 573

   This course examines the development, successes, and
failures of today's American media. Students will learn to
become media-literate consumers of books, magazines,
newspapers, film, television, the internet, and other modern
formats. Media theories, public relations, and advertising will
also be discussed. (GEM 6 course)
574 | APPENDIX D: SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS

APPENDIX D: SAMPLE
DEMOGRAPHIC
ANALYSIS

Please--no names!

Directions: Circle the appropriate answers.

Enrollment: Full-time student Part-time student

Type: Transfer/General Studies Professional-Technical

Dual Credit

Major: General Studies Business Education

Communication

Pre-Medical-Related      Psychology

Other:______________

1. Age:
      a. 19 and younger
      b. 20-24
      c. 25-39
     d. 40 and older

2. Sex:
      a. Female
      b. Male

3. Marital status:
               APPENDIX D: SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS | 575

      a. single
      b. committed relationship
      c. married
     d. separated
      e. divorced
      f. widowed
4. Number of Children:
      a. no children
      b. one child
      c. more than one child
5. Religious preference:
      a. Atheist/Agnostic
      b. Christian
      c. Jewish
     d. Muslim
      e. Buddhist
      f. Other:___________
6. Political Affiliation:
      a. Democrat
      b. Republican
      c. Independent
     d. Supporter of a third party (Libertarian, Green,

          Socialist, etc.)
      e. Non-Political
7. Personal/family income:
      a. $10,000 or below
      b. $10,001-15,000
576 | APPENDIX D: SAMPLE DEMOGRAPHIC ANALYSIS

        c. $15,001-30,000
       d. $30,001-60,000
        e. over $60,000
 8. I am from:
        a. the country
       b. a small town
        c. a medium-sized town
       d. a city
        e. a big city
 9. My financial support mainly comes from (circle all
      that apply):
        a. parents, spouse, or other family member
       b. full-time job
        c. part-time or summer job
       d. savings
        e. scholarships/grants/loans
10. I currently live:
        a. at home with parents/family
       b. in a rental room/apartment/house
        c. in the residence hall
       d. in a home I own
        e. Other:_____________
         APPENDIX E: SAMPLE AUDIENCE ANALYSIS-- INFORMATIVE
                                                                          SPEECH | 577

APPENDIX E: SAMPLE
AUDIENCE ANALYSIS--
INFORMATIVE SPEECH

Name: Sally Student
   Topic: Developments of the personal computer
   3 Main Points:

  I. Origins
 II. Current and emerging technology
III. Computers of the future

 1. Rate your interest in learning about the PC, where
      1 represents "Uninterested" and 5 represents "Very
      Interested." (circle number)

                 1 2 3 4 5

 2. How often do you use a computer at home? (select
      one)
       A. Never/Seldom
       B. Once or twice a week
       C. 3-5 times a week
578 | APPENDIX E: SAMPLE AUDIENCE ANALYSIS-- INFORMATIVE
SPEECH

       D. Daily
 3. How do you use your computer? (check all that

      apply)

... Browsing
   ... Research
   ... Email
   ... Instant messaging
   ... Games
   ... Word processing
   ... Databases
   ... Spreadsheets
   ... Other:__________________

 4. Have you ever used a tablet? Yes No

 5. Do you find that user interface (e.g., Start menus in
      Windows) could be improved in a way that the
      machine would be easier to use? Yes No

 6. What feature or function would you most like to
      have in future computers?
            APPENDIX F: SAMPLE AUDIENCE ANALYSIS--PERSUASIVE
                                                                          SPEECH | 579

APPENDIX F: SAMPLE
AUDIENCE
ANALYSIS--PERSUASIVE
SPEECH

Problem: Big Box Store hurts local economies, uses cheap
overseas labor and corrupt and discriminatory business
practices

1. What is your position on this problem? (circle one)

Unaware Aware/Opposed Aware/Neutral Aware/Agree

2. How urgent of a problem is this issue in your life,
    with 1 representing "Not urgent at all" and 5
    representing "Very Urgent"? (circle one)

1  2  3  4  5

3. How frequently do you shop at Big Box Store?
    (select one)
     A. Never
     B. Once a week
580 | APPENDIX F: SAMPLE AUDIENCE ANALYSIS--PERSUASIVE
SPEECH

       C. More than once a week
       D. Every day

Explain why you shop/don't shop at Big Box Store with
that frequency.

 4. Are you aware of the charges of corruption/
      discrimination that have been brought against Big
      Box Store? Yes No

 5. Does Big Box Store have a union in America? Yes
         No

 6. Where are most of Big Box Store's labor and
      products outsourced? (select one)
       A. Japan
       B. Mexico
       C. China
       D. Other:_________

 7. What is the average yearly income of a Big Box
      Store employee? (select one)
       A. Less than $20,000
       B. $20,000-$30,000
       C. $30,000-$40,000
       D. Less than $40,000
       E. I have no idea

 8. Big Box Store employees on tax-funded assistance
    APPENDIX F: SAMPLE AUDIENCE ANALYSIS--PERSUASIVE
                                                                  SPEECH | 581

programs cost taxpayers _______ per year. (select
one)

       A. $50 million
       B. $500 million
       C. $1.5 billion
       D. I have no idea
582 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

APPENDIX G: SPEECH
TOPIC IDEAS

How nuclear power works
   Biography of someone you admire
   How to make pizza
   The history of comic books
   How to change your car's oil
   The story of how your school was founded
   How to pick a bottle of wine
   The history of your hometown
   How to swing a golf club
   Trends in the stock market
   How to drive a stick-shift
   History of a favorite product brand
   How to shoot a basketball
   Description of life in another country
   How to weave a basket
   The three branches of U.S. government
   How to read a map
   How roads are built
   The Seven Wonders of the World
   Disneyland
   How to knit a scarf
                                APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 583

Professional baseball stadiums
Local folklore
Roadside attractions
Chinese food
UFOs
Real-life vampires
Types of cheese
How to play chess
Key phrases in a foreign language
How to plan a wedding
How to tie various knots
Cruise vacations
Crazy laws
How to improve your health
Electric cars
Life in the future
How to throw a good party
Working in the fast-food industry
How to play the kazoo
Origins of superstitions
Lesser-known presidents
Computer viruses
Types of poetry
Evolution of video games
Raising pet snakes
Serial killers
Foreign TV shows
584 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   How to make a website
   Civil War generals
   Famous diplomats
   All about your favorite vacation spot
   Famous speeches
   How to get good grades
   How to write a resume
   How to survive a job interview
   Types of tropical fish
   Dog shows
   The newspaper business
   All about a favorite radio show
   How a computer works
   How to organize a closet
   U.S. territories
   Voodoo
   Comparison of different religions
   Schools of painting
   The latest discoveries in astronomy
   Fringe political parties
   How to find cheap airline tickets
   Competitive horseback riding
   How to make fishing lures
   Labor Unions
   Internet dating Cults
   Dyslexia
   Impact of media on society
                                APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 585

Branches of the military
Famous advertising campaigns
Nursing homes
How to write a will
The United Nations
How to find your ancestors
Deep sea fishing
A particular period of architecture
How to construct an argument
Saving money on your income taxes
Sports card collecting
The history of the Bible
Book reviews for a particular author
How to avoid boredom
Sales tactics
Comparison of economic systems
Censorship in history
Psychological profiling
Picking a name for your children
America's fastest growing cities
How to improve your manners
How to improve your conversation skills
World War II heroes
The Miss America Pageant
Interesting cultures
How to raise rabbits
Exotic pets
586 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   Ballroom dancing
   Euthanasia
   Identity theft
   Evolution of voting laws
   Natural disasters
   Breeds of dogs
   Dream interpretation
   Drinking problems
   Drug problems
   The FBI
   Basic economic principles
   Advances in education
   Spies
   Evolution of the English language
   National Parks
   Young billionaires
   Former child stars
   Obesity epidemic
   How to be more romantic
   Types of common plants
   How to cook vegetarian
   Muscle cars
   Antique collecting
   Dog training
   Model railroading
   How to perform a magic trick
   The intelligence of dolphins
                                APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 587

Multi-Level Marketing
Choosing a digital camera
Funny inventions
Stupid criminals
Code breaking
How to play poker
Child geniuses
Spoon collecting
Charitable organizations
Reincarnation
How to break bad habits
Weight lifting
How the circulatory system works
Origin of holidays
Interior decorating
Lie detecting
The Supreme Court
Learning styles
Life in jail
How to properly brush your teeth
How to set up an aquarium
Organized crime
Street gangs
How to make soup
The worst professional sports teams
How the telephone works
The U.S. Postal Service
588 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   How to apply makeup
   Investment strategies
   The lottery
   The Industrial Revolution
   Medicines from nature
   Memory loss
   Differences in male and female communication
   Mental illnesses
   The Middle Ages
   How the brain works
   Prohibition
   Drug laws
   Airplane stunts
   The history of your favorite musical group
   Useful websites
   The Great Depression
   Famous riots
   How to play your favorite board or video game
   Interesting world records
   Different philosophical perspectives
   The welfare system
   City planning
   Reality TV shows
   Types of birth control
   Choosing the right tires for your car
   Diploma mills
   The most dangerous jobs
                                APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 589

The trucking industry
Basic first aid
Coin collecting
The British Royal Family
Ice cream making
How search engines work
Banned books
The worst trades in sports history
How galaxies are formed
Native American tribes
Exotic breeds of cats
How to make a cocktail
How to turkey-call
How bottled water is purified
Sports card collecting
The U.S. Post Office
How cellular phones work
Computers through the decades
Spring Break destinations
The rising cost of education
Early 20th-century film making
Unique websites
How to back up your DVDs
How to make candles
Hand-held PDAs
Famous robberies
Wedding traditions of other cultures
590 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   Robots now and in the future
   Rock collecting
   The career of a favorite musician
   How to cure/prevent hangovers
   Women in politics
   The Great Lakes Conspiracy theories
   Iraq war
   Phobias
   Immigrants in the USA
   Stockholm syndrome
   Military benefits
   GMOs
   Climate change
   Strategies for healthy eating
   E.S.P.
   Famous golf courses
   Gold rushes outside of California
   U.S. immigration patterns through history
   Code breaking
   Submarines TV sitcoms
   Landfills
   Beekeeping
   All-terrain vehicles
   Satellite radio
   Exotic fruits
   What to look for in a new car
   Firefighting
                                 APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 591

Canadian football
The sport of "curling"
The insurance industry
Famous comedy duos
Word origins
How chocolate is made
Bio-diesel
New technologies
Ghosts
How the Earth was formed
Overcoming conflict
The longest books ever written
How to ski
How to make beer
Fastest growing careers
Origins of clichs
Schizophrenia
Afghanistan war
Brainwashing
Bartering
Healthcare Cyber safety
Women in the media
Preventing elder abuse
Civil War history/lore
World Cup
Copyright violations online
Reality of a dream
592 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   Importance of vitamins and minerals
   The origin of alphabets
   The history of tobacco use
   Human cadavers--history of, uses of DNA evidence
   Women in the military
   Herbs as medicine
   The history of greyhound dogs
   How to achieve goals
   Albert Einstein's contributions to science
   Being confident
   Believing in yourself
   Breaking bad habits
   Being optimistic in life
   Being a positive talker
   Helen Keller's life
   How self-motivation works
   Handling responsibility
   Importance of discipline
   Importance of meditation
   Life and works of Mahatma Gandhi
   Life and works of Mother Teresa
   People who changed the world
   Powerful communication
   Weight issues
   What winners do to win
   Why travel is beneficial to education
   Near death experiences
                                APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS | 593

How to start a good personal inventory
The beauty of wolves
Social networking
Funeral oration
Graduation checklist
Roadside attractions
How to adopt a dog
Allergies
School shootings
Toxic chemicals in food
Brain mapping and paralysis
Hypnosis
The many kinds of tea
The many kinds of coffee
The process of building any given product on the market
Anxiety and its effects
Human facial recognition
Different types of dreams
Resort vacations
World music
Teenage pregnancy
Indian culture or Bollywood
What to do on spring break
How to make an income while a student
The basics of financial aid
How to get along with your roommate
Some inexpensive places to take your date
594 | APPENDIX G: SPEECH TOPIC IDEAS

   How to get that great internship
   Basics of getting a fellowship
   What to do when a roommate moves out
   How to survive freshman year
   How to take the GRE
   How get a student job on campus
   Great vacation bargains for students
   What to do in your senior year
   Moving out of the dorm to an apartment off campus
   Freebies and discounts for students
   How to fill out a FAFSA
                                          APPENDIX H: THE CRAAP TEST | 595

APPENDIX H: THE
CRAAP TEST

Source: Photograph by StockSnap via Pixabay

The CRAAP Test provides a list of questions that help
scholars evaluate the quality of the information they gather
for use in academic papers, speeches/presentations, and more.
Depending on the specific topic area, some questions will offer
more critical data than others.
596 | APPENDIX H: THE CRAAP TEST

Evaluation Criteria

Currency: How timely is the information?

   When was the information created?
   Has the information been revised or updated?
   If the topic requires up-to-date information, then will

      older sources work?

Relevance: How important is the information?

   Who is the intended audience?
   Is the information presented at an appropriate academic

      level (i.e., not too basic and not too advanced)?
   Have several sources been reviewed before deciding that

      this one works best?

Authority: Who created the information?

   Who is the author/publisher/sponsor?
   What are the author's credentials or affiliations?
   Does the author possess the necessary qualifications to

      be write about the topic?
   Is there contact information for the author?

Accuracy: How reliable and verifiable is the information?

   How has the information been collected?
                                          APPENDIX H: THE CRAAP TEST | 597

   Is there evidence to support assertions?
   Has the information been reviewed and verified by

      others?
   Is the language used relatively free of emotion and/or

      biased language or tone?
   Are there spelling, grammar, or typographical errors?

Purpose: Why does this information exist?

   Is the information presented in more of an
      informational, persuasive, or entertaining manner?

   Did the author or authors clearly state their purpose?
   Is the information fact, opinion, or propaganda?
   Does the point of view seem impartial and objective?
   Are there political, ideological, cultural, religious, or

      other biases present?
598 | SUBJECT INDEX

SUBJECT INDEX

A B C D E F G H I J K            bits, practice
      L M N O P Q R S T          blind review
      V W Z                      blogs
                                 body movement
A                                brainstorming
accuracy, language               C
active vs passive visual aids    call to action step, speech to
alliteration
American Association of                motivate
                                 caring/goodwill
      Colleges and Universities  central idea / tips to create
antithesis
anxiety symptoms                       central idea
APA guidelines                   clarity, language
appearance/dress                 clarity, visual aids
argumentation                    clarity, vocal
attention-getter                 clincher
audience demographics            communication academic

      (sample survey)                  certificate
audience surveys (sample         communication course

      survey)                          offerings
B                                communication definition
back loading                     communication theory,
biofeedback
                                       advanced
communication theory, basic              SUBJECT INDEX | 599
communication, intercultural
communication,                 F
                               fallacies, logical
      interpersonal            feedback
communication, intrapersonal   first impressions
communication, mass            front loading
communication, nonverbal       funnel approach
communication, public          G
communication, small group     gain attention step, speech to
competence
conclusions                          motivate
concrete language              glossophobia
connotation                    Golden Circle, The
context                        Google
credibility, visual aids       grading rubric, speech to
D
denotation                           inform without visual
doublespeak                          aids
E                              grading rubric, speech to
either-or questions                  inform with visual aids
Elaboration Likelihood Model   grading rubric, speech to
electronic distraction               motivate
emotion, expressing / emotion  graphs/charts
ethos                          groupthink
euphemisms                     Gutenberg, Johannes
extemporaneous                 H
eye contact                    handouts
                               hearing vs listening
                               impromptu speaking
                               I
600 | SUBJECT INDEX           momentum vs accuracy
                              Monroe, Alan
inclusive pronouns            multiple choice questions
Industrial Revolution         muscle memory
inflated language             N
Information Age               narratives
intensity                     need step, speech to motivate
interference, external        note card strategies
interference, internal        O
internet                      objections, addressing
internet domains              oral citations
internet sources              organizational patterns
J                             P
jargon                        paralanguage
journals, trade and           parallel structure
                              pathos
      professional            pauses/fillers
K                             peer evaluations
King, Jr., Dr. Martin Luther  persuasion
L                             physical objects, use of
logos                         pitch/intonation
M                             plagiarism
maps                          popular literature
medium (also, channel)        positive imagery or
memorization, advice against
memorization vs learning            visualization
memorized speeches            positive visualization
mindfulness                   poster boards/flip charts
miscommunication
MLA guidelines
PowerPoint/Prezi                          SUBJECT INDEX | 601
preview of points
preview of points motivating    rhetorical questions
                                rhetorical triangle
      to action                 S
primacy effect                  sample outline, speech to
printing press
progressive revelation                inform
projection (vocal)              sample outline, speech to
purpose, general
purpose, specific                     motivate
Q                               satisfaction step, speech to
Q&A period
quick poll                            motivate
R                               scaled questions
rate of speech                  scholarly literature
reasoning, inductive vs         self as visual aid
                                semantic differential scale
      deductive                 sender
recap                           share test, social media
receiver                        signal end
recency effect                  signal end, motivate to action
relate to audience              Sinek, Simon
relate to audience, motivating  social desirability bias
                                Social Judgment Theory
      to action                 Socrates
relate to self                  speech title
relate to self, motivating to   static displays
                                stories, use of
      action                    survey analysis
rhetorical devices              survey length
                                survey methods
602 | SUBJECT INDEX            vivid language
                               vocal quality
syllogisms                     vocal rate
T                              W
timer practice                 Wikipedia
traditional research           wow factor
transitions                    writing as technology
trustworthiness                Z
V                              zettabyte
video/audio clips
visualization step, speech to

      motivate
