        Preparing to Publish

Sarah Huffman; Elena Cotos; and Kimberly Becker

                                     Iowa State University Digital Press
                                                         Ames, Iowa
Preparing to Publish by Sarah Huffman; Elena Cotos; and Kimberly Becker is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.

You are free to copy, share, adapt, remix, transform, and build upon the material as long as you follow the terms of the
license.

This is a publication of the
Iowa State University Digital Press
701 Morrill Rd, Ames, IA 50011
https://www.iatatedigitalpress.com
digipress@iastate.edu
Contents

Introduction                                                1

Chapter 1

What is a Scientific Argument?                              3

How to Use this E-book                                      4

Note to Students                                            6

Note to Instructors                                         7

Chapter 2

Conceptualizing the Research Article                        9

The Sections of a Research Article                          10

What is Research?                                           11

What is a Genre?                                            13

Chapter 2 Synopsis: The Organization of a Research Article  14

Chapter 3: Writing the Introduction Section

Conceptualizing the Research Article                        16

Goals of an Effective Introduction Section                  17

Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory     18

Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche                    25

Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche                   33

Some Other Important Points about Introductions             46

Chapter 3 Synopsis: Writing Introductions                   47

Chapter 4: Writing the Methods Section

Conceptualizing the Research Article                        50

Goals of an Effective Methods Section                       51
Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods                52

Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study                               63

Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data                               74

Chapter 4 Synopsis: Writing Methods Sections                     79

Chapter 5: Writing the Results Section

Conceptualizing the Research Article: Review                     82

Goals of an Effective Results Section                            84

Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche                            86

Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche                              90

Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche                             94

Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche                              100

Chapter 5 Synopsis: Writing Results Sections                     104

Chapter 6: Discussion/Conclusion Section(s)

Conceptualizing the Research Article                             107

Goals of an Effective Discussion/Conclusion Section              108

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory      110

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings         116

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the Territory            123

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory  127

Chapter 6 Synopsis: Writing the Discussion/Conclusion            133

Chapter 7: Writing Abstracts

Defining Abstracts                                               136

Goals of an Abstract                                             138

Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar   140

Chapter 7 Synopsis: Writing the Abstract                         146

About the Contributors                                           148
Introduction

Preparing to Publish is an e-book that guides readers into the world of academic manuscript publication.
The primary audience is graduate students and those who instruct them. The materials here build upon
a tradition of English for Academic Purposes to provide clear guides to writing research reports. The
text explores the communicative goals and strategies associated with successful academic writing and
demonstrates the relationships between the sections of a manuscript.
For students and novice research writers and scholars, this book is intended as an important resource
for navigating academic writing, specifically empirical research write-ups. It will help students identify
functions of the research article as a whole and explore authors' meaning as they write each section of the
research article. This book will also supply strategies for understanding research writing within students'
individual disciplines and yield helpful tips for planning for, outlining, drafting, and reviewing their own
research reports.
For instructors and mentors of graduate students and novice researchers, this book will serve as a valuable
reference guide in helping those unfamiliar with the standards of scholarly writing to better comprehend
the research writing genre. It can be used within a graduate-level class in any number of academic
disciplines and/or referenced as a useful pedagogical resource for students to consult as they learn the
mandatory components of the research article. Alongside research article section-specific instructional
materials are real-world examples of the building blocks that make up the writing. These samples are
derived from a range of authentic, published research articles from highly reputable peer-reviewed journals
and were hand-selected by field-specific experts in varying academic programs.
We hope you will take time to examine the goals and strategies covered in each chapter of the book.
We recommend using these elements as you explore published writing in your own field. Equipped with
these new helpful tools, you will be drafting your research article with more ease, more intention, and less
confusion about the type of writing you are expected to produce at this advanced academic level.

                                                                                                                                                                     Introduction | 1
Chapter 1

2 | Chapter 1
 What is a Scientific Argument?

  When we think of the word "argument," we often envision a disagreement between two or more parties.
  In writing, the "argument" refers more exclusively to the case you are building and for which you have
  supporting information to strengthen that case. In the scientific research article, you will be constructing an
  argument about the legitimacy, value, and reliability of the research you have conducted. The more robust
  your supporting data and more well-crafted and better reasoned the interpretations of your results are, the
  more you will convince your audience of the acceptability of your argument.
    What is a scientific argument in the context of scholarly writing?

        · a claim backed up (warranted) by evidence
        · not a heated disagreement
  The concept of the argument can be applied to any part of the empirical research write-up, from the entire

                                                                                                                                                                                              1

  article or thesis or dissertation down to each individual sentence (Cargill & O'Connor, 2009) . For this reason,
  it is important that research writers are intentional about what argument they want to make (or what they
  aim to convince their audience of) before they begin writing; this will shape not only each sentence, but also
  the text as a whole.

1. Cargill, M. & O'Connor, P. (2009). Writing scientific research articles: Strategies and steps. Wiley-Blackwell.
                                                                                                                                              What is a Scientific Argument? | 3
How to Use this E-book

Prior to delving into the book's content, it is helpful to understand how the chapters are organized and
how to best exploit the instructional content and featured supplemental components. Firstly, each chapter
presents detailed descriptions of the research article sections, including authors' main goals for each section
and the strategies authors intentionally apply to achieve those goals, and what common elements we find in
every research report, no matter the discipline. To supplement this written description, a number of callout
boxes are used so you can understand how to interact with the material and use it to best process the tips
and strategies provided. Make sure to read and interact with these features so you can make the most from
your engagement with this book.
Featured chapter components:

  · Warm-Up
  · Explore and Apply
  · Examples
  · Key Takeaways

          Learning Objectives

     The learning objectives features help you understand the intent of each portion of the book. They are typically
     located at the start of the chapters and orient you to what you can expect to have learned after reading the
     given chapter.

      Warm-Up

     Warm-up features include interactive tasks, such as questions about your observations of writing in your
     discipline or short activities prompting you to reflect on your own writing process. This feature primes you to
     engage with the upcoming material in ways that are most relevant to you and your field.

4 | How to Use this E-book
      Examples

The examples features provide real-world examples of the content being described. These examples are
derived from actual peer-reviewed research publications in a variety of different disciplines and are intended to
better illustrate the instructional material in the particular section covered.

     Key Takeaways

The key takeaways features supply you with a quick summary of the overall message of each section. They can
serve as a useful thumbnail if you need a reminder about what content is provided in that part of the book.

    Explore & Apply

The explore and apply feature encourages you to investigate the writing conventions of your own discipline.
Specific tasks ask you to explore quality published research in your field so you can better match the goals and
strategies instructed in the chapter with what you observe occurring in that writing. Next, you are provided
suggestions for how to apply these goals and strategies as you construct your own written drafts.

                                                                                                                                               How to Use this E-book | 5
Note to Students

For students and novice research writers and scholars, this book is intended as an important resource
for navigating academic writing, specifically empirical research write-ups. It will help students identify
functions of the research article as a whole and explore authors' meaning as they write each section of
the research article, in addition to supplying strategies for understanding research writing within students'
individual disciplines and yielding helpful tips for planning for, outlining, drafting, and reviewing their own
research reports.
We encourage you to consult the "How to Use this E-book" segment of the book prior to getting started.
This page helps you navigate the book's features and primes you for using the text so that you get the most
out of it. You'll learn how to use the warm-up activities to start reflecting on your own writing processes,
where to find authentic examples of instructed content that are included for illustration purposes, how to
best explore published writing in your own field to understand published authors' use of certain research
article section-specific goals and strategies, and how to apply these concepts to successfully draft your own
research article.
As you encounter interactive tasks and activities in this e-book, please complete them! They are inserted
intentionally to engage you with the material and to prompt you to discover more about the academic
writing standards and conventions in your own discipline. Your recognition of what makes quality research
writing in your field will help you as you craft your own research writing and assist greatly with your
progress as an independent academic writer.

6 | Note to Students
Note to Instructors

For instructors and mentors of graduate students and novice researchers, this book will serve as a valuable
reference guide in helping those unfamiliar with the standards of scholarly writing to better comprehend
the research writing genre. It can be used within a graduate-level class in any number of academic
disciplines and/or referenced as a useful pedagogical resource for students to consult as they learn the
mandatory components of the research article. Alongside research article section-specific instructional
materials are real-world examples of the building blocks that make up the writing. These samples are
derived from a range of authentic, published research articles from highly reputable peer-reviewed journals
and were hand-selected by field-specific experts in varying academic programs.
We encourage you to peruse the "How to Use this E-book" segment of the book prior to introducing this
e-book to your students. This page helps students navigate the book's features and primes them for using
the text so that they get the most out of it. They will learn how to use the warm-up activities to start
reflecting on their own writing processes, where to find authentic examples of instructed content that are
included for illustration purposes, how to best explore published writing in their own fields to understand
published authors' use of certain research article section-specific goals and strategies, and how to apply
these concepts to successfully draft their own research articles.
Please prompt your students to take advantage of the interactive tasks and activities in this e-book. They are
inserted intentionally to engage learners with the material and discover more about the academic writing
standards and conventions in their own disciplines. Student recognition of what makes quality research
writing in their fields will help them as they write up their own empirical research and support their growth
as independent research writers.

                                                                                                                                                            Note to Instructors | 7
Chapter 2

8 | Chapter 2
Conceptualizing the Research Article

You are probably familiar with some of the sections included in a typical research article (and if not, you're
in the right place!), but even if you have read many articles, you may not have thought critically about what
the writers' intentions are in various parts of it. One of the aims of this book is to help you see the purposes
of academic research writing from the perspective of a writer - specifically, with regard to goal setting and
strategy implementation.

         Learning Objectives

     After completing this chapter, you should be able to ...
         · explain the organizational structure of a research article (RA);
         · recognize the common sections of an RA;
         · apply knowledge of the structure to understand basic communicative goals;
         · evaluate the organizational pattern in terms of general vs. specific information.

The first step for learning about how to do research writing is understanding the organizational structure
of an RA. With that in mind, use the warm-up activity below to activate your thinking about this topic.

       Warm-Up

     Consider these questions as you prepare to read:
         · We often visually depict a research article with the image of an hourglass. Why do you think this image is
             so useful for envisioning the various sections of an RA?
         · What do you consider to be the major parts of a research article (RA)?
         · Which ones contain more general information?
         · Which ones are more specific?

     Test yourself with this quick activity:
                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                   https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=930#h5p-11

                                                                                                                                   Conceptualizing the Research Article | 9
The Sections of a Research Article

If you've ever read or written almost any type of academic document, you might have noticed that they
start with introductions and end with conclusions. However, research articles - as a genre - have other
consistent sections as well. The complete list of sections for research articles include the following:

  · Introduction
  · Methods
  · Results
  · Discussion/Conclusion
A common acronym for teaching the sections of a research article is IMRD/C. In this book, we will focus
heavily on helping you understand each of those IMRD/C sections' various pieces, including their
communicative goals and strategies you can use to achieve those goals. We will also use a visual of an
hourglass to demonstrate this IMRD/C organizational structure.

We hope that this graphic along with the explanations and examples in Chapters 3-6 will allow you to
deepen your understanding of research writing and become a more successful author.
 Next, we'll investigate each part of a research article from a big-picture perspective, starting with an exploration of
 the term "research."

10 | The Sections of a Research Article
What is Research?

The word research is simple and yet at the same time quite complex. In this section, we'll explore definitions
of research and narrow down which type of research will be discussed in this book. Let's start by looking at
the word itself.

Research can be a noun or a verb, and as such, it is already a nuanced word. When we complicate it
further by introducing the idea that different academic disciplines consider research from a variety of
perspectives (and use a variety of definitions), then it seems almost impossible to define simply. As we must
start somewhere, we choose to begin with dictionary definitions of this word in both of its forms (noun and
verb):

research / rsrt, ri srt /

noun

 1. diligent and systematic inquiry or investigation into a subject in order to discover or revise facts,
      theories, applications, etc.:recent research in medicine.

 2. a particular instance or piece of research.

verb (used without object)

  · to investigate carefully.

verb (used with object)

  · to make an extensive investigation into; to research a matter thoroughly.

Other words for research include scrutinize, study, inquire, examine, investigate, explore, and many more. All
of them, however, are basically denoting a serious look at some topic from some given perspective. Scholars
consider many different academic activities to be "research," but typically the research that is presented
in the types of articles this book discusses are considered "empirical" examinations into a topic. Empirical
describes research that is not based solely on theory but rather is capable of being verified via experience,
observation, analysis, and conclusion. Of course, the use of theory/ies is included, but the research articles
we focus on in this textbook are empirical ones.

Within empirical research, there are a few predominant paradigms. These are typically labeled quantitative,
qualitative, and mixed methods research studies. You probably know which type of study is the norm for

                                                                                                                                                             What is Research? | 11
your research interests, so we will not delve into defining and describing those categories. The point to
remember is that information presented in this book could be applied to any type of research manuscript.
 Next, we'll introduce another term that is often applied to research writing: GENRE.

12 | What is Research?
 What is a Genre?

  Like the word research, the word genre also has many definitions. At its most basic level, genre is the French
  word for "type." In the world of English for Academic Purposes, it refers to a communicative event that is
  widely recognized. In terms of research, some common genres include research articles, grant proposals,
  conference papers, posters, abstracts, and even job-related documents such as cover letters, research
  statements, etc. In this book, we are focused on the research article genre.
  As genres have particular characteristics, one way of learning how to write better within a given genre is
  to explore the characteristics of it, which is one of our primary goals in this book. Before we explore the
  research article, however, it's important to know about genre systems, which are interrelated text types that
  often work together to achieve a communicative goal.

 Genre chains

                                                                                                                                        1

  The concept of genre chains was first discussed in Swales (2004) , where he defined a "chain" as a genre that
  is an antecedent of another genre. When studying English for Academic Purposes, it is common to approach
  the learning academic writing, for example, by exploring genre chains because it helps us understand
  certain types of genre, like research writing, as it is systematized and chronologically organized in an order
  of sequences.

 Genre ecologies

  Genres are also sometimes conceptualized in terms of their ecologies, or interrelated and interacting genres

                                    2

  Erickson (2000) . In terms of the research article genre, it is helpful to envision the research write-up as
  only one piece of the communication that occurs between scholars. For example, lab reports, conference
  presentations and published conference proceedings, white papers, systematic reviews, and more are all
  part of ecologies that comprise a research communication genre.

1. Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
2. Erickson, T. (2000). Making sense of computer-mediated communication (CMC): Conversations as genres, CMC systems as genre

   ecologies. In 33rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, ed. R. H. Sprague, Jr. Maui: IEEE Computer Society
   Press.

                                                                                                                                                                 What is a Genre? | 13
Chapter 2 Synopsis: The Organization of a Research
Article

This chapter outlined the organizational structure of a research article, which is commonly referred to as
IMRD/C. Each of those sections has specific goals and strategies that writers can use to optimize their
ability to communicate research successfully. One way to envision the relationships between each of the
IMRD/C sections is with the image of an hourglass.

The hourglass demonstrates the generality of the Introduction and the Discussion/Conclusion sections in
contrast to the more specific nature of the middle two sections -- Methods and Results. In the next four
chapters, you'll learn about each of those sections, respectively.

         Key Takeaways

     Each research article will contain distinct sections that tend to be rather consistent across disciplines, but
     could contain some individual variation within your discipline or even academic journal. The argument in an
     overall research article moves from being general to specific then back to more general again.

14 | Chapter 2 Synopsis: The Organization of a Research Article
Chapter 3: Writing the Introduction Section

       Learning Objectives

     After completing this chapter, you should be able to...
         · articulate the importance of Introductions,
         · recognize the communicative goals of Introductions,
         · strategize to achieve communicative goals,
         · optimize the language for introducing your research, and
         · evaluate your Introduction.

             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=57#h5p-1

                                                                                                                        Chapter 3: Writing the Introduction Section | 15
Conceptualizing the Research Article

You may be aware that research articles have specific sections regardless of the academic discipline or
journal. Generally, there are five commonly acknowledged sections of an empirical research manuscript:
Introduction (including the Literature Review), Methods, Results, and Discussion/Conclusion.

Notice that the figure depicts a research article in the shape of an hourglass. That shape provides a way for
us to consider which sections of a research article will be general/broad and which will be specific/narrow.
The first part -- the Introduction -- is one of the most general or broad parts of the entire article.

      Warm-Up

     Why do you think the Introduction needs to be general (broad) and not too specific (narrow)? What aspects of
     an Introduction contribute to its breadth?

16 | Conceptualizing the Research Article
Goals of an Effective Introduction Section

There are three main goals for an effective Introduction:
 1. Establish a research territory that fits into the existing literature;
 2. Identify a niche in the literature where your study fits;
 3. Address the niche by filling the "gap" in the literature.

The image below provides a visual way to understand the three goals:

These goals contribute an answer to the question of why an Introduction is considered more broad or
general than other parts of a research article. By establishing a territory, identifying a niche, and addressing
that niche, a writer generally needs to focus on the bigger picture, the problem, and a potential solution.
As you can see in the figure, the Introduction becomes more specific with each goal; the problem is more
specific than the territory, and your proposed solution to the problem will be even more specific than the
problem. The concentric circles get smaller and smaller, indicating this narrowing of content into more and
more specific ideas.

                          Next, we'll examine each of these three goals in-depth and give some examples.

                                                                                                                           Goals of an Effective Introduction Section | 17
 Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge
 Territory

  The first goal of writing an Introduction is Establishing a Knowledge Territory, which means that you
  explain to your reader the big picture of where your study fits in the literature. To accomplish this goal, you
  must demonstrate knowledge of the topic and its relevance to the field. In other words, you are establishing
  how your expertise fits into an existing body of work.

  Overall, Goal 1 (Establishing a Knowledge Territory) presents information, generally known background, and
  previous research on the topic of your research. It is the broadest part of an Introduction, so as you are
  writing, be sure to keep the information general.

  Here are some excerpts from research articles with the key language in bold, because it is the best clue for
  linking words or phrases to a communicative goal:

        Examples

            · Wood pellet production is a well-established and rapidly expanding industry worldwide, including in the
                United States and Canada where the annual production is nearing 4 million metric tons. In the province
                of British Columbia, the industry has grown from 50,000 tons in 1996 to an expected 1,500,000 tons in
                2010.1

            · Legionellae are widespread in both natural and man-made aquatic habitats. Among the 51 species
                described so far, Legionella pneumophila is the most causative agent of legionellosis, but it is often
                difficult to isolate from environmental samples because of the presence of heterotrophic-associated
                bacteria that frequently overgrow on culture plates.2

            · It is well known that having strong and supportive social relations is beneficial for several different
                outcomes (House et al., 1988; Call and Mortimer, 2001; Malecki and Demaray, 2003; Cohen, 2004). We also
                know that social background influences our living conditions and opportunities in several ways (Breen
                and Jonsson, 2005; Conger and Donnellan, 2007).3

1. Tumuluru, J., Sokhansanj, S., Lim, C., Bi, X., Lau, A., Melin, S., Oveisi, E., Sowlati, T. (2010). "Quality of wood pellets produced in
   British Columbia for export", Applied Engineering in Agriculture 26(6).

2. Allegra, S., Girardot, F., Grattard, F., Berthelot, P., Helbig, J., Pozzetto, B., Riffard, S. (2011). "Evaluation of an immunomagnetic
   separation assay in combination with cultivation to improve Legionella pneumophila serogroup 1 recovery from
   environmental samples", Journal of Applied Microbiology 110(4):952-961.

3. Good, G., Dell, D., Mintz, L. (1989). "Male role and gender role conflict: Relations to help-seeking in men.", Journal of
   Counseling Psychology 36(3):295.
   18 | Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory
The bolded phrases in the list above are language cues demonstrating how the writers accomplish the
communicative goal of establishing the territory. There are many other ways to achieve the same goal, and
you can find extensive lists of such phrases by visiting Manchester's Academic Phrasebank website, which
we will refer to repeatedly in this book.
Goal 1 prepares your reader to understand your research better by describing what is generally known and
what has been previously researched. Imagine it as the foundation upon which you are going to build the
house of your research. Unlike architectural foundations, however, the foundation of your research (as laid
out in the Introduction) is on display for all to see. In fact, in this foundation, your aim as a writer is also to
attract the reader, draw them into the research, and maintain their interest.

Goal 1 Strategies

Goal 1, "Establishing a Knowledge Territory," means that you demonstrate knowledge of the topic and its
relevance in the field. There are three strategies that will help you to accomplish this:

Strategies for Introduction Communicative Goal 1: Establishing a
Knowledge Territory

  · Claim centrality of your topic
  · Provide relevant general background
  · Review informative previous research
We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published journal articles.

                                                                                                       Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory | 19
 Introduction Goal 1 Strategy: Claiming Centrality

  Claiming centrality is a strategy used to focus the reader's attention on the reasons that your research
  belongs within the bigger picture of the topic. Centrality is also about stating the importance of your study
  and/or the amount of attention that other scholars have paid to the issue. You can implement this strategy
  by pointing out the broader scope of the interest and noting the other investigations that are related. This
  highlights the significance of your claims and shows the study has the potential for prominence within
  your discipline.
  Here are two examples taken from published research articles in different disciplines. These excerpts
  demonstrate how to claim that there is a considerable amount of interest and importance in the topics,
  and the key language is in bold.

        Examples

            · Meat tenderness is an important issue in beef cattle because it has a major impact on consumer
                satisfaction. However, beef meat quality is not routinely measured, so a classical selection based on
                records is not feasible.4

            · The emission from low-mass X-ray binaries in quiescence (qLMXBs) is routinely studied to provide
                useful constraints on the physical models of the interior of neutron stars (NSs). The low luminosity
                (1032-1033 erg s-1, 4-5 orders of magnitude lower than the outburst luminosities) of these objects was
                first observed in the post-outburst stages of the transient LMXBs Cen X-4 and Aql X-1 (van Paradijs et al.
                1987), and initially interpreted as a thermal blackbody emission powered by some low-level mass
                accretion onto the NS surface (Verbunt et al. 1994).5

  Claiming centrality generally occurs quite early in an Introduction because of its ability to establish the
  territory for the remainder of the Introduction. You will often see this strategy as the very first sentence of
  a paper; however, it is important to remember that strategies do not occur in a set order. That is, writers
  can use them wherever they seem most useful or relevant in a given Introduction.
  Some common vocabulary that is associated with this strategy includes the following, as noted in the
  Academic PhraseBank website:

4. llais, S., Journaux, L., Levéziel, H., Payet-Duprat, N., Raynaud, P., Hocquette, J., Lepetit, J., Rousset, S., Denoyelle, C., Bernard-
   Capel, C. (2011). "Effects of polymorphisms in the calpastatin and µ-calpain genes on meat tenderness in 3 French beef
   breeds", Journal of Animal Science 89(1):1-11.

5. Guillot, S., Rutledge, R., Brown, E. (2011). "Neutron Star Radius Measurement with the Quiescent Low-mass X-ray Binary U24 in
   NGC 6397", The Astrophysical Journal 732(2):88.
   20 | Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory
pivotal       focal        fundamental
instrumental  vital        critical
essential     potent       powerful
crucial       widely-used  extensive
growing       primary      requisite

Introduction Goal 1 Strategy: Providing General Background

A second strategy for Establishing the Knowledge Territory is providing general background. This strategy
usually combines a variety of different types of information, which may be related to theory, practice,
methodology, or any other shared area of knowledge within the discipline. In other words, academics use
this strategy as a tool to position the research within a framework. That could be a theoretical or
conceptual framework or just an overview of the informational or conceptual frame of reference to support
the reader's understanding of the study.
Below you will read some examples of this strategy being used in published research from a discipline in
the human sciences and a discipline in the natural sciences. Notice how the writers are making general
statements about their topics, which may include presenting information, systems, or necessities for
future research by using words adverbs, such as usually, typically, commonly, generally, or mostly, which
serve to emphasize the general nature of the statements.

Examples

· The promotion system is mainly concerned with the regulation of desired outcomes-people operating

   under a promotion focus are oriented toward opportunities and accomplishing aspired goals and

   generally engage in approach-related behaviors toward positive end states, such as acquiring or
   consuming desired objects.6

· As an opportunistic pathogen, Candida albicans is an important cause of systemic fungal infection in

   hospitalized patients. Routine detection of C. albicans in blood is time consuming and typically involves

   the use of blood cultures, followed by isolation on solid agar media. Definitive identification of C. albicans
   via commercially available automated systems may require up to 48 h.7

Of course, it is not a requirement for there to be an adverb in a sentence whose purpose is to present
General Background. It is merely one way to accomplish the goal of establishing territory. So, while each

6. Baas, M., De Dreu, C., Nijstad, B. (2011). "When prevention promotes creativity: the role of mood, regulatory focus, and
   regulatory closure.", Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100(5):794.

7. Bisha, B., Kim, H., Brehm-Stecher, B. (2011). "Improved DNA-FISH for cytometric detection of Candida spp", Journal of Applied
   Microbiology 110(4):881-892.

                                                                                                           Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory | 21
  discipline has its own conventions and each author has his/her/their own personal writing style, there are
  many similarities and patterns in the language used. Nevertheless, these are only examples, and there is an
  almost infinite number of language possibilities one could choose to employ to provide the reader with a
  general background. Now let's examine the final strategy for Goal 1.

 Introduction Goal 1 Strategy: Reviewing Previous Research

  Reviewing previous research is the third strategy a writer can utilize for establishing territory in an
  Introduction. This strategy acknowledges the many contributions of other scholars by synthesizing and
  criticizing previous research. We often call this section the "literature review." This strategy additionally
  provides a demonstration of expertise about a topic, supporting the reader's understanding and expanding
  your ethos as an author and academic, which then contributes to the credibility of your research.

  Although this is probably the most well-known of the strategies within an Introduction, it is also one of the
  more varied in terms of the language resources we can exercise. Below are several examples from high-
  impact journals in two varied fields. Notice the variety of phrases the writers use to introduce previous
  literature.

        Examples

            · Recent increases in the prevalence of asthma and other allergic diseases have prompted investigators to
                consider the role of the environment in the genesis of atopy (von Mutius, 2009; Horner, 2010). Modern
                public health practices have eliminated many of the microbial threats for humans.8

            · Recent studies (e.g., Bartell, 2005; Bickmore & Bickmore, 2010; Britton, Paine, Pimm, & Raizen, 2003;
                Glazerman et al., 2009; Main, 2008; New Teacher Center, 2002; Piggot-Irvine, Aitken, Ritchie,
                Ferguson, & McGrath, 2009; Smith & Ingersoll, 2004) affirm that comprehensive induction comprises an
                array of aligned and integrated components which include: carefully selected and trained mentors; a
                curriculum of intensive and structured support and professional development opportunities; regular
                meetings with mentors; opportunities to observe experienced teachers; formative assessment tools that
                permit evaluation of practice; and outreach to wider educational support. We know also, from research
                by Carver and Feiman-Nemser (2009), that policy documentation which "sets conditions for how
                induction support is practiced by mentors, and experience by novices" (p. 314) is important, and that
                support should be provided across at least the first 2 years in the workplace.9

8. Wingender, G., Rogers, P., Batzer, G., Lee, M., Bai, D., Pei, B., Khurana, A., Kronenberg, M., Horner, A. (2011). "Invariant NKT cells
   are required for airway inflammation induced by environmental antigens", The Journal of Experimental Medicine
   208(6):1151-1162.

9. Anthony, G., Haigh, M., Kane, R. (2011). "The power of the `object' to influence teacher induction outcomes", Teaching and
   22 | Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory
Besides the varied language forms that can be used to execute this strategy, it is also important to note that
different disciplines have many different formatting styles including, but not limited to, endnotes, footnotes,
in-text citations, direct quotes, indirect quotes, parentheticals, etc. Another important point to make about
the actual language that a writer might consider using is that reporting verbs (words that directly quote
someone else's idea[s]) are extremely common in this strategy. Reporting verbs are quite nuanced and can
provide not only a quote but also the writer's stance towards that quote (i.e., supportive, doubtful, neutral,

                                                                                        1011

etc.). A number of frequent reporting verbs are listed in the textbox below:

describe  demonstrate
explain   claim
mention   examine
argue     claim
state     suggest
show      indicate
note      propose
use       show
find      focus

Some other common language (noted in the box below) came from the Academic PhraseBank's section on
"Referring to previous work to establish what is already known":

· Studies of X show the importance of ...        · Previous research has found ...
· Several theories on the origin of X have been  · The existing body of research on X suggests that ...
                                                 · There is a growing body of literature that
   proposed.
· Extensive research has shown that ...             recognizes...
· It has previously been observed that ...       · Recent evidence suggests that ...
· Several attempts have been made to ...         · Surveys such as that conducted by X (1988) have
· Studies over the past two decades have
                                                    shown that ...
   provided important information on ...         · Factors found to be influencing X have been explored
· Data from several studies suggest that ...
                                                    in several studies.
                                                 · Recent work has established that ...

Now that we've reviewed all the strategies for accomplishing Goal 1 of the Introduction section, let's try an
exercise.

    Teacher Education, 27.
10. Bloch, J. (2010). A concordance-based study of the use of reporting verbs as rhetorical devices in academic papers. Journal of

    Writing Research, 2(2), 219-244.
11. Liardét, C., & Black, S. (2019). "So and so" says, states and argues: A corpus-assisted engagement analysis of reporting

    verbs. Journal of Second Language Writing, 44, 37-50.

                                                                                                            Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory | 23
             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=86#h5p-3

       Key Takeaways

     Goal #1 of writing the Introduction section is related to Establishing a Territory. There are three strategies that
     you can use to accomplish this goal:

         · Claim centrality
         · Provide background
         · Review previous research

24 | Introduction Goal 1: Establishing a Knowledge Territory
 Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche

  The second goal of an Introduction is to Identify a Niche or state the problem that your paper is trying
  to address. In doing this, you will call attention to an area of interest in the current research and specify
  weaknesses/drawbacks in existing studies. When you identify your niche, you have underscored a gap in
  some part of your field, and this gap is called your niche.

  Accomplishing this second goal gives you the opportunity to show where you intend to make your
  contribution to the discipline. It also allows you to narrow the focus of the paper from a more general focus
  to a more specific area of the field where there is the potential for more research (your research).

  Here are some excerpts from research articles. The bold language shows you the words that act as
  indicators that the writer is working to accomplish Goal 2: Identifying a Niche.

         Examples

            · Processed products containing OFSP have been studied in Kenya [7] and it has been shown that porridge
                made using OFSP flour was widely accepted by consumers. However, information on how well provitamin
                A survives processing is still patchy.1

            · Despite the advancement in therapeutic cocktails, the outcome of chemotherapy remains unsatisfactory.
                The development of multidrug resistance (MDR) has gradually become a major cause of the failure of
                cancer chemotherapy [1] .2

            · How do emotions arise? Do they arise via low-level processes that provide quick, bottom-up affective
                analyses of stimuli? Or do they arise via high-level, top-down cognitive appraisal processes that draw
                upon stored knowledge?3

  As you can see in the excerpts, the authors are pointing out missing pieces in the current research trends
  and specifying weaknesses or drawbacks in existing research. In many cases, this starts with a word
  that demonstrates contrast, such as however or despite. Writers use such a word to make the transition

1. Bechoff, A., Poulaert, M., Tomlins, K., Westby, A., Menya, G., Young, S., Dhuique-Mayer, C. (2011). "Retention and
   bioaccessibility of -carotene in blended foods containing orange-fleshed sweet potato flour", Journal of agricultural and food
   chemistry 59(18):10373-10380.

2. Zhang, P., Ling, G., Sun, J., Zhang, T., Yuan, Y., Sun, Y., Wang, Z., He, Z. (2011). "Multifunctional nanoassemblies for vincristine
   sulfate delivery to overcome multidrug resistance by escaping P-glycoprotein mediated efflux", Biomaterials 32(23):5524-5533.

3. Ochsner, K., Ray, R., Hughes, B., McRae, K., Cooper, J., Weber, J., Gabrieli, J., Gross, J. (2009). "Bottom-Up and Top-Down
   Processes in Emotion Generation Common and Distinct Neural Mechanisms", Psychological Science 20(11):1322-1331.
                                                                                                                                 Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche | 25
from establishing their territory (Goal 1) to identifying the niche (Goal 2). There are many other ways to
accomplish Goal 2, so let's explore the main strategies that writers use to accomplish it.
To identify a niche, you must signal a turn from the overview of a disciplinary territory and narrow the paper
down to one aspect of that territory that still needs to be addressed. This identification includes flagging
limitations or incompleteness in the current research and/or practice and emphasizing the need to address
the limitations. The visual below represents how the identification of the niche (signaled in red) is embedded
within an establishment of territory (signaled in blue), further narrowing the scope of the argument for the
necessity and value of the current research study.

Strategies for Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche

  · Indicating a gap
  · Highlighting a problem
  · Raising general questions
  · Proposing general hypotheses
  · Presenting justification
Notice that the words "and/or" follow each strategy. This is an indication that the strategies are not a
checklist that must be accomplished. Each of them is one way that you can accomplish the goal of identifying
a niche. However, you do not have to use all of them. In fact, some disciplines typically use certain strategies
and not others; moreover, certain writing styles may prefer some over others. So, think of this as a list of
options.
Authors generally utilize these strategies to further their critical analysis of previous research. After
introducing the niche, the authors may choose to emphasize the need to address it by providing a

26 | Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche
  justification; thus, an Introduction's second goal usually begins with a word indicating that the following
  sentence is going to oppose or negate the previous sentence. Frequently, Goal 2 is initiated with words such
  as however, nevertheless, yet, unfortunately, but, etc. In addition, the function of Goal 2 can be expressed by
  the words/phrases:

     · Negative or quasi-negative quantifiers: no, little, none (of), (very) few, neither... nor
     · Terminology of negation expressed by

            verbs (e.g., fail, lack, overlook) and/or
            adjectives (e.g., inconclusive, misleading, scarce, elusive, limited, questionable) and/or
            nouns (e.g., failure, limitation, gap, dearth, lack) and/or
            adverbs (e.g., rarely, scarcely, barely, hardly)

 Introduction Goal 2 Strategy: Indicating a Gap

  Indicating a gap is the first possible way that authors can claim a lack of research on a certain topic or
  area. That is, this strategy reveals a gap in the targeted research trend that needs to be filled. You can use
  this strategy to underscore the unknown, show connections between what is known in the field and what
  requires investigation, demonstrate critical evaluation of the current general research topic, and possibly
  connect to the goals of the present study in implicit or explicit ways.

  Now, let's examine some excerpts of what these strategic options look like in real, published manuscripts.
  Be on the lookout for the example language noted above.

        Examples

            · Although the specific purpose of adult neurogenesis is not entirely clear, there is evidence that it has
                major roles in adult neuroplasticity [1,2]. Ablating aNSCs through genetic manipulation in mice or by focal
                irradiation leads to deficits in hippocampus-dependent learning tasks [3,8].4

            · Adult attachment theory has made considerable progress in identifying different dimensions that
                produce distinctive affective responses. A relatively unexplored issue in attachment theory and research
                is the specificity or generality of affective reactivity to others' behavior. In other words, does an
                attachment orientation produce a generalized response to others or does an attachment orientation
                produce responses that are specific to the kind of relationship?5

4. Guo, W., Allan, A., Zong, R., Zhang, L., Johnson, E., Schaller, E., Murthy, A., Goggin, S., Eisch, A., Oostra, B. (2011). "Ablation of
   Fmrp in adult neural stem cells disrupts hippocampus-dependent learning," Nature Medicine 17(5):559-565.

5. Sadikaj, G., Moskowitz, D., Zuroff, D., (2011). "Attachment-related affective dynamics: differential reactivity to others'
                                                                                                                                 Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche | 27
  If you'd like to see more examples of language that you can use to signal the use of this strategy, the
  Academic Phrasebank website is an excellent resource. Some of the sentence starters that are suggested
  there include the following:

      · Previous studies of X have not dealt with ...
      · Researchers have not treated X in much detail.
      · Such approaches, however, have failed to address ...
      · Previously published studies are limited to local surveys.
      · Half of the studies evaluated failed to specify whether ...
      · The existing accounts fail to resolve the contradiction between X and Y.
      · However, much of the research up to now has been descriptive in nature ...

 Introduction Goal 2 Strategy: Highlighting a Problem

  Highlighting a problem articulates a problem that needs to be solved or an area for improvement in
  the research area. You can use this strategy to signal an existing issue, raise a concern about the issue,
  demonstrate critical evaluation of the issue, and possibly connect to the goals of the present study. Consider
  the following examples of how authors use this strategy to highlight a problem existing in their particular
  niche.

        Examples

            · People's tendencies to project their own opinions can alter their judgments about what others think is
                ethical, perhaps giving them a sense of being in the majority even when they are not. The ramifications
                of this false consensus effect may be problematic: if members of organizations erroneously assume that
                their actions are in line with prevailing ethical principles, they may subsequently learn of their
                misjudgment when it is too late to avert the consequences. In the present research, we examine whether
                brokers in a social network show evidence of false consensus in ethical decision making. 6

            · Unfortunately, it is very easy to overfit a model to one particular dataset (Huang et al. 2003). This
                situation would probably result in biased predictions when the model is applied to other datasets. A
                misspecification of the model or a poor draw of training data from the population could also lead to
                biased predictions. 7

   interpersonal behavior.", Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 100(5):905.
6. Flynn, F., Wiltermuth, S. (2010). "Who's with me? False consensus, brokerage, and ethical decision making in organizations",

   Academy of Management Journal 53(5):1074-1089.
7. aughn, N., Turnblom, E., Ritchie, M. (2010). "Bootstrap evaluation of a young Douglas-fir height growth model for the Pacific

   Northwest", Forest Science 56(6):592-602.
   28 | Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche
 Introduction Goal 2 Strategy: Raising General Questions

  Raising general questions is the third possible strategy. This is used to highlight questions about the
  current body of research on your topic. There are two ways to raise general questions: (1) asking a direct
  question (i.e., actually using a question mark) and/or (2) asking an indirect question (i.e., presenting the
  question in the form of a statement). It is important to realize that this strategy is related to questions about
  the field; these are NOT your specific research questions. Those will be discussed later.
  The following examples demonstrate how published writers raise general questions in their manuscripts:

        Examples

            · With such a large and rapid infrastructure development programme, decision makers must balance three
                key factors when deciding the nature and characteristics of the treatment infrastructure developed: what
                solution provides the best economic value? 8

            · How can the process of dynamic evaluation be studied? The issue of potential differences in judgment
                raises the methodological question of who is in the best position to rate in-progress artworks. It might
                be more ecologically valid to have artists rate their own emerging works; however, in that case there is no
                basis for validating artists' own judgments against those of external observers. 9

 Introduction Goal 2 Strategy: Proposing General Hypotheses

  When writers propose general hypotheses, they are predicting future findings or implications. Note that
  this strategy -- like the previous one -- includes the word general. These are NOT the specific hypotheses
  that you might have about your research. So, in order to do this, you need to use language that indicates
  the hypothetical nature of your claims. For example, you could use a conditional statement (e.g., if X were
  Y, then it would affect Z) and/or words such as may, might, likely, possible, expected, etc. The following are
  examples of how you can implement this strategy:

8. Patterson, T., Esteves, S., Dinsdale, R., Guwy, A. (2011). "Life cycle assessment of biogas infrastructure options on a regional
   scale", Bioresource Technology 102(15):7313-7323.

9. Kozbelt, A., Serafin, J. (2009). "Dynamic evaluation of high-and low-creativity drawings by artist and nonartist raters",
   Creativity Research Journal 21(4):349-360.
                                                                                                                                 Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche | 29
         Examples

              · Many studies on antimicrobial peptides have been carried out in an effort to elucidate the cause for this
                 selectivity. One hypothesis is that the highly anionic lipids (~30 mol %) (3, 4) in the cytoplasmic
                 membranes of bacterial and fungal cells facilitate antimicrobial action by electrostatically attracting these
                 cationic peptides to the membrane. In contrast, the lack of negative charges in the eukaryotic membrane
                 of higher organisms combined with the high level of cholesterol (~50 mol %) (5, 6) may reduce the extent
                 of binding and counter the effects of these peptides on the membrane. 10

              · However, cytogenetics and comparative morphology do not confirm this hypothesis (Zohary and Hopf,
                 2000). Therefore, plum may result from polyploid forms arising from cherry plums, forming a "P.
                 cerasifera-P. domestica polyploid crop complex" (Zohary and Hopf, 2000). However, the possibility of
                 secondary hybridisation with other species, including sloe, cannot be excluded.11

  Introduction Goal 2 Strategy: Presenting Justification

   Presenting justification, the fifth and last possible strategy in Goal 2 (Identifying a Niche), usually occurs
   after the writer has discussed the gap, problem, question, or hypothesis. To accomplish this strategy, you
   can justify or motivate the need for your research. Alternately, you can demonstrate the value or worth of
   the research. Note how the published authors do this in the examples below:

10. Mani, R., Buffy, J., Waring, A., Lehrer, R., Hong, M. (2004). "Solid-state NMR investigation of the selective disruption of lipid
    membranes by protegrin-1", Biochemistry 43(43):13839-13848.

11. Horvath, A., Balsemin, E., Barbot, J., Christmann, H., Manzano, G., Reynet, P., Laigret, F., Mariette, S. (2011). "Phenotypic
    variability and genetic structure in plum (< i> Prunus domestica L.), cherry plum (< i> P. cerasifera Ehrh.) and sloe (< i> P.
    spinosa L.)", Scientia Horticulturae 129(2):283-293.
    30 | Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche
         Examples

             · The study of the solar hard X-ray (HXR) flare spectra may provide some useful information for solar
                 flares, such as the acceleration mechanisms of energetic electrons. The solar HXR flare spectra consist of
                 thermal and nonthermal components (Aschwanden 2004; Dennis 1985). 12

             · Empirical evidence describing the temporal development of local plastic flow is greatly desired.
                 Therefore, novel experimental techniques are being developed to characterize the grain and sub-grain
                 scale deformation fields produced during deformation of polycrystalline materials. Digital image
                 correlation (DIC) methods that utilize optical imaging are readily available for measuring macro-scale
                 planer 2-D, and arbitrary 3-D, motion and deformation [3].13

   The second goal of the Introduction presents the specific background information to provide your readers

                                                                                                                                                     14

   with an appreciation of how the paper advances the field in some way . Beware of repeating what you have
   read in other papers. A good research writer develops an ability "to say the same things that have been said
   many times before but in a different, interesting, intriguing way" (Wallwork, 2016, p. 195). When you Identify
   a Niche, you are giving the readers an orientation to how your work fits into the field.

  Now let's practice identifying these strategies in context:

                  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=90#h5p-5

12. Shao, C., Huang, G. (2009). "Comparative Study of Solar HXR Flare Spectra in Looptop and Footpoint Sources", The
    Astrophysical Journal 691(1):299.

13. Walley, J., Wheeler, R., Uchic, M., Mills, M. (2012). "In-situ mechanical testing for characterizing strain localization during
    deformation at elevated temperatures", Experimental Mechanics 52(4):405-416.

14. Wallwork, A. (2016). English for writing research papers. Springer.
                                                                                                                                   Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche | 31
       Key Takeaways

     The second goal of an Introduction section in a research article is Identifying a Niche. There are five possible
     ways to achieve this:

         · Indicate a gap and/or
         · Highlight a problem and/or
         · Raise general questions and/or
         · Propose general hypotheses and/or
         · Present justification
     Note the use of "and/or" after each strategy. This reminds you that it's not necessary to implement all of these
     strategies. You can choose which ones work best for your own topic, style, and discipline.

32 | Introduction Goal 2: Identifying a Niche
 Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche

  This goal allows you to indicate how your work/research speaks to the niche that you have carved out
  for yourself. Usually, this is the last part of the Introduction - the part just before the research questions.
  However, please don't forget that these are not "rules." We are presenting guidelines based on linguistic
  research investigating published academic journal articles. As a writer, you decide how to organize your
  writing so that you accomplish these goals. In this last goal, you want to write directly about your purpose
  and values, and perhaps you'll want to outline the structure or organization of your article. Basically,
  you define how your present study addresses the identified niche and how it contributes to the existing
  research. Also, you can explain - briefly - the outcomes of the project.

    We've now explored Goals 1 and 2 and their accompanying Strategies. Next, we'll introduce the strategies you can
    use to achieve the final Goal of an Introduction section: Addressing the Niche.

  Below are some examples of Goal 3 from published research articles. Notice how the bolded parts help the
  writer to achieve the communicative goal of Addressing the Niche.

         Examples

            · This study investigates the construct of writing ability in English and Korean based on elementary
                school students' responses to two tasks. Specifically, on the one hand, the study aims to validate the
                influence of four components of writing ability across both languages: namely, content, grammar,
                spelling, and text length in writing. On the other, it aims to assess the effect of two tasks on writing
                performance across both languages.1

            · In this qualitative study, we interviewed and observed 11 high-reputation plant managers to find out
                what made them successful. We report their words and actions, and rarely did those managers mention
                the benefits of technology or the newest analytical tools. Rather, what we saw common among the plant
                managers in our study - even across several industries - was the effective application of well-honed
                political skill.2

            · The coupling of neutrinos to this hydrodynamically unstable matter is central to the supernova problem.
                In this work, we present new, hitherto unpublished features of the only two-dimensional multi-group,
                multi-angle neutrino transport calculations of core-collapse supernova evolution ever performed. Results
                from these simulations were first published by Ott et al. (2008).3

1. Bae, J., Bachman, L. (2010). "An investigation of four writing traits and two tasks across two languages", Language
   Testing 27(2):213-234.

2. Smith, A., Plowman, D., Duchon, D., Quinn, A. (2009). "A qualitative study of high-reputation plant managers: political skill and
                                                                                                                             Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 33
  In the Academic Phrasebank website, there are numerous examples of phrases and clauses that can be used
  to accomplish each of the goals we are presenting. Here are a few of them:

      · The specific objective of this study was to ...
      · This thesis will examine the way in which the ...
      · This study set out to investigate the usefulness of ...
      · This case study seeks to examine the changing nature of ...
      · This research examines the emerging role of X in the context of ...
      · This study systematically reviews the data for..., aiming to provide ...

  We'll discuss more specific language resources (words, phrases, and clauses) that you can use to accomplish
  this goal at a later point in the chapter. For now, the main point is to understand that Goal 3 carves out a
  place for your research by pointing out how you are going to solve a problem or fill a gap.

 Strategies for Introduction Goal 3

  There are multiple ways you can effectively achieve the goal of addressing the niche into which your
  research fits:

   successful outcomes", Journal of Operations Management 27(6):428-443.
3. randt, T., Burrows, A., Ott, C., Livne, E. (2011). "Results from core-collapse simulations with multi-dimensional, multi-angle

   neutrino transport", The Astrophysical Journal 728(1):8.
   34 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
     · Introduce your research descriptively
     · Announce the purpose of the study
     · Present research questions
     · Present research hypotheses
     · Summarize methods
     · Clarify definitions
     · Announce principal outcomes
     · State value
     · Outline the structure

    Remember: You don't have to use all the strategies to accomplish a goal!

  Let's get a closer look at each strategy to understand how they work.

 Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Introduce Your Research Descriptively

  This strategy concerns how writers note the main characteristics of their research. They provide
  information that highlights their goals and intentions. The strategy also specifically outlines how the
  objectives of the research address the niche.

         Examples

            · It transforms outcomes for each alternative into a common unit with a multi-attribute value (utility)
                function using weights that reflect the decision makers' preferences. We report on an MCDA involving
                the 26 most important stakeholders in two Swiss cases; a general and a psychiatric hospital. Details of the
                MCDA methodology are given in ref 24 and of the ecotoxicological risk assessment in ref 20.4

            · Using these data, in this article I examine the validity of the tests by analyzing what the teachers believed
                the tests measure and what they believed the tests' impacts are. In essence, this paper investigates the
                social consequences of a large-scale testing program and scrutinizes not only the intended outcome but
                also the unintended side effects of the English language tests (Messick, 1989, p. 16). Because the testing in
                Michigan was required by the federal government?s No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act, I begin by
                summarizing that law.5

4. Lienert, J., Koller, M., Konrad, J., McArdell, C., Schuwirth, N. (2011). "Multiple-criteria decision analysis reveals high stakeholder
   preference to remove pharmaceuticals from hospital wastewater", Environmental Science & Technology 45(9):3848-3857.

5. Winke, P. (2011). "Evaluating the Validity of a High-Stakes ESL Test: Why Teachers' Perceptions Matter", TESOL Quarterly
   45(4):628-660.
                                                                                                                             Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 35
  To accomplish this, authors will often use highly contextualized words/phrases, such as this, the present
  study, we, I, now, and here, which you can see in bold in the examples above. However, you should be aware
  that this is not the announcement of the goals/aims of the study. This is a more general description of
  the research. If you would like to be more specific about your objectives, you can implement the strategy
  presented next.

 Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Announce the Purpose of the Study

  This strategy clearly articulates the intentions of the researcher(s) by specifying how the objectives address
  gaps in the research. It is common for writers to use words, such as aim, purpose, goal, objective, target, etc.,
  to directly state their intentions. The examples below show how this is realized in published articles from
  high-impact journals:

         Examples

            · When this process of mutual adjustment goes well, people may remark that they are "in synch" or "on the
                same wavelength." One goal of the present article is to show that there is an important literal truth
                behind these colloquialisms. That is, as people converse and work together, major interpersonal
                issues-namely, agency and communion-come to have strongly entrained cyclical patterns, making
                partners' behaviors as interlocked or interdependent, as if they were dancing together.6

            · Although Ca2+ signaling in B cells is widely assumed to be essential, the importance of SOC influx for
                physiological B cell functions was unclear. To directly assess the involvement of SOC influx in B cells ,
                we generated mice with B cell-specific deletions of Stim1 and Stim2. We found that STIM1 and STIM2
                critically regulated BCR-induced SOC influx and proliferation in vitro, and yet they were dispensable for
                B cell development and antibody responses in vivo.7

  You might also note that it's common to see phrases with to + a verb (e.g., to show, to compare, to evaluate,
  etc.). The Academic Phrasebank website also provides some sentence starters:

6. Sadler, P., Ethier, N., Gunn, G., Duong, D., Woody, E. (2009). "Are we on the same wavelength? Interpersonal complementarity
   as shared cyclical patterns during interactions.", Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 97(6):1005.

7. Matsumoto, M., Fujii, Y., Baba, A., Hikida, M., Kurosaki, T., Baba, Y. (2011). "The calcium sensors STIM1 and STIM2 control B cell
   regulatory function through interleukin-10 production", Immunity 34(5):703-714.
   36 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
      · The specific objective of this study was to ...
      · This study set out to investigate the usefulness of ...
      · This research examines the emerging role of X in the context of ...
      · This study systematically reviews the data for..., aiming to provide ...
      · Drawing upon two strands of research into X, this study attempts to ...
      · This study therefore set out to assess the effect of X ..., and the effect of ...
      · The main aim of this study is to investigate the differences between X and Y.
      · There are two primary aims of this study: 1. To investigate ... 2. To ascertain ...
      · This study seeks to obtain data which will help to address these research gaps.
      · One purpose of this study was to assess the extent to which these factors were ...
      · The purpose of this investigation is to explore the relationship between X and Y.

 Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Present Research Questions

  Presenting research questions is a strategy for directly stating what queries were made about the data.
  Authors do this in an effort to specify the focus of the research and to highlight main topics or words that
  can help the reader navigate the remainder of the manuscript.

  Writers who choose to implement this step articulate their questions directly (with a question mark) or
  indirectly (a question in the form of a statement), both of which are shown below:

         Examples

            · From this perspective, strategic planning represents an inertial force that decreases the number of NPD
                projects. The purpose of our study is to provide empirical evidence on the debated role of strategic
                planning in generating NPD projects by answering the two questions: (1) does strategic planning
                increase or decrease the number of NPD projects? and (2) if so, how can a firm manage controllable
                organizational factors to mitigate the adverse effect of strategic planning on the number of NPD
                projects for better performance?8

            · The increase in growth response due to irrigation was relatively small, with no significant increase in
                basal area (Albaugh et al. 2004). In this study, the questions we attempted to answer were whether the
                growth gains experienced from fertilization resulted in lower SG and percent latewood, as expected
                from previous studies; whether SG properties were affected by irrigation, implying the importance of
                water availability despite limited growth gains; and whether irrigation had an impact on the wood
                quality of fertilized trees different from that of unfertilized trees.9

8. Song, M., Im, S., Bij, H., Song, L. (2011). "Does Strategic Planning Enhance or Impede Innovation and Firm Performance?*",
   Journal of Product Innovation Management 28(4):503-520.

9. Love-Myers, K., Clark, A., Schimleck, L., Dougherty, P., Daniels, R.. (2010). "The effects of irrigation and fertilization on specific
   gravity of loblolly pine", Forest Science 56(5):484-493.

                                                                                                                              Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 37
   Direct questions always use question-word order and end with a question mark (?). Some common ways
   to start a direct question include wh-words such as who, what when, where, how, and why, but research
   questions can commonly begin with other phrases such as: to what degree, do/did, have/has, etc. Indirect
   questions sometimes start with words such as whether or if.

  Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Present Research Hypotheses

   Presenting research hypotheses is a way for writers to share what they have found or hope to find that
   is directly relevant to the objectives or questions of the study. Authors utilize this step to introduce the
   assumptions to be tested, clarify expectations of the findings, and speculate about potential outcomes.

   To present their research hypotheses, authors use verbs like hypothesize, suggest, expect, predict, etc., the
   subjunctive mood (e.g., would expect, could be possible), and modal verbs such as could, might, and may.
   Consider the following examples:

         Examples

              · We focused on school support because of the significant role of environment in influencing human
                 behaviors (Lewin, 1936). We believe that school support, a contextual factor, is intricately related to
                 teacher motivation, a personal factor. 10

              · As previous research has demonstrated that the learners' view towards a learning environment strongly
                 influences their learning outcomes and learning process, it can be discussed whether program-defined
                 adaptivity is not only effective because of the underlying learner models, but also because the adaptivity
                 is perceived and experienced as such by the learners. In this study, we apply the cognitive mediational
                 paradigm and hypothesize that perceptions of adaptivity mediate the relation between adaptive
                 instruction and learners' motivations and learning outcomes. 11

   You can use the verb hypothesize or the noun hypothesis, but be careful with replacing that word with
   synonyms, which could carry different connotations because of their nuanced meanings.

  Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Summarize Methods

   The strategy summarizing methods allows writers to present their procedures for the first time. However,

10. FiLam, S., Cheng, R. W., Choy, H. C. (2010). "School support and teacher motivation to implement project-based learning",
    Learning and Instruction, 20, pp. 487-497.

11. Vandewaetere, M., Vandercruysse, S., Clarebout, G., "Learners' perceptions and illusions of adaptivity in computer-based
    learning environments", Education Tech Research Dev, pp. NA.
    38 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
   you should note that it is a summary of the methods and shouldn't be too detailed. Here are some examples
   from published writing:

         Examples

             · Recently, Yu et al. (2008a, b) employed a novel EPS fractionation approach to obtain the pellets (cells) by
                 extracting the EPS matrix. In this study, aerobic granules seeded with activated sludge flocs and pellets,
                 respectively, were cultivated in two sequencing batch reactors (SBRs), then these two kinds of
                 granules were both stored at 25 +/- 1 degrees Celsius for 3 weeks. The main purposes of this study were
                 to investigate their responses to storage and explore the mechanism of stability loss.12

             · We propose that HRO status can be achieved through a systematic process linked to top leadership. We
                 empirically test this proposition by building a model for improving patient safety in hospitals. 13

   Note that this strategy can be implemented by using either passive or active voice. Both are correct, but the
   decision of whether to use one or the other is usually based on the discipline in which you do research. The
   Academic Phrasebank website provides other examples, and from the list below, you can see that there are
   a variety of forms that you can use to effectively realize this strategy:

       · Data for this study were collected using ...
       · Five works will be examined, all of which ...
       · This investigation takes the form of a case-study of the ...
       · This study was exploratory and interpretative in nature.
       · This study uses a qualitative case study approach to investigate ...
       · The research data in this thesis is drawn from four main sources: ...
       · The approach to empirical research adopted for this study was one of ...
       · This dissertation follows a case-study design, with in-depth analysis of ...
       · By employing qualitative modes of enquiry, I attempt to illuminate the ...
       · Qualitative and quantitative research designs were adopted to provide ...
       · Both qualitative and quantitative methods were used in this investigation.
       · A holistic approach is utilised, integrating X, Y and Z material to establish ...
       · The study was conducted in the form of a survey, with data being gathered via ...
       · The methodological approach taken in this study is a mixed methodology based on ...
       · A combination of quantitative and qualitative approaches was used in the data analysis.

12. Xu, H., He, P., Wang, G., Yu, G., Shao, L. (2010). "Enhanced storage stability of aerobic granules seeded with pellets", Bioresource
    Technology 101(21):8031-8037.

13. McFadden, K., Henagan, S., Gowen III, C. (2009). "The patient safety chain: Transformational leadership's effect on patient
    safety culture, initiatives, and outcomes", Journal of Operations Management 27(5):390-404.
                                                                                                                              Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 39
  Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Clarify Definitions

   Clarifying definitions is the strategy writers use when they need to inform the reader of terms or concepts
   as they are used in the research. By implementing this step, authors can explain the meaning of terminology,
   provide working definitions, and/or clarify concepts. Sometimes scholars use this strategy to demonstrate
   how the terms or concepts used in the paper are similar to or different from the way the terms are typically
   used in the field, which helps readers to avoid misinterpreting the wording. The definitions and/or terms
   used in the study may come from previous research, or they may be new terminology or phrasing that the
   author has coined. Look at the examples below to take note of how published writers make this happen in
   their manuscripts:

         Examples

             · Some organizations require great attention to preventing mistakes because errors could have serious
                 implications to public safety. High reliability organizations (HROs) refer to organizations or systems
                 that operate in complex and hazardous conditions and yet consistently achieve nearly error-free
                 performance. They are termed HROs because they seem to function in a more reliable fashion than
                 other similar organizations. 14

             · Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is defined as a group of vascular disorders that involve the heart as well as
                 the vasculature. CVD remains the leading cause of death in developed nations and accounts for over one-
                 third of all deaths within the United States each year [1] .15

   If you'd like to explore more ways to clarify definitions, the Academic Phrasebank website not only provides
   a list of general ideas, but also includes more specific ways to define words for a variety of different
   communicative goals (e.g., indicating difficulties to define a term, referring to others' definitions etc.). Here
   are a few starter sentences that might help you to envision how writers accomplish the strategy of defining
   terms, which contributes to addressing the niche:

14. McFadden, K., Henagan, S., Gowen III, C. (2009). "The patient safety chain: Transformational leadership's effect on patient
    safety culture, initiatives, and outcomes", Journal of Operations Management 27(5):390-404.

15. Wood, J., Shah, N., McKee, C., Hughbanks, M., Liliensiek, S., Russell, P., Murphy, C. (2011). "The role of substratum compliance
    of hydrogels on vascular endothelial cell behavior", Biomaterials 32(22):5056-5064.
    40 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
       · Throughout this paper, the term `X' will refer to ...
       · The term `X' will be used in this thesis to refer to ...
       · Historically, the term `X' has been used to describe ...
       · It is necessary here to clarify exactly what is meant by ...
       · The phrase `X' will be used in this study to describe the ...
       · According to Smith (2002), X can be defined as follows: ` ... '
       · In this article, the abbreviation XYZ will be used to refer to ...
       · Throughout this dissertation, the term `X' will be used to refer to ...
       · The term `X' is a relatively new name for ..., commonly referred to as ...
       · In this essay, the term `X' will be used in its broadest sense to refer to all ...
       · In this dissertation, the terms `X' and `Y' are used interchangeably to mean ...
       · While a variety of definitions of the term X have been suggested, this paper will use the definition first suggested

           by Smith (1968) who saw it as ...

  Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Announce Principal Outcomes

   Announcing principal outcomes briefly states the most important results of the study. In other words, you
   can think of this strategy as a preview of your full results section. Using this strategy shows which specific
   findings contribute to the communicative goal of Addressing the Niche while also providing a preview of
   the more detailed outcomes, which will be elaborated upon later in your paper.

   Below are some examples of the announcing principal outcomes strategy:

         Examples

             · Instead, the template-bridging effect of the membrane binding to the Gla domains of both f Xa and PZ,
                 together with the specific interaction of the two Gla domains shown previously by Rezaie and co-workers
                 (6), were the most important factors in bringing about the PZ-dependent acceleration of f Xa inhibition in
                 the presence of phospholipid and Ca2+. Importantly, we found that a ZPI variant with P1 arginine reacted
                 at a diffusion-limited rate with f Xa. Reaction was predominantly as a substrate, as a result of rapid
                 acylation and deacylation, and did not depend on PZ or other cofactors.16

             · The goal of this study was to identify and test the importance of potential drivers of agricultural land
                 abandonment and consequent natural vegetation re-growth, using a spatially explicit statistical model,
                 based on an economic theoretical framework. There are three main findings of this study. Firstly, the
                 research area in the municipality of Ancud, Chiloe Island, in Southern Chile has been proposed by Food
                 and Agriculture Organization of The United Nations (FAO) as a Globally Important Agricultural Heritage
                 System (GIAHS), which sustains itself on the permanence of traditional farming practices that are
                 threatened by land abandonment.17

16. Huang, X., Dementiev, A., Olson, S., Gettins, P. (2010). "Basis for the specificity and activation of the serpin protein Z-

                                                                                                                               Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 41
   To announce the principal outcomes of their research, authors typically use verbs such as find, show,
   indicate, reveal, explain, demonstrate, determine, prove, establish, etc. Regardless of the verb you use,
   however, you want to be sure that you are previewing just the most important findings. You'll have an entire
   section of the paper (the Results section) to provide the details.

  Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: State Value

   Stating the value of present research explains the significance of your research. It functions as a kind of
   argument that the study provides an important contribution to the field. Here are two examples:

         Examples

             · Therefore, this work's intent was to study the bioaccumulation of the contaminants mentioned previously
                 in the autochthonous black pig feeding substantially on natural pastures and reared under different
                 extensive farming systems within the preserved area of the Regional Nebrodi Park of Sicily (Italy). The
                 acquired information could provide answers to food safety issues for locally processed meat
                 production and, at the same time, endorse the abovementioned sustainable farming practices, i.e., that
                 outdoor and wild pigs be recognized as sensitive sentinels to monitor the overall quality of the
                 environment (36).18

             · The research we report here offers a possible explanation for why situational cues, such as numerical
                 representation, might contribute to such performance outcomes. We propose that, by triggering
                 objective experiences of identity threat (e.g., cognitive and physiological vigilance) and subjective
                 experiences of identity threat (e.g., a decreased sense of belonging and decreased desire to participate in
                 the setting), subtle situational cues may have powerful and far-reaching effects for potential targets of
                 stereotypes and stigma.19

   Many writers implement this strategy through the use of verbs such as can, could, might, or may in
   combination with verbs like offer, provide, generate, or contribute. Other authors use adjectives or adverbs

    dependent proteinase inhibitor (ZPI) as an inhibitor of membrane-associated factor Xa", Journal of Biological Chemistry
    285(26): 20399-20409.
17. Díaza, G. I., Nahuelhuala, L., Echeverríad, C., Maríne, S. (2011). "Drivers of land abandonment in Southern Chile and
    implications for landscape planning", Landscape and Urban Planning, 99, pp. 207-217.
18. Brambilla, G., De Filippis, S., Iamiceli, A., Iacovella, N., Abate, V., Aronica, V., Di Marco, V., Di Domenico, A. (2010).
    "Bioaccumulation of dioxin-like substances and selected brominated flame retardant congeners in the fat and livers of black
    pigs farmed within the Nebrodi Regional Park of Sicily", Journal of Food Protection® 74(2): 261-269.
19. Murphy, M., Steele, C., Gross, J. (2007). "Signaling threat how situational cues affect women in math, science, and engineering
    settings", Psychological Science 18(10):879-885.
    42 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
such as possible, potential, likely, or probably. The Academic Phrasebank provides the following sentence
starters as suggestions:

   · This is the first study to ...
   · This study provides new insights into ...
   · This work will generate fresh insight into ...
   · The study offers some important insights into ...
   · Understanding the link between X and Y will help ...
   · This is the first study to undertake a longitudinal analysis of ...
   · The present research explores, for the first time, the effects of ...
   · The importance and originality of this study are that it explores ...
   · The findings should make an important contribution to the field of ....
   · Characterisation of X is important for our increased understanding of ...
   · It is hoped that this research will contribute to a deeper understanding of ...
   · This study aims to contribute to this growing area of research by exploring ...
   · This project provided an important opportunity to advance the understanding of ...
   · Therefore, this study makes a major contribution to research on X by demonstrating ...
   · There are several important areas where this study makes an original contribution to ...
   · The experimental work presented here provides one of the first investigations into how ...

Introduction Goal 3 Strategy: Outline the Structure

Outlining the structure of the paper is the final possible strategy that you can use to accomplish the third
goal (Addressing the Niche). This strategy is a preview of the organization of the manuscript. The use of an
outline gives the reader insight into how the paper is structured, thus giving an overview of each section
and its content. You could consider this strategy like written directions, which provide a guide to the paper
and encourage the easy location of specific content.
Consider the following examples, in which authors outline the structure of their papers:

         Examples

         · My results can therefore help to explain why models that treat product locations as fixed often do poorly
             at predicting how prices change after mergers (Peters, 2006; Whinston, 2006; Ashenfelter and Hosken,
             2008) and why competitors may choose to lobby an antitrust authority to prohibit a merger even when
             synergies are unlikely. The article is structured as follows. The rest of the Introduction reviews the
             related literature. Section 2 describes the data and how I use playlists to measure differentiation.
             Section 3 presents the main results.20

         · This article is structured as follows. The second section describes the study sites, the simulated cork
             oak silviculture models, the data collection, the private amenity valuation, and the afforestation net
             benefit estimation. The third section presents the main results. The fourth section closes with
             discussion and conclusions.21

                                                                                                                          Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 43
    Usually, writers who utilize this strategy begin with an overview sentence followed by a list of section-
    by-section content. The examples above use similar tactics to each other even though they are from very
    different disciplines. Additionally, the Academic Phrasebank website has a further list of ideas, as noted
    below:

        · The first section of this paper will examine...
        · This paper begins by ... It will then go on to ...
        · My thesis is composed of four themed chapters.
        · The essay has been organised in the following way.
        · The remaining part of the paper proceeds as follows: ...
        · The main issues addressed in this paper are: a), b) and c).
        · This paper first gives a brief overview of the recent history of X.
        · This paper has been divided into four parts. The first part deals with ...
        · The third chapter is concerned with the methodology used for this study.
        · The overall structure of the study takes the form of six chapters, including ...
        · Chapter Four analyses the results of interviews and focus group discussions undertaken during ...
        · Chapter Two begins by laying out the theoretical dimensions of the research, and looks at how ...
        · The fourth section presents the findings of the research, focusing on the three key themes that ...

    So, there are quite a few strategies for accomplishing the third goal. Now, you will complete an exercise to
    see how well you can recognize the strategies in published articles.

                  An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
                  https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=91#h5p-6

20. Sweeting, A. (2010). "The effects of mergers on product positioning: evidence from the music radio industry", The RAND
     Journal of Economics 41(2): 372-397.

21. Ovando, P., Campos, P., Oviedo, J., Montero, G. (2010). "Private Net Benefits from Afforesting Marginal Cropland and Shrubland
     with Cork Oaks in Spain", Forest Science 56(6): 567-577.
     44 | Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche
    Key Takeaways

The third goal of an Introduction section in a research article is Addressing a Niche. There are nine possible
ways to achieve this:

    · Introduce research descriptively
    · Announce purpose of study
    · Present research questions
    · Present research hypotheses
    · Summarize methods
    · Clarify definitions
    · Announce principal outcomes
    · State value
    · Outline the structure
Remember: It's not necessary to implement all of these strategies. You can choose which ones work best for
your own topic, style, and discipline.

                                                                                                                    Introduction Goal 3: Addressing the Niche | 45
Some Other Important Points about Introductions

We have now covered the three communicative goals for writing Introductions and announced their various
strategies. Here are a few other important points:

  · There is no linear order for organizing your content to fulfill these communicative goals.
  · Some communicative strategies are used more extensively than others.
  · Different strategies can be combined to achieve a stronger communicative effect.
  · The use of strategies varies depending on disciplinary conventions.
  · It is up to us as academic writers to evaluate our writing intentions and assess the degree to which we

      accomplish our goals.
Before you write, it may benefit you to read. When you are reading, be critical and look for the goals/
strategies presented in this chapter. Two important aspects of writing can help you to do this:

             1. The subject matter: writers movement from general to specific. Notice how you do (or do not
                  do) this.

             2. The quality of the claims: what you say is not as important as HOW you say it. Use your ability
                  to compose strong arguments to enhance the quality of your claims.

 Let's try one final exercise to practice applying your knowledge of Introductions.
             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=107#h5p-7

46 | Some Other Important Points about Introductions
Chapter 3 Synopsis: Writing Introductions

We have now reviewed the three communicative goals and a variety of strategies that you can use to help
write the Introduction section of a research article. The image below provides a snapshot of this chapter:

         Key Takeaways

     There are 3 goals for Introduction sections:
         1. Establish a Knowledge Territory: Demonstrate what you know and what has already been established in
             the field while holding the attention of the reader so that they are interested enough to keep reading.
        2. Identify a Niche: Point out exactly what is the problem or gap in the literature, which sets the reader up
             for the third and final communicative goal of an Introduction.
        3. Address the Niche: Justify the research without being formulaic; as a writer, you have the freedom to
             present your research in whatever way you feel best accomplishes these communicative goals.

We'll now move on to the next section of a research article: The Methods.

                                                                                                                          Chapter 3 Synopsis: Writing Introductions | 47
Other resources:

The literature review section of the research article is commonly included in the Introduction section and
regularly follows the outlined goals and strategies prominent in published Introductions. The literature
review is a complicated component of the research article and requires a comprehensive synthesis of
relevant research; this critique can serve as a means for authors to expose the need for the current
research project based on insufficient, contradicting, or problematic findings from the past. Read more
about techniques for writing a literature review from these two web resources:

  · Wikihow
  · Williams College

        Explore + Apply

     Before you begin applying what you've learned in this chapter to your Introduction section, explore published
     writing in your discipline or in a target journal that you've identified. Look for the goals and strategies
     presented here to see where you might find similarities and differences that are discipline- or journal-specific.

48 | Chapter 3 Synopsis: Writing Introductions
Chapter 4: Writing the Methods Section

        Learning Objectives

     After completing this chapter, you should be able to ...
         · articulate the importance of Methods sections,
         · recognize the communicative goals of the Methods,
         · strategize to achieve communicative goals,
         · optimize the language for writing about your Methods, and
         · evaluate your Methods section.

             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=332#h5p-8

                                                                                                                             Chapter 4: Writing the Methods Section | 49
Conceptualizing the Research Article

You may remember from Chapter 3 that research articles have specific sections regardless of discipline or
journal. Generally, there are five commonly acknowledged sections of an empirical research manuscript:
Introduction (including the Literature Review), Methods, Results, and Discussion/Conclusion.

Notice that the figure depicts an article in the shape of an hourglass. That shape provides a way for us to
consider which sections of a research article will be general and which will be specific. The middle part --
the Methods and Results sections -- are the most narrow, or specific, areas of the entire article. As you move
away from the Introduction, your content will start to become more and more specific, reaching its most
specific point in the Methods and Results sections. In this chapter, we will present the goals and strategies
for writing the Methods.

             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=340#h5p-9

      Warm-up

     Why do you think the Methods need to be specific (narrow) and not too general (broad)? What aspects of the
     Methods contribute to its specificity?

50 | Conceptualizing the Research Article
Goals of an Effective Methods Section

There are three main goals for an effective Methods section:
 1. Contextualize the study's methods;
 2. Describe the study;
 3. Analyze the data.

The image below provides a visual way to understand the three goals:

These goals attempt to explain to the reader -- in a very detailed fashion -- how the study was carried out.
Specificity is of utmost importance in this section, and one way to think about how specific the content
should be is to imagine that someone is reading your Methods section with the purpose of replicating your
research. Would they be able to conduct this same study based on what you have written in this section?
You want the answer to be YES. So, by contextualizing, describing, and analyzing, you can explain to the
reader exactly what, when, where, and how you did what you did.
 Next, we'll examine each of these three goals in a more careful way and provide some examples from published
 research.

                                                                                                                                Goals of an Effective Methods Section | 51
Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods

The first goal of writing your Methods section is to contextualize (provide context or a "picture" of) the
procedures you followed to conduct the research. Doing this requires attention to detail. Some of the
possible ways that you can accomplish this goal will be discussed later in the chapter, but first, let's look at
some examples of Methods sections from published research articles in high-impact journals (the parts of
the Methods that contain Goal 1 language are bolded):

52 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
         Examples

            · Volumetric gas concentrations obtained from the gas analyzers were converted into mass
                concentrations with the ideal gas law by using the mean reactor room temperature and assuming one
                atmosphere pressure. Gas release is defined in this article as the process of gas transferring through the
                liquid manure surface into the free air stream of the reactor headspace. Gas emission is defined as the
                process of gas emanating from the reactor into the outdoor atmosphere. Gas release does not equal gas
                emission under transient conditions, although it does under steady-state conditions. The rate of gas
                emission from a reactor was calculated with equation 1: Equation (1) where QGe is gas emission rate
                (mass min-1), CGex is exhaust gas concentration (mass L-1), CGin is inlet gas concentration (mass L-1),
                and Qv is reactor airflow rate (L min-1). The gas release rate was approximated with the rates of
                change in gas mass in the reactor headspace with equation 2: Equation (2) where QGr is gas release
                rate (mass min-1), CGh is gas concentration in the headspace (mass L-1), and Vh is headspace air
                volume (L). In this article, we assumed that CGh was equal to CGex. To use the sampled data obtained in
                this study, equation 2 was discretized to equation 3: Equation (3) where __delta__t is sampling
                interval (min), and k is sample number (k = 0, 1, 2, ... ). Gas release flux was calculated with equation 4:
                Equation (4) where qGr is gas release flux (mass m-2 in-1), and A is area of reactor manure surface
                (m2).1

            · The participants were employees of a medium-sized firm in the telecommunications industry. The
                sampling frame was the list of 3,402 potential users of the new ERP system. We received 2,794 usable
                responses across all points of measurement, resulting in an effective response rate of just over 82
                percent. Our sample comprised 898 women (32 percent). The average age of the participants was 34.7,
                with a standard deviation of 6.9. All levels of the organizational hierarchy were adequately represented in
                the sample and were in proportion to the sampling frame. While ideally we would have wanted all
                potential participants to provide responses in all waves of the data collection, this was particularly
                difficult given that the study duration was 12 months and had multiple points of measurement. Thus, the
                final sample of 2,794 was determined after excluding those who did not respond despite follow-ups,
                those who had left the organization, those who provided incomplete responses, or who did not choose to
                participate for other reasons. Yet, we note that the response rate was quite high for a longitudinal field
                study; this was, in large part, due to the strong organizational support for the survey and the employees'
                desire to provide reactions and feedback to the new system. Although we did not have any data from the
                non-respondents, we found that the percentage of women, average age, and percentages of employees in
                various organizational levels in the sample were consistent with those in the sampling frame.
                Employees were told that they would be surveyed periodically for a year in order to help manage the
                new ERP system implementation. Employees were told that the data would also be used as part of a
                research study and were promised confidentiality, which was strictly maintained. 2

1. Ni, J. Q., Heber, A. J., Kelly, D. T., & Sutton, A. L. (1998). Mechanism of gas release from liquid swine wastes. In 2001 ASAE Annual
  Meeting (p. 1). American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers.

                                                                                                                Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods | 53
  So, as you can see in the excerpts above, the writers are providing lots of detailed information that
  contextualizes the study. To contextualize methods means that you explain all of the conditions in which
  the study occurred. It might be helpful for you to think of answering the questions who, what, when, where,
  how, and why.
  Goal 1, Contextualizing the Study Methods, means that you completely describe the circumstances
  surrounding the research. There are several strategies you can use to help you successfully achieve this goal
  in a detailed manner.

 Strategies for Methods Communicative Goal 1:
 Contextualizing the Study Methods

     · Referencing previous works
     · Providing general information
     · Identifying the methodological approach
     · Describing the setting
     · Introducing the subjects/participants
     · Rationalizing pre-experiment decisions

    We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

 Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Referencing Previous Works

  Referencing previous works is a strategy used to relate your research to the literature. The strategy
  involves a direct reference to another author or an explicit mention of a study.
  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

2. Morris, M. G., & Venkatesh, V. (2010). Job characteristics and job satisfaction: Understanding the role of enterprise resource
   planning system implementation. Mis Quarterly, 143-161.
   54 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
         Examples

       · The entire experiment consisted of six situations, and each situation was tested employing one advertisement.
           The balanced Latin-square method proposed by Edwards (1951) was used to arrange the six experimental
           situations. To simplify the respondents' choices with regard to order and sequence, all of the print
           advertisements tested were appropriately arranged in the experimental design. 3

       · The Eulerian-granular model in ANSYS 12.0 was used to model the interactions between three phases: one
           gaseous phase and two granular particle phases within a fluidized bed taken from the literature [32] . This
           model was chosen over the Eulerian-Lagrangian models as it is computationally more efficient with regards to
           time and memory.4

  Some common vocabulary that is associated with this strategy includes the following, as noted in the
  Academic Phrasebank website:

      · Many researchers have utilised X to measure ...
      · One of the most well-known tools for assessing ...
      · Traditionally, X has been assessed by measuring ...
      · A number of techniques have been developed to ...
      · Different methods have been proposed to classify ...
      · X is the main non-invasive method used to determine ...
      · Different authors have measured X in a variety of ways.
      · Several methods currently exist for the measurement of X.
      · Previous studies have based their criteria for selection on ...
      · X is one of the most common procedures for determining ...
      · There are three main types of study design used to identify ...
      · The use of life story data has a relatively long tradition within X.
      · Recent advances in X methods have facilitated investigation of ...
      · There are a number of instruments available for measuring the ...
      · X and Y are currently the most popular methods for investigating ...
      · Recently, simpler and more rapid tests of X have been developed.
      · In most recent studies, X has been measured in four different ways.
      · The use of qualitative case studies is a well-established approach in ...
      · Xs have been used in the past to investigate the mechanical properties of ...

  Referencing previous works can occur almost anywhere in the Methods section because it can be used to
  validate or justify decisions about any of the data collected, procedures used, and analyses carried out.

3. Lin, P. C., & Yang, C. M. (2010). Impact of product pictures and brand names on memory of Chinese metaphorical
   advertisements. International Journal of Design, 4(1).

4. Armstrong, L. M., Gu, S., & Luo, K. H. (2011). Effects of limestone calcination on the gasification processes in a BFB coal gasifier.
   Chemical Engineering Journal, 168(2), 848-860.

                                                                                                                 Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods | 55
 Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Providing General Information

  Providing general information allows a writer to give the background that is specific to the methods. This
  can be theoretical, empirical, informational, or experiential background to the methodology of the study.
  You can use this strategy to build a bridge for the reader. The bridge should connect your study to other
  studies that have utilized the same or similar methodology. This strategy also encompasses any preliminary
  hypotheses or interpretations that you may want to make.

  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

       · The animals used during this study were slaughtered in accredited slaughterhouses according to the rules on
           animal protection defined by French law (Code Rural, articles R214-64 to R214-71, http://www.legifrance.gouv.fr).
           The Qualvigene program, described in detail elsewhere (Allais et al., 2010), was a collaborative research
           program involving AI companies, INRA (the French National Institute for Agricultural Research) and the
           Institut de l'Elevage (Breeding Institute) in France. The program was initiated to study the genetic determinism
           of beef and meat quality traits (Malafosse et al., 2007).5

       · This study focused on stemwood when examining alternative woody biomass management regimes for loblolly
           pine. PTAEDA3.1, developed with data from a wide range of loblolly pine plantations in the southern United
           States, was used to simulate growth as well as competition and mortality effects and predict yields of various
           management scenarios (Bullock and Burkhart 2003, Burkhart et al. 2004).6

  Providing general information is a strategy that helps to provide context for an author's explanation of
  methodological steps. By including more information, you are adding to the specificity and level of detail,
  which is one of the most important aspects of the Methods section.

 Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Identifying the Methodological Approach

  Identifying the methodological approach allows a writer to pinpoint the exact method that was adopted
  to accomplish the study's goals. This is a strategy you would use if there was a specific set of procedures
  for your approach or, in some cases, even a predetermined framework for how to carry out the study. The
  main purpose of this step is to introduce the methodological approach or experimental design used for the

5. Allais, S., Journaux, L., Levéziel, H., Payet-Duprat, N., Raynaud, P., Hocquette, J. F., ... & Renand, G. (2011). Effects of
   polymorphisms in the calpastatin and µ-calpain genes on meat tenderness in 3 French beef breeds. Journal of Animal Science,
   89(1), 1-11.

6. Guo, Z., Grebner, D., Sun, C., & Grado, S. (2010). Evaluation of Loblolly pine management regimes in Mississippi for biomass
   supplies: a simulation approach. Southern Journal of Applied Forestry, 34(2), 65-71.
   56 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
  current study to inform the reader of the selected approach, announce credible research practices known
  in the field, and possibly transition to describing the experimental procedures.

  Consider the following examples:

         Examples

       · In both seasons, the experiments were arranged in a complete randomized block design with four
           replications, using a plot size of 3.45m x 15m each containing 114 plants. Three levels of organic
           supplementation [0 kgm-2 (S0), 0.35 kgm-2 (S0.35) and 0.70 kgm-2 (S0.70)] were incorporated into the soil 2 days
           before solarization.7

       · To address these hypotheses rigorously, we conducted a randomized controlled trial with children clustered
           within schools. All three interventions were delivered by the same teaching assistant in each school.8

  The Academic Phrasebank website provides a list of sentence starters that would indicate the use of this
  strategy. Here are a few examples:

      · The solution was then assayed for X using the Y method.
      · X was prepared according to the procedure used by Jones et al. (1957).
      · The synthesis of X was done according to the procedure of Smith (1973).
      · X was synthesised using the same method that was detailed for Y, using ...
      · Samples were analysed for X as previously reported by Smith et al. (2012).
      · Analysis was based on the conceptual framework proposed by Smith et al. (2002).
      · This compound was prepared by adapting the procedure used by Jones et al. (1990)...

  Identifying the methodological approach is a strategy that supplies a frame for a description of
  experimental steps and methodological decisions. By describing the new methods you developed or
  explaining how you employed an established methodology, you are helping the reader to understand
  exactly what you did and when, why, where, and how you did it.

 Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Describing the Setting

  Describing the setting of the study is simply telling the reader about where or under what conditions the
  study happened. The setting is all about the place, conditions, and surroundings. In other words, this strategy

7. Mauromicale, G., Longo, A. M. G., & Monaco, A. L. (2011). The effect of organic supplementation of solarized soil on the quality
   of tomato fruit. Scientia Horticulturae, 129(2), 189-196.

8. Clarke, P. J., Snowling, M. J., Truelove, E., & Hulme, C. (2010). Ameliorating children's reading-comprehension difficulties: A
   randomized controlled trial. Psychological Science, 21(8), 1106-1116.
                                                                                                                 Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods | 57
   details the characteristics of the environment in which the research was conducted, which often answers
   the "where" and "when" questions. Information may include details about the place and temperature; it
   may also include some temporal (or time-related) descriptors such as the time of the year. It should
   be noted that this step may overlap with some steps in Goal 2 (which describes the tools used or the
   experimental procedures conducted), but it remains distinct from them in that describing the setting
   specifically references the inherent characteristics of the context or environment in which the study took
   place, and not the characteristics of the materials used to accomplish the experiment or to affect some
   change in the subject that is being examined. You'll read more about this in the next chapter.

   Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

        · The mares were admitted at day 310 of pregnancy, housed in wide straw bedding boxes and fed with hay and
            concentrates twice a day.9

        · All three studies were performed in the eastern half of the SRS in the RCW management area (US Department
            of Energy 2005).10

   So, describing the setting helps the reader to picture the situation and the conditions in which the
   experiment was completed.

  Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Introducing the Subjects/Participants

   Introducing the subjects or participants in your study helps you to describe the characteristics of your
   sample. Whether you have human, animal, or inanimate participants or subjects, you will still need to provide
   the reader with a careful description of them. For a study involving humans, this answers the "who" question.
   For studies without humans, this often answers the "what" question. It should be noted, however, that not
   all disciplines have subjects/participants, but when subjects/participants can be identified, this step helps
   to describe subjects/participants and their original/pre-experimental characteristics, properties, origin,
   number, composition/construction, etc. The step also details the process by which subjects/participants
   were recruited/selected.

   Below are a couple of examples excerpted from published reports of research with the relevant language in

 9. Castagnetti, C., Mariella, J., Serrazanetti, G. P., Grandis, A., Merlo, B., Fabbri, M., & Mari, G. (2007). Evaluation of lung maturity
    by amniotic fluid analysis in equine neonate. Theriogenology, 67(9), 1455-1462.

10. Goodrick, S. L., Shea, D., & Blake, J. (2010). Estimating fuel consumption for the upper coastal plain of South Carolina. Southern
    Journal of Applied Forestry, 34(1), 5-12.
    58 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
   bold to illustrate how the words/phrases work to implement the strategy, which then works to accomplish
   the goal:

         Examples

             · Participants in this study included 10 TAs enrolled in this French doctoral program.11
             · The Mexican populations, Chetumal and Tulum (Mex-1 and Mex-2, respectively), have large resin-

                 producing glands, while the Venezuelan populations, Tovar and Caracas (Ven-1 and Ven-2, respectively),
                 have smaller glands.12

   The Academic Phrasebank website provides a list of sentence starters that would indicate the use of this
   strategy. Here are a few examples:

       · The cohort was divided into two groups according to ...
       · A random sample of patients with ... was recruited from ...
       · Articles were searched from January 1965 until April 2014.
       · The sample was representative with respect to gender and ...
       · Forty-seven students studying X were recruited for this study.
       · A systematic literature review was conducted of studies that ...
       · Just over half the sample (53%) was female, of whom 69% were ...
       · Of the initial cohort of 123 students, 66 were female and 57 male.
       · Eligible women who matched the selection criteria were identified by ...
       · Only children aged between 10 and 15 years were included in the study.
       · The participants were divided into two groups based on their performance on ...
       · Two groups of subjects were interviewed, namely X and Y. The first group was...
       · The project used a convenience sample of 32 first-year modern languages students.
       · All of the participants were aged between 18 and 19 at the beginning of the study...
       · All studies described as using some sort of X procedure were included in the analysis.
       · Participants were recruited from 15 clinics across ..., covering urban and rural areas ...
       · The initial sample consisted of 200 students, 75 of whom belonged to minority groups.
       · Semi-structured interviews were conducted with 17 male offenders with a mean age of 38 years.

   Introducing your subjects/participants is key because of the important role that a sample plays in the
   design of the study. Think of this strategy as a way to make an argument for the value of your sample.

11. Mills, N. (2011). Teaching assistants' self-efficacy in teaching literature: Sources, personal assessments, and consequences. The
    Modern Language Journal, 95(1), 61-80.

12. Pélabon, C., Carlson, M. L., Hansen, T. F., Yoccoz, N. G., & Armbruster, W. S. (2004). Consequences of inter-population crosses
    on developmental stability and canalization of floral traits in Dalechampia scandens (Euphorbiaceae). Journal of Evolutionary
    Biology, 17(1), 19-32.

                                                                                                                  Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods | 59
  Methods Goal 1 Strategy: Rationalizing Pre-Experiment Conditions

   Rationalizing pre-experiment conditions is a way to show the reader how you attained your specific
   sample or how you decided about the methods you chose prior to actually carrying out the experimental
   procedures of the study.

   Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

        · The literature review presented above leads us to formulate our research questions more precisely. First, we
            ask whether there is a difference in well-being between the unemployed and those currently employed.13

        · We defined two sub-samples of LAEs split at R = 25.5. The continuum-bright (UV-bright hereafter) sub-sample
            of 118 LAEs enables a direct comparison with the SED parameters of R less than 25.5 "BX," star-forming
            galaxies in the same range of redshift (Steidel et al. 2004). The remaining 98 LAEs are classified as UV-faint.14

   On the Academic Phrasebank website, sentence starters are provided for indicating the inclusion or
   exclusion criteria you may have used in your study.

       · Criteria for selecting the subjects were as follows:
       · Publications were only included in the analysis if...
       · The participants in this study were recruited from ...
       · To identify X, the following parameters were used: ...
       · The area of study was chosen for its relatively small ...
       · Primary inclusion criteria for the X participants were ...
       · Eligibility criteria required individuals to have received ...
       · Five individuals were excluded from the study on the basis of ...
       · A small sample was chosen because of the expected difficulty in obtaining ...
       · The subjects were selected on the basis of the degree of homogeneity of their ...
       · A comparison group of 12 male subjects without any history of X was drawn from a pool of ...

   Keep in mind that the Methods section is very important. Even if readers are skimming a published article,
   they typically read the methods with careful attention to the details provided. Because Methods sections
   are often rote narratives of procedures, there are several frequently adopted words or phrases that are

13. Ervasti, H., & Venetoklis, T. (2010). Unemployment and subjective well-being: An empirical test of deprivation theory, incentive
    paradigm and financial strain approach. Acta Sociologica, 53(2), 119-139.

14. Guaita, L., Acquaviva, V., Padilla, N., Gawiser, E., Bond, N. A., Ciardullo, R., ... & Schawinski, K. (2011). Ly-emitting galaxies at z=
    2.1: Stellar masses, dust, and star formation histories from spectral energy distribution fitting. The Astrophysical Journal,
    733(2), 114.
    60 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
standard. The Academic Phrasebank website provides a list of these, which are summarized in the table
below:

Type of Language                             Example
Infinitive of purpose (to + base form verb)  To measure X, we ...
Expressing purpose with "for"                To establish X, the participants were ...
Sequence words (related to timing)           For the questions in the interview, we adapted ...
                                             For the purpose of analysis, X was ...
                                             Prior to
                                             After

Passive voice verbs (be + past participle)   All participants were sent ...
                                             The data were normalized using ...

Adverbs of manner                            A sample was then carefully injected into ...
                                             The mixture was then gradually heated ...

"Using" + instruments                        Data were collected using Xs ...
                                             The subjects were recruited using email ...

Overall, there is a lot of example language that you may use to incorporate as you write the Methods section.
Using the goals and strategies as a guide, you can choose the words and phrases suggested to ensure that
your methods are appropriately detailed and clear.

                                             Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods | 61
        Key Takeaways

     Goal #1 of writing the Methods section is related to Contextualizing the Study's Methods. There are six possible
     strategies that you can use to accomplish this goal:

         · Referencing previous works and/or
         · Providing general information and/or
         · Identifying the methodological approach and/or
         · Describing the setting and/or
         · Introducing the subjects/participants and/or
         · Rationalizing pre-experiment decisions
     Remember: You do not need to include all of these strategies -- they are simply possibilities for reaching the
     goal of Contextualizing the Study's Methods.

62 | Methods Goal 1: Contextualize the Study's Methods
Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study

The second goal of writing your Methods section is to Describe the Study. This is the primary portion of the
Methods section and is the place for you to include details of what you actually did to conduct the research.
To accomplish this goal, you will need to explain how, when, and where you obtained the data, and you
should describe that data. If your study involves the use of variables, then part of the objective for this goal
is to highlight their purpose. Usually, authors explain why they did or did not include certain variables along
with detailing their experimental procedures and noting tools, instruments, materials, or equipment that
may have been used. Finally, another purpose of this goal is to provide a rationale for the decisions that were
made along the way of collecting, analyzing, and interpreting the data.
Now let's look at some examples from published studies, where Goal 2 is bolded:

                                                                                                                                   Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 63
        Examples

            · The sulfur atom is located in a bridging position between two paired Mo atoms. Besides, each Mo atom is
                surrounded by one Ni atom. Oxygenated molecules can thus interact either with the sulfur-deficient
                Mo sites (Fig. 1a and b) or with the Ni sites, while hydrogen atoms can interact either with metal
                centers to form hydridic species or with the S atom to form protonic species. The following
                parameters, x = 12.29 A, y = 12.80 A and z = 27.01 A, are used for the supercell, which ensures a vacuum
                interlayer of 15.00 A (in z direction) and is sufficient to avoid spurious interactions between two edges
                belonging to neighboring supercells . In this work, we focus on the metallic edge (M-edge) for both
                systems. We complementarily used the DMol3 package [34] to determine Hirshfeld charges [35] of
                relevant active sites and atoms in studied molecules.1

            · A phenomenological approach was used to map out people's experiences of pleasantness on different
                levels of bodily functioning. Phenomenology as a distinct method of inquiry is based upon the classic
                philosophical works of Husserl and Heidegger (Moustakas, 1994). It provides a structured approach to
                investigate subjective experience, allowing the discovery of shared ideas and common experiences
                among people (Maggs-Rapport, 2008). A traditional data collection method for phenomenological inquiry
                is the qualitative, in-depth interview (Lopez & Willis, 2004). Since this method can be time-intensive,
                interviews are often semi-structured, hereby maximizing researcher efficiency while still allowing
                people's freedom of expression (Barriball & While, 1994). In order to increase the scientific rigor of
                phenomenological research, balanced integration is promoted (de Witt & Ploeg, 2006). Balanced
                integration relates to "...the general philosophical theme and its fit with the researcher and the research
                topic, in depth intertwining of philosophical concepts with the study methods and findings, and a balance
                between the voice of the participants and the philosophical explanation..." (p. 224). Our inquiry goals were
                to investigate the pleasantness of everyday activities experienced within the human body in relation to
                the aesthetics of interaction paradigm, using a biological perspective on human functioning. In order to
                reach these goals, we set out to obtain in-depth understanding of a large variety of pleasant, everyday
                experiences. During the recruitment of participants, we tried to maximize diversity in responses by
                searching for people who used different sensory modalities in their professional work and who had
                different demographic characteristics. Participants were 12 Dutch citizens varying in age, background,
                income, and level of education. Their occupations were: Disk jockey, music conductor, preacher,
                psychology student, Reichian body worker, physiotherapist, maitre/sommelier, manager in the
                perfumery industry, architecture student, dance teacher, fashion design student and secretarial worker.
                Participants were selected through professional listing services and through our social networks. Care
                was given that interviewers were not personally acquainted with any of the participants. Participants'
                ages ranged from 20 to 72 years. Six participants were women and six were men.2

1. Dupont, C., Lemeur, R., Daudin, A., & Raybaud, P. (2011). Hydrodeoxygenation pathways catalyzed by MoS2 and NiMoS active
   phases: A DFT study. Journal of Catalysis, 279(2), 276-286.

2. Rozendaal, M. C., & Schifferstein, H. N. (2010). Pleasantness in bodily experience: A phenomenological inquiry. International

   64 | Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study
So, Goal 2 paints a picture of the data and the tools/resources/materials used in the study. Most of your
Methods section will be used to accomplish this goal. As such, Goal 2, Describing the Study, includes
outlining all the processes you (the researcher) used from start to finish. There are several strategies you
can implement that will allow you to accomplish this goal.

Strategies for Writing about Methods Goal 2: Describing the Study

  · Acquiring the data
  · Describing the data
  · Identifying variables
  · Describing experimental/study procedures
  · Describing tools/instruments/materials/equipment
  · Rationalizing experiment decisions
  · Reporting incrementals

 We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Acquiring the Data

Acquiring the data refers to a writer's description of the collection and data-recording process. This
strategy enables an author to illustrate how the data were obtained (e.g., via sampling, selecting, or
measuring processes) and also what was done to the data (including, but not limited to, preparing,
tabulating, or estimating the data).
Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

Journal of Design, 4(2), 55-63.

                                 Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 65
        Examples

       · In the present study, 12 Australian university students of Japanese were recruited, who in turn invited their
           Japanese contacts to participate. In total, data was collected from 30 participants, and some Japanese
           participants were contacts of more than one Australian participant. In contrast to many previous studies,
           volunteers were not paired with NSs in order to complete tasks, but instead data was collected from participants
           in existing relationships. 3

       · The high-quality fluorescent particles, typically used in microfluidics, generally provide high-quality particle
           images, with acceptable SNR up to high levels of defocusing, and are particularly well suited for this type of
           application. In figure 2 the peak intensities and particle image diameters, obtained from different types of
           tracer particles, are shown as a function of their distance z from the in-focus plane. The tracer particles are
           polystyrene latex spheres with diameters of dp = 1, 2, 5 and 10 __mu__m, fabricated by Microparticles GmbH.4

  Overall, this strategy illustrates the process of collecting and/or recording data that comes from any
  source -- primary or secondary. It answers the questions: when, where, and how did you acquire the
  samples that you are using. It can also include your basic measurement strategies and what you did to the
  data to prepare it for analysis. At the end of the chapter, we'll provide examples of some common language
  that can be used to implement this strategy.

 Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Describing the Data

  Describing the data typically follows the previous strategy of explaining how the data were acquired.
  When you describe data, you elaborate on features such as measurement units, scales, qualities, or
  quantities.
  Consider these excerpts from published research articles:

3. Pasfield-Neofitou, S. (2011). Online domains of language use: Second language learners' experiences of virtual community and
   foreignness. Language Learning & Technology, 15(2), 92-108.

4. Cierpka, C., Rossi, M., Segura, R., & Kähler, C. J. (2010). On the calibration of astigmatism particle tracking velocimetry for
   microflows. Measurement Science and Technology, 22(1), 015401.
   66 | Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study
        Examples

       · The relative quantification of the samples was determined using the Bio-Rad CFX Manager software, integrating
           primer efficiencies calculated from a standard curve. For the gene, the sample showing the highest intensity level
           was used as reference with a value of 1. The final data result from averages of three biological replicates and at
           least two technical repetitions.5

       · Age was weakly and typically not significantly related to performance on outcome measures at pre- and
           posttest and, therefore, was not included in analyses. Table 1 presents demographic and screening data,
           arranged by study condition and MD subtype. (We note that we conducted supplementary analyses to
           determine whether adding ESL, IQ, or WRAT Arithmetic altered the nature of the findings. Because none did,
           we did not include these variables as covariates in the analyses described below.)6

  Overall, the use of this strategy enables researchers to fully illustrate their data sample for the reader. This
  strategy is particularly important as a means of justifying the quality of your sample, so be sure to pay close
  attention to detail at this stage of your writing.

 Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Identifying Variables

  The strategy of identifying variables distinguishes which parts of your data were manipulated or used to
  influence the findings. Some common labels include constant versus subject-to-change conditions or
  factors during the time the experiment was carried out. Here are two examples taken from published
  research articles:

5. Tian, J., Shen, H., Zhang, J., Song, T., & Yao, Y. (2011). Characteristics of chalcone synthase promoters from different leaf-color
   Malus crabapple cultivars. Scientia Horticulturae, 129(3), 449-458.

6. Powell, S. R., Fuchs, L. S., Fuchs, D., Cirino, P. T., & Fletcher, J. M. (2009). Effects of fact retrieval tutoring on third-grade
   students with math difficulties with and without reading difficulties. Learning Disabilities Research & Practice, 24(1), 1-11.
                                                                                                                                      Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 67
         Examples

        · In a typical experiment, a range of 0.01-10.0 mL of ZnO NCs (1.22 x 10-11 to 1.22 x 10-8 mol) were added to 10 vials
            each containing 3.8 x 10-6 M (4.2 x 10-8 mol) 1-CO2H in ethanol. A control vial had the same amount of 1-CO2H
            as the other vials but contained 5 __mu__L of 0.100 M NMe4OH5H2O to deprotonate the molecule. Ethanol
            was added until all vials contained 11.0 mL.7

        · Because of the marked differences between nurture group and control samples in the very few reported studies
            that have included control groups, this study adopted a highly formalised procedure for selecting controls. While
            this did not eliminate the almost unavoidable differences between experimentals and controls in a quasi-
            experimental study, it was successful in significantly reducing any differences.8

   Now that you have sufficiently identified and described your variables, you can move on to explaining what
   you actually did to conduct the experiment: the methods/procedures.

  Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Describing Experimental Study Procedures

   Describing experimental study procedures describes what you did to cause an outcome related to or
   leading to specific results. It also illustrates the steps you used and provides a description that is detailed
   enough for future replication of the study. You can accomplish this strategy by outlining what was done for
   the actual study or experiment in step-by-step actions.
   Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

        · At the initial login, participants were asked to record their steps for 4 days over the following week. 9
        · The mold was then attached to the bottom pedestal of the test cell, the membrane stretched over the bottom

            end platen and sealed using two o-rings. 10

 7. Rossini, J. E., Huss, A. S., Bohnsack, J. N., Blank, D. A., Mann, K. R., & Gladfelter, W. L. (2011). Binding and static quenching
    behavior of a terthiophene carboxylate on monodispersed zinc oxide nanocrystals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115(1),
    11-17.

 8. Reynolds, S., MacKay, T., & Kearney, M. (2009). RESEARCH SECTION: Nurture groups: a large-scale, controlled study of effects
    on development and academic attainment. British Journal of Special Education, 36(4), 204-212.

 9. Booth, A. O., Nowson, C. A., & Matters, H. (2008). Evaluation of an interactive, Internet-based weight loss program: a pilot
    study. Health Education Research, 23(3), 371-381.

10. Alshibli, K. A., Batiste, S. N., & Sture, S. (2003). Strain localization in sand: plane strain versus triaxial compression. Journal of
    68 | Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study
   When describing procedures in the Methods section, authors use both active and passive voice. Very
   frequently, the verbs in the active and passive voice are used in the past tense (as in the examples above).
   However, in some disciplines, authors may choose to use the present simple tense to describe the
   experimental steps of their study (e.g., I exclude small state-owned banks from the sample).

  Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Describing Tools / Instruments / Materials /
  Equipment

   Describing tools/instruments/materials/equipment explains the materials (physical or abstract) used in
   data acquisition or experimental procedures. This information is useful for the reader in case the study may
   be replicated by another researcher. Sometimes the overall goal of a sentence is to describe tools, but other
   times there are overarching goals. It must be noted that while the origin or nature of the tools/instruments/
   materials/equipment may be described, this strategy does not include the process of obtaining or creating
   them, nor does it explain how they were used or what specific actions were taken with them in the course
   of the study.

   It is also worth mentioning that this description of tools/instruments/materials/equipment may not only
   appear in the description of experimental procedures, but also when you are discussing other parts of the
   data acquisition or analysis process.

   Examples of this strategy are in the box below:

         Examples

        · The basic liquid medium (BLM) used for the activation of the cultures consisted of chicken feather meal 20;
            NaCl, 0.5; KH2PO4, 1.0 and K2HPO4, 6.0 at pH 7.5.11

        · The MLAT (Modern Language Aptitude Test) is usually administered in two versions-full and short. Since the
            short version contains all sections relevant to vocabulary learning, it was the version selected for the current
            research.12

   Note that in the first example, the past tense is used to describe materials specifically designed or chosen
   for the study and that may not be familiar to the readers. However, the present tense (used in the second

    Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering, 129(6), 483-494.
11. Liang, J. D., Han, Y. F., Zhang, J. W., Du, W., Liang, Z. Q., & Li, Z. Z. (2011). Optimal culture conditions for keratinase production

    by a novel thermophilic Myceliophthora thermophila strain GZUIFR-H49-1. Journal of Applied Microbiology, 110(4), 871-880.
12. Nikolova, O. R. (2002). Effects of students' participation in authoring of multimedia materials on student acquisition of

    vocabulary. Language Learning & Technology, 6(1), 100-122.
                                                                                                                                       Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 69
   example) can be used to describe standard or conventional tools or equipment that are likely to be familiar
   to the readers.

   Once the variables, procedures, and materials have been sufficiently explained, you will need to justify the
   decisions you made that contributed to the selection of them.

  Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Rationalizing Experiment Decisions

   Rationalizing experiment decisions provides reasoning or explanation for choices made in the
   experimental process (e.g., in data collection or preparation, experimentation, or tool selection). This
   strategy is useful for justifying choices, connecting choices to research purposes and questions, establishing
   credibility, and indicating the objective for certain experimental steps.

   The following examples illustrate this step:

         Examples

        · Moreover, since one aim of the study was to investigate students' impressions regarding the process enacted
            during the Role Play, it was decided that the same dimensions and indicators could be used to address this
            issue.13

        · Yield was not determined by combine harvesting because of the wide range of harvest maturity dates within the
            study.14

   This strategy of providing a justification or rationale for your decisions is extremely important in making the
   research process transparent for your readers.

  Methods Goal 2 Strategy: Reporting Incrementals

   Reporting incrementals, the last potential strategy in Goal 2, reports the preliminary findings, results of
   observations, and/or measurements. It may serve as a way for the author to promote understanding of the
   next steps taken or choices made in the experiment. These incremental reports can clarify your methods
   and/or justify the use of a particular technique or procedure. This strategy results in a brief reporting of
   what occurred in the experimental process. It helps your readers understand why you completed the
   experimental procedures or made certain choices in a particular way.

13. Pozzi, F. (2011). The impact of scripted roles on online collaborative learning processes. International Journal of Computer-
    Supported Collaborative Learning, 6(3), 471-484.

14. Kahlon, C. S., Board, J. E., & Kang, M. S. (2011). An analysis of yield component changes for new vs. old soybean cultivars.
    Agronomy Journal, 103(1), 13-22.
    70 | Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study
   Examples of the reporting incrementals strategy are as follows:

         Examples

        · The final R- and R-free values after data refinement (details in the Supplementary Methods) were 21.6% and
            28.7%, respectively.15

        · Although the same amounts of reactants were used to produce the 508 and 625 nm particles, slight differences
            in stirring speed likely contributed to the size variations.16

   There is one important caveat for reporting incrementals; this strategy should not be confused with actual
   study results. This strategy is simply a small mention of incremental findings or observations that you
   believe to be noteworthy, and they may or may not be directly connected to the final study results.

  Language Suggestions for Goal 2 Strategies

   Some common vocabulary that is associated with this strategy includes the following, as noted in the
   Academic Phrasebank website:

15. Masterson, L. R., Cheng, C., Yu, T., Tonelli, M., Kornev, A., Taylor, S. S., & Veglia, G. (2010). Dynamics connect substrate
    recognition to catalysis in protein kinase A. Nature Chemical Biology, 6(11), 821-828.

16. Kramb, R. C., & Zukoski, C. F. (2008). A metastable van der Waals gel: Transitioning from weak to strong attractions. Langmuir,
    24(14), 7565-7572.
                                                                                                                                        Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 71
 Sequence phrases
   · To begin this process, ...
   · The first step in this process was to ...
   · The second method used to identify X involved ...

 Passive voice verbs
   · All participants were sent ...
   · The data were normalized using ...
   · Ethical approval was obtained from ...

 Expressing purpose with for
   · For the attitude questions, a Likert scale was used.
   · For the purpose of analysis, two segments were extracted from each ...
   · For the estimation of protein concentration, 100 µL of protein sample was mixed with ...

 Adverbs of manner
   · The medium was then aseptically transferred to a conical flask.
   · A sample of the concentrate was then carefully extracted from ...
   · The tubes were methodically collected by ...

 Using + instruments
   · Data were collected using two high spectral resolution Xs.
   · Semi-automated genotyping was carried out using X software and ...
   · Using the X-ray and looking at the actual X, it was possible to identify ...

Linguistic research on language structure and use in Methods sections of research articles has shown
common trends in the forms and structure of the section across disciplines. There is a predominant use of
the present and present perfect tenses, verbs in the past passive and past active voice, and modifiers such as
adjectives and adverbs. These common characteristics may work together to strengthen the author's claims
by calling attention to the contributions of the current work and downplaying uncertainty perhaps arising in
the attainment and analysis of data. Writers also may choose how to represent themselves in their writing.
The personification of the authors is sometimes seen by the use of the pronouns "we," or "I," though the
context and rationale for its use seem inconsistent among the disciplines.

72 | Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study
     Key Takeaways

Goal 2 of writing the Methods section is related to Describing the Study. There are seven possible strategies
that you can use to accomplish this goal:

    · Acquiring the data and/or
    · Describing the data and/or
    · Identifying variables and/or
    · Describing experimental/study procedures and/or
    · Describing tools/instruments/materials/equipment and/or
    · Rationalizing experiment decisions and/or
    · Reporting incrementals
Remember: You do not need to include all of these strategies -- they are simply possibilities for reaching the
goal of Describing the Study.

                                                                                                                             Methods Goal 2: Describe the Study | 73
Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data

The third goal of writing your Methods section, Analyzing the Data, is to overview the data analysis. To do
this, the author explains how the data have been analyzed (without describing the results of that analysis).
Accomplishing this goal provides a preview of the central pieces of the research, including, but not limited
to, objectives, questions/hypotheses, procedures/methods, and main results. Authors also make arguments
about the value of the reported work in an effort to justify the need for addressing the niche and any
previous attempts to provide solutions to problems or gaps in the literature.
Sometimes writers outline their papers to help the reader understand the structure of what's to come.
In addition to describing the specific actions taken during the analysis of the data, this goal contains
explanations of actions taken prior to the analysis, during which researchers prepare the data for analysis
and interpretation. This goal might also include a description of measures taken to establish the credibility
of the investigation (e.g., reporting reliability, noting limitations, or mentioning follow-up work).
Turn your attention to these excerpts from published writing. The bolded parts demonstrate the writer's
attempt to accomplish Goal 3 by explaining how the data was analyzed.

74 | Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data
         Examples

            · Initially, all main effects (year, planting date, cultivar, and harvest date), as well as all of their
                associated interactive combinations, were included within the statistical model. Based on previous
                experience (Gunsaulis et al., 2008; Coblentz and Walgenbach 2010), management main effects (planting
                date, cultivar, and harvest date) were likely to interact with each other, and also to interact strongly with
                year. This hypothesis proved to be correct; regardless of the response variable (canopy height, growth
                stage, DM concentration, and yields of DM), nearly all interactive combinations of main effects were
                highly significant (P less than 0.01). To properly assess the DM yield potential of fall grown oat cultivars,
                an understanding these interactions was imperative, particularly those with environment (year);
                therefore, year was considered to be a fixed, rather than random effect. Furthermore, some
                compromises were necessary to maintain a concise presentation of results. For yields of DM,
                interaction means were sorted by planting date within year and reanalyzed as a split-plot design with
                cultivars as whole plots and harvest dates as subplots using PROC MIXED (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). For
                most of the nine combinations of year and planting date, the cultivar x harvest date interaction was
                significant; therefore, these interaction means are presented and discussed.1

            · This count is regressed on country-year variables that control for a country's changing export
                capabilities, including country dummy variables, time dummy variables, a vector of time-varying
                characteristics of country j, and the Post Reform Dummy. The country characteristics included in the
                vector Hjt are the same as those used in the specifications presented in Table 3. Because the data cover
                only an 11 year time frame, as explained below, country-specific time trends are not included. For data,
                we utilize the U.S. trade database created by Feenstra et al. (2001).2

  As noted above, this strategy is all about the analytical procedures used to carry out the research. So,
  the previous Goal (Methods Goal 2: Describing the Study) is more about what happened during the data
  collection, while this goal explains to the reader what happened AFTER the data were collected.

  The purpose of Goal 3, Analyzing the Data, is to persuade your reader about the quality of the data analysis
  and make a claim that the study's procedures have led to valid and credible findings. As a reminder, this
  communicative goal allows the writer to explain how the data have been analyzed (without describing the
  results of that analysis).

 Strategies for Writing about Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the

1. Coblentz, W. K., Bertram, M. G., & Martin, N. P. (2011). Planting date effects on fall forage production of oat cultivars in
   Wisconsin. Agronomy Journal, 103(1), 145-155.

2. Branstetter, L., Fisman, R., Foley, C. F., & Saggi, K. (2011). Does intellectual property rights reform spur industrial
   development?. Journal of International Economics, 83(1), 27-36.

                                                                                                                                       Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data | 75
 Data

            Preparing the data
            Describing the data analysis
            Establishing credibility

    We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

 Methods Goal 3 Strategy: Preparing the Data

  Preparing the data describes what was done to the data and how the data were prepared for analysis.
  That is, this strategy is used to explain data selection, collection, and preparation (e.g., sampling, screening,
  cleaning, inclusion/exclusion, correction). You will also mention any tools that you used to accomplish these
  processes. Also, you need to explain data manipulation (e.g., transforming, coding, tabulating, estimating)
  along with any tools you used. Below are two examples of the utilization of this strategy in published
  research:

         Examples

       · For all variables, least squares means were generated and, when significant (P < 0.05) F values were observed,
           least squares means were separated with pairwise t-test (PDIFF option).3

       · Each electronic nose measurement was associated with the average (one representative value) of the eight
           human panelists assessments. The determination of the average pleasantness rating also involved trimming
           the data. The data were scanned for values that did not support the general consensus.4

  Although the examples show data that were included in the research, you may also mention which data were
  excluded from the analysis. The following are some examples from the Academic Phrasebank website that
  you might consider using as sentence starters:

3. Sawyer, J. T., Apple, J. K., Johnson, Z. B., Baublits, R. T., & Yancey, J. W. S. Color Stability of Dark-cutting Beef Enhanced with
   Lactic Acid. Arkansas, 87.

4. Williams, A. L., Heinemann, P. H., Wysocki, C. J., Beyer, D. M., & Graves, R. E. (2010). Prediction of hedonic tone using an
   electronic nose and artificial neural networks. Applied Engineering in Agriculture, 26(2), 343-350.
   76 | Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data
      · Criteria for selecting the subjects were as follows:
      · Publications were only included in the analysis if...
      · The participants in this study were recruited from ...
      · To identify X, the following parameters were used: ...
      · The area of study was chosen for its relatively small ...
      · Primary inclusion criteria for the X participants were ...
      · Eligibility criteria required individuals to have received ...
      · Five individuals were excluded from the study on the basis of ...
      · A small sample was chosen because of the expected difficulty in obtaining ...
      · The subjects were selected on the basis of the degree of homogeneity of their ...
      · A comparison group of 12 male subjects without any history of X was drawn from a pool of ...

 Methods Goal 3 Strategy: Describing the Data Analysis

  Describing the data analysis provides a description of the actual analysis (with/without certain tools) in
  terms of how the data analysis was done and what procedures were used for analysis (e.g., statistical
  techniques, coding schemes, etc.).
  Consider the following examples from published research:

         Examples

            · For all variables, least squares means were generated and, when significant (P < 0.05) F values were
                observed, least squares means were separated with pairwise t-test (PDIFF option). 5

            · Our paired survey from buyers and suppliers significantly reduces the single-side, single-informant
                related common method variance bias. Before computing the average score from both sides, we also
                took steps recommended by Podsakoff and Organ (1986) and conducted a global factor analysis on
                items related to all predicting and criterion variables for each side. No single factor emerges from the
                analysis and no one factor accounts for most of the covariance for all predicting and criterion variables,
                confirming the absence of the common method bias. 6

 Methods Goal 3 Strategy: Establishing Credibility

  Establishing credibility means that you provide a rationale for the analysis and/or data processing and
  indicates statistical or other procedures employed to ensure credibility (e.g., reliability calculations). The

5. Sawyer, J. T., Apple, J. K., & Johnson, Z. B. (2007). The impact of acidic marination concentration and sodium chloride on
   sensory and instrumental color characteristics of dark-cutting beef. Arkansas Animal Science Department Report, 92-95.

6. Liu, Y., Luo, Y., & Liu, T. (2009). Governing buyer-supplier relationships through transactional and relational mechanisms:
   Evidence from China. Journal of Operations Management, 27(4), 294-309.
                                                                                                                                       Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data | 77
  implementation of this strategy gives recognition to existing and/or pre-existing limitations and/or
  explains or interprets certain observations or measurements.
  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

       · We only tentatively interpret the A mar data here, as its determination is complicated by uncertainties
           associated with the partitioning of marine and terrestrial deposits in the macrostratigraphy database (a subject
           of ongoing work).7

       · Lastly, MM5 is intended to be a very conservative dissonance indicator, preventing potential misclassification
           of residents as mismatched as much as possible.8

        Key Takeaway

        Overall, this goal provides information about how the researchers collected, manipulated, screened, cleaned,
        coded, and analyzed their data.

7. Meyers, S. R., & Peters, S. E. (2011). A 56 million year rhythm in North American sedimentation during the Phanerozoic. Earth
   and Planetary Science Letters, 303(3-4), 174-180.

8. Schwanen, T., & Mokhtarian, P. L. (2005). What affects commute mode choice: neighborhood physical structure or preferences
   toward neighborhoods? Journal of Transport Geography, 13(1), 83-99.
   78 | Methods Goal 3: Analyzing the Data
Chapter 4 Synopsis: Writing Methods Sections

We have now reviewed the three communicative goals and a variety of strategies that you can use to help
write the Methods section of a research article. The image below provides a snapshot of this chapter:

       Key Takeaways

     There are three main goals of the Methods section that can be used to provide necessary detail about the study
     procedures:

         · Contextualizing the study methods
         · Describing the study
         · Analyzing the data

                                                                                                                    Chapter 4 Synopsis: Writing Methods Sections | 79
        Explore + Apply

     Before you begin applying what you've learned in this chapter to your Methods section, explore published
     writing in your discipline or in a target journal that you've identified. Look for the goals and strategies
     presented here to see where you might find similarities and differences that are discipline- or journal-specific.

80 | Chapter 4 Synopsis: Writing Methods Sections
Chapter 5: Writing the Results Section

        Learning Objectives

     After completing this chapter, you should be able to ...
         · articulate the importance of Results sections,
         · recognize the communicative goals of the Results,
         · strategize to achieve communicative goals,
         · optimize the language for writing about your Results, and
         · evaluate your Results section.
             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=450#h5p-10

                                                                                                                                Chapter 5: Writing the Results Section | 81
Conceptualizing the Research Article: Review

You may remember from Chapters 3 and 4 that research articles have specific sections regardless of
discipline or journal. Generally, there are five commonly acknowledged sections of an empirical research
manuscript: Introduction (including the Literature Review), Methods, Results, Discussion/Conclusion.

Notice that the figure depicts an article in the shape of an hourglass. That shape provides a way for us to
consider whether the content of the sections of a research article will be general or specific. The middle
parts -- the Methods and Results sections -- are the most specific pieces of the entire article. As you learned
in Chapter 4 (Methods), the move toward the middle of your research manuscript allows you to really hone in
on your exact study's parts, so the content will necessarily narrow in scope. In this chapter, we will present
the goals and strategies for writing the Results.

             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=505#h5p-9

82 | Conceptualizing the Research Article: Review
    Warm-Up

Why do you think the Results need to be specific (narrow) and not too general (broad)? What aspects of the
Results section contribute to its specificity?

                                                                                                               Conceptualizing the Research Article: Review | 83
Goals of an Effective Results Section

The use of a separate Results section varies by discipline (field) and journal. Some disciplines utilize a section
for presenting results and another section for discussing those results while others integrate the findings
with an interpretation of those findings, which is called the "Discussion." In this book, we have separated
those two sections so that the goals and strategies can be more easily explained, clarified, and exemplified.
As Wallwork (2011) points out, when the two sections are separate, the Results section tends to be one of
the shorter sections of the paper. This is because successful research writers present only the findings
that are the most representative. Those findings are then organized according to the research questions or
hypotheses outlined in previous sections of the manuscript. Results can be reported as text, tables, figures,
or all three.
The Results section aims at achieving four main communicative goals:

 1. Approaching the niche
 2. Occupying the niche
 3. Construing the niche
 4. Expanding the niche
The use of the word niche probably seems familiar to you because you learned about it in Chapter 3:
The Introduction Section. The meaning of that word is exactly the same in this chapter as it was earlier
in the book. The niche is the area of the research where you have identified a need, problem, or gap.
Your Introduction identified and addressed the niche, your Methods section provided the procedures for
investigating that niche, and now, in the Results section, you're going to provide the answers to your
questions by reporting your findings.

84 | Goals of an Effective Results Section
                    We'll now review these four goals in a little more depth and look at some examples.

     Key Takeaways

To sum up, depending on the organizational pattern you have chosen for your results section, you may have 2-4
goals to accomplish in your Results section:

   1. Approaching the niche
   2. Occupying the niche
   3. Construing the niche
   4. Expanding the niche
The first two of these will definitely be a part of your Results section, whether or not it is combined with the
Discussion of your findings. However, Goals 3 and 4 will only be present if you have a combined Results/
Discussion section. It is still important to accomplish these goals in your paper -- the only question is where
your reader will find them.

                                                                                                                            Goals of an Effective Results Section | 85
Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche

The first goal in the Results section is called Approaching the Niche. The major aim is to show a progression
from all the other preceding parts (i.e., Introduction and Methods) to the Results, or findings. The
progression here carries a lot of meaning. It means that your findings are valid in that they have a logical
connection to general information from the field. It means that the findings are connected with your
methods and that your methods were valid. This connection is often made by repeating relevant information
to give a preview of your results. The connection of your results to the field is also important because
it reiterates and further validates the information and processes/procedures that you wrote about in
the Methods section. So, as you are writing this part of the research report, you'll be considering what
you've already written about in the literature review in the Introduction (specifically, the niche) while also
emphasizing the choices you made regarding methodology. The similarity in the names of the goals in the
Introduction section and the Results section is no coincidence. It is very important that you avoid simply
reporting the results without linking them to the niche that you established at the very beginning of the
paper.

Goal 1, Approaching the Niche, means that you articulate the progression from the start of your manuscript
up to this point. In other words, you need to show how the gap is being filled with your results. This is not
a place to dump your findings into the paper; on the contrary, you need to demonstrate the connection
between the general information from the field to the specific methods you chose and finally here, to the
results. This is often accomplished by re-emphasizing some particular aspects of what you wrote in both
the Introduction and the Methods sections. There are several strategies you can use to help you successfully
achieve this goal in a detailed manner.

Strategies for Results Communicative Goal 1: Approaching
the Niche

  · Providing general information
  · Restating study specifics
  · Justifying study specifics

 We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

Results Goal 1 Strategy: Providing General Information

Providing general information is a strategy used to show the reader your thinking about how the results
may be understood or confused. This is your opportunity to reiterate any information that the reader may
have forgotten (or may not have read at all). This is how you link the information back to your Introduction,

86 | Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche
  where you justified the need for the study in the first place. In other words, you can use this strategy to
  provide context for the study and the results inside a specific "territory" (knowledge space). You may refer
  back to methods, techniques, processes, or practices used in your field. This strategy thus allows you to
  orient your readers in a way that makes it easier for them to navigate your results. You do this by indicating
  the order of information you are presenting as results or by highlighting noteworthy aspects on which they
  should focus.
  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

         Examples

       · Monitoring results are presented by station in the following section. The monitoring data are divided into pre-,
           during-, and post-construction periods. These periods were determined by observation and are somewhat
           arbitrary, as construction projects are a continuum with no distinct breaks.1

       · This section presents results for our various test corpora and classifiers. We will first verify Wagner et al.'s
           (2007) finding that combining features of different methods helps. 2

  It might be helpful to think of this strategy like road signs when you are driving. The signs along the way help
  you determine where you are going, and likewise, this strategy helps your reader to know your intentions
  about organizing the Results section.

 Results Goal 1 Strategy: Restating Study Specifics

  Restating study specifics is a common strategy that you can use to restate various characteristics of
  your methodology, such as the overall approach, research questions, and/or hypotheses. The purpose of
  restating study specifics is to connect them to the respective results. Don't forget, the reader needs to be
  able to understand the results, and reminding the reader briefly of how those results were obtained can
  be a good strategy to accomplish this goal. Sometimes this strategy is accomplished by pointing to visual
  representations of procedures or approaches (for example, graphs or tables).
  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

1. Line, D. E., Shaffer, M. B., & Blackwell, J. D. (2011). Sediment export from a highway construction site in central North
   Carolina. Transactions of the ASABE, 54(1), 105-111.

2. Wagner, J., Foster, J., & van Genabith, J. (2009). Judging grammaticality: Experiments in sentence classification. Calico Journal,
   26(3), 474-490.
                                                                                                                                    Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche | 87
         Examples

       · We hypothesized that JM6 acts as a prodrug and would be metabolized under acidic conditions in the gut to
           slowly release Ro 61-8048 and thereby provide long-lasting inhibition of KMO (Figures 2A and 2B). To investigate
           the pharmacokinetic properties of JM6, we treated wild-type (WT) mice with a single high dose of JM6 (300
           mg/kg p.o.) and measured JM6 and Ro 61-8048 in plasma, brain, muscle, and liver by liquid chromatography/
           mass spectrometry (LC/MS) 5 hr after administration.3

       · In Table 2, we test for the effects of culture on individual preferences for redistribution and explore the effects
           of traditional economic determinants of preferences . A one unit increase in the mean preference for
           redistribution in the individual's country of birth, calculated on a 1 to 5 scale, is associated with a 0.36 unit
           increase in the individual's own preference for redistribution (column 1). This effect is highly statistically
           significant (t=4.08).4

  So, restating the study specifics helps the reader to situate your findings within the larger "territory" or body
  of literature that is already available. It also clarifies the connections between the motivations, methods, and
  results.

 Results Goal 1 Strategy: Justifying Study Specifics

  Justifying study specifics is the final strategy that provides the reader with an understanding of how
  you have progressed from the literature to the justification of the study, to the research questions, to the
  methods, and now, finally, to your results. You can provide justifications for study-related choices as a way
  of increasing the credibility of your results. If you remember back to the Methods section, authors try to
  anticipate criticism with the purpose of making the methods credible. In the Results section, criticism is
  also anticipated; thus, providing sound reasoning or rationale for certain study choices and reiterating the
  importance of decisions made along the way is like answering questions from your readers before they are
  asked.

  Below are a few examples excerpted from published reports of research with the relevant language bolded
  to illustrate how the words/phrases work to implement the strategy, which then works to accomplish the
  goal:

3. Zwilling, D., Huang, S. Y., Sathyasaikumar, K. V., Notarangelo, F. M., Guidetti, P., Wu, H. Q., ... & Muchowski, P. J. (2011).
   Kynurenine 3-monooxygenase inhibition in blood ameliorates neurodegeneration. Cell, 145(6), 863-874.

4. Luttmer, E. F., & Singhal, M. (2011). Culture, context, and the taste for redistribution. American Economic Journal: Economic
   Policy, 3(1), 157-79.
   88 | Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche
         Examples

       · This flow was chosen because it has a streamwise component, in the x-direction, that varies over the cross
           section but does not provide flow in the y- or z-directions.5

       · Previous studies results showed that 25.0 mu M NAA was the lowest concentration among the three auxins
           tested that resulted in 100% rooting. Thus, 25.0 __mu__M NAA was selected as the most effective treatment
           and used in all further experiments.6

  The use of this strategy is key because of the connection it provides from the beginning of your manuscript
  to the point where you realize the main objective: the Results! If a reader has indeed read all of your report
  up to this point, then they have probably forgotten some important information that they might need to
  fully understand your findings. On the other hand, some readers only skim research articles, and so they
  may arrive at the Results section with only a vague understanding of what you set out to accomplish. So,
  employing this strategy is a way to guide your reader to a better comprehension of the study from an
  overarching perspective.

        Key Takeaways

        In order to accomplish the communicative goal of approaching the niche in your Results section, you'll need to
        employ these techniques:

            · Providing general information and/or
            · Restating study specifics
            · Justifying study specifics

5. Cierpka, C., Rossi, M., Segura, R., & Kähler, C. J. (2010). On the calibration of astigmatism particle tracking velocimetry for
   microflows. Measurement Science and Technology, 22(1), 015401.

6. Bag, N., & Palni, M. (2010). A two-step procedure for in vitro rooting of micropropagated tea [Camellia sinensis L.(O) Kuntze]
   microshoots. The Journal of Horticultural Science and Biotechnology, 85(3), 197-204.
                                                                                                                                   Results Goal 1: Approaching the Niche | 89
Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche

Another goal of the Results section is to introduce new information about the niche (the specialty area or
territory that you established in the Introduction and that you are now returning to in the Results section).
This new knowledge represents information that was previously insufficient or lacking in the research area.
Authors accomplish Goal 2 by presenting the results of their research in explicit and informative ways.
Relevant supporting evidence for your findings may also be presented. Results from your study may be
presented in the text or in graphical or pictorial form in charts, tables, equations, images, and/or diagrams
that act as visual aids. Presenting the study's results in multiple formats may help your readers understand
your study's findings in multiple ways (e.g., visual, spatial, textual).

It is important to clarify that for this goal, you are simply presenting the results as information rather than
writing your beliefs, interpretations, or evaluations of them. You should not comment on or discuss the
findings as you work to accomplish Goal 2. All evaluative comments occur either later in the Results section
(if Results and Discussion sections are combined) or in the Discussion section.

Goal 2, Occupying the Niche, is the place for you to introduce your readers to the new knowledge that has
been gained from your research. Since you have already established a gap in the introduction, you will use
this opportunity to progress from pointing out a gap to filling that gap. There are several strategies you can
use to help you successfully achieve this goal.

Strategies for Results Communicative Goal 2: Occupying the
Niche

  · Reporting specific results
  · Indicating alternative presentation of results

We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

Results Goal 2 Strategy: Reporting Specific Results

Reporting specific results is a strategy used to introduce the quantitative or qualitative results of your
study. Employing this strategy well also includes making connections between the results and your original
goals, research questions, and/or hypotheses as written about in your Introduction. You can report specific
results in narrative form (i.e., in sentences within paragraphs), in numerical form (e.g., tables and equations),
or in graphic form (e.g., figures).

Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

90 | Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche
        Examples

       · The emission spectra of the ZnO NCs displayed the characteristic green emission (?max ~520 nm). 1
       · Concurrently, a significant increase in crop phytotoxicity was observed for both glyphosate- susceptible maize

           and soybean plants at 72 and 192 HAT. 2

  Although these examples are both relatively short, the decision about how much detail to provide can
  depend on a number of factors including common practices within an individual writer, journal, or
  discipline.

  Some common sentence starters that can be used with this strategy include, but are not limited to, the
  following, as noted in the Academic Phrasebank website:

      · The first set of questions aimed to ...
      · To compare the difference between ...
      · The purpose of Experiment 3 was to ...
      · Simple statistical analysis was used to ...
      · The next question asked the informants ...
      · To assess X, the Y questionnaire was used

 Results Goal 2 Strategy: Indicating an Alternative Presentation of
 Results

  Indicating an alternative presentation of results allows a writer to point out and/or summarize the results
  in a more visual form. When you use this strategy, you'll refer to the visuals to help guide the reader to a
  more complex view of the results. This strategy encourages a better understanding of the results as they
  are presented in alternative form as a supplement to the report itself, which relies on text (words, phrases,
  sentences, etc.).

  Here are two examples taken from published research articles:

1. Rossini, J. E., Huss, A. S., Bohnsack, J. N., Blank, D. A., Mann, K. R., & Gladfelter, W. L. (2011). Binding and static quenching
   behavior of a terthiophene carboxylate on monodispersed zinc oxide nanocrystals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115(1),
   11-17.

2. Zelaya, I. A., Anderson, J. A., Owen, M. D., & Landes, R. D. (2011). Evaluation of spectrophotometric and HPLC methods for
   shikimic acid determination in plants: models in glyphosate-resistant and-susceptible crops. Journal of Agricultural and Food
   Chemistry, 59(6), 2202-2212.
                                                                                                                                      Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche | 91
        Examples

       · Similarly, Figure 5B represents the log10 of the ratio between the gene expression levels at T2idl, T4idl, or T6idl
           and the expression of the genes at T0idl. 3

       · Figure 3 illustrates the Hybrid tom and hen turkey growth performance during the one-year monitoring period.4

  Indicating an alternative presentation of results provides a means for authors to showcase their findings
  outside of the written content of the article. By including additional forms of the findings, you are adding
  to the specificity and level of detail of the results, which helps readers more accurately comprehend your
  findings.
  The Academic Phrasebank website provides a list of sentence starters that would indicate the use of this
  strategy. Here are a few examples:

      · Table 1 shows/compares/presents/provides ...
             an overview of ...
             the experimental data on X.
             the summary statistics for ...

      · Figure 1 illustrates/presents/compares/summarizes ...
             some of the main characteristics of ...
             the difference in the two groups of ...
             the results of ...

3. Keech, O., Pesquet, E., Gutierrez, L., Ahad, A., Bellini, C., Smith, S. M., & Gardeström, P. (2010). Leaf senescence is accompanied
   by an early disruption of the microtubule network in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 154(4), 1710-1720.

4. Li, H., Xin, H., Burns, R. T., Jacobson, L. D., Noll, S., Hoff, S. J., Harmon, J. D., Koziel, J. A., & Hetchler, B. P. (2011). Air emissions
   from tom and hen turkey houses in the US Midwest. Transactions of the ASABE, 54(1), 305-314.
   92 | Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche
    Key Takeaways

Although this goal has only two strategies, they are both very important. This is where you finally get to show
the world what you found through your study, so be sure to employ these two strategies in an effort to
construe your findings as clearly as possible:

    · Reporting specific results and/or
    · Indicating alternative presentation of results.

                                                                                                                            Results Goal 2: Occupying the Niche | 93
Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche

The next goal in the Results section is called Construing the Niche. The main aim of Goal 3 is to comment
on and frame the results of the current study. This commentary on the results helps to explain the findings
and develop a reader's understanding of how the findings relate to the other literature in the discipline. You
would typically use this goal after a report of findings because it is a prime opportunity to evaluate how the
presented results fit in the pre-existing literature. While in most other sections, we have pointed out that
there is no set order to the goals and strategies, in the case of Results Goals 2 and 3, it is the norm to find
them in a particular order. In Goal 2, you first simply report the results, and then in Goal 3, you follow that
report with attempts to interpret the results in relation to what has occurred in the study and what has
been reported in other relevant research in the discipline. To sum up, Construing the Niche allows authors
to describe and evaluate the reported results.

It must be noted that Goal 3 may or may not appear in the Results section of a research manuscript. If the
manuscript is organized with the Results and Discussion sections combined, then Goal 3 will be included.
However, if the Results section and Discussion section are separate, the author may discuss the results in
later sections of the manuscript, meaning Goal 3 may not be present in the Results section at all.

Strategies for Results Communicative Goal 3: Construing
the Niche

  · Comparing results with literature review
  · Accounting for results
  · Explicating results
  · Relating to expectations
  · Acknowledging limitations

 We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

Results Goal 3 Strategy: Comparing Results with the Literature
Review

Comparing results with the literature review is a strategy where authors compare the results of their
current study with reported findings, theoretical beliefs, and/or previously stated assumptions or
predictions in their discipline. In other words, authors must attempt to match what they wrote about in
the Introduction in order to underscore similarities and/or differences between their research findings
and previous research findings. This strategy is also an opportunity to support explanations and/or claims
with what is known from previous research, show how the results relate to the body of existing knowledge

94 | Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche
  on the topic of current research and strengthen the credibility of your findings. Here are two examples of
  how you can accomplish this step, with the specific language bolded to show how language can be used to
  realize this strategy:

         Examples

       · These observations are consistent with previous researchers' findings that bond order is independent of the
           d18O of water and the d13C of dissolved inorganic carbon (Schauble et al., 2006). 10.1

       · The short action time of 0.4s estimated based on the micro-PIV measurements was found to agree well with the
           value reported by Demuren et al. (2009). 10.2

  Note that both examples have cited relevant literature with which the authors are comparing their findings.

 Results Goal 3 Strategy: Accounting for Results

  Accounting for results reflects on the nature of your study's results to point out what may have contributed
  to your results or outcomes and suggest reasons for, hypotheses about, speculations for, and/or
  assumptions that may account for certain findings. By using this strategy, you are working to justify the basis
  of the results.
  Consider the following examples of how you can accomplish this strategy, with the specific language bolded
  to highlight important language:

         Examples

       · Thus, it is likely that the in vivo visualization of the polymerized MTs was unbiased, despite the construct
           being driven by a strong promoter. 3

       · The discrepancy of the downtime NH3 ER (0.14 vs. 0.88 g d-1 bird-1) may have been a result of differences in
           litter source (rye hull vs. shavings) and clean-out practices, such as the extent of caked litter removal, tilling, and
           rebedding.4

1. Tripati, A. K., Thiagarajan, N., Eagle, R., Gagnon, A. C., Eiler, J. M., & Bauch, H. A. (2009, December). Equilibrium 13C-18O
   Isotope Signatures and `Clumped Isotope'Thermometry in Foraminifera and Coccoliths. In AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts (Vol.
   2009, pp. PP31B-1340).

2. Wang, B., Demuren, A., Gyuricsko, E., & Hu, H. (2011). An experimental study of pulsed micro-flows pertinent to continuous
   subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy. Experiments in Fluids, 51(1), 65-74.
                                                                                                                                     Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche | 95
  There are two important points to note about the examples: (1) This step can be completed with or without
  referencing previous research; (2) Writers will often use hedging techniques.

  What is hedging? Hedging refers to how a writer expresses certainty or uncertainty. Often in academic
  writing, a writer may not be sure of the claims that are being made, or perhaps the ideas are good, but the
  evidence is not very strong. It is common, therefore, to use cautious language that indicates uncertainty

                                                                5

  (known as hedging language).
  There are two primary language "tools" that writer's use to indicate they are hedging:

    1. Adjectives and adverbs of likelihood as in the first example (e.g., likely)
    2. Modal verbs as in the second (e.g., may have been)
  The University of Bristol's website (noted above) provides a list of these tools and even has an exercise where
  you can test yourself on how well you understand them.

 Results Goal 3 Strategy: Explicating Results

  Explicating results is another strategy that helps to explain the reported results in the context of the study.
  Writers accomplish this by interpreting, inferencing, and possibly citing literature in order to give meaning
  to the results, make immediate deductions from the results, provide logical interpretations, and prepare for
  further discussion of the results outside the context of their study.
  Let's examine some examples of how you can realize this strategy in your writing (specific language bolded):

3. Keech, O., Pesquet, E., Gutierrez, L., Ahad, A., Bellini, C., Smith, S. M., & Gardeström, P. (2010). Leaf senescence is accompanied
   by an early disruption of the microtubule network in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiology, 154(4), 1710-1720.

4. Li, H., Xin, H., Burns, R. T., Jacobson, L. D., Noll, S., Hoff, S. J., ... & Hetchler, B. P. (2011). Air emissions from tom and hen turkey
   houses in the US Midwest. Transactions of the ASABE, 54(1), 305-314.

5. University of Bristol website. (http://www.bristol.ac.uk/academic-language/media/BEAP/5.4/index.html)
   96 | Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche
         Examples

       · Indeed, this finding suggests that strength of ties, per se makes little difference, at least in our context, in the
           extent to which bridging promotes individual innovativeness. 6

       · These results indicated that SsoPox immobilized on nanoalumina membranes can indeed attenuate the
           production of P. aeruginosa quorum- sensing-associated virulence factors.7

 Results Goal 3 Strategy: Relating to Expectations

  Relating to expectations is used to reason about the anticipated or unanticipated research findings and/
  or observations. This step is typical when you want to point out expected or unexpected results, express
  attitudes about findings (often with regards to surprising or unsatisfactory results), or connect the findings
  to original hypotheses, possibly stating whether or not they are confirmed or supported.
  Below are two examples of writing that uses this strategy to accomplish Goal 3 in the Results section:

         Examples

       · One of the most striking findings is that all participants spent some time on both kinds of problems (i.e., there
           were neither floor nor ceiling effects), and there was considerable variability in time spent on both types of
           problems.8

       · Perhaps the most intriguing finding of our single-crystal X-ray analyses comes from the location of the protons
           in compound. 9

  The Academic Phrasebank website provides a list of sentence starters that would indicate the use of this
  strategy. Here are a few examples:

6. Tortoriello, M., & Krackhardt, D. (2010). Activating cross-boundary knowledge: The role of Simmelian ties in the generation of
   innovations. Academy of Management Journal, 53(1), 167-181..

7. Ng, F. S., Wright, D. M., & Seah, S. Y. (2011). Characterization of a phosphotriesterase-like lactonase from Sulfolobus
   solfataricus and its immobilization for disruption of quorum sensing. Applied and Environmental Microbiology, 77(4), 1181-1186.

8. Forbes, C. E., & Schmader, T. (2010). Retraining attitudes and stereotypes to affect motivation and cognitive capacity under
   stereotype threat. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99(5), 740.

9. Richards, G. J., Hill, J. P., Subbaiyan, N. K., D'Souza, F., Karr, P. A., Elsegood, M. R., ... & Ariga, K. (2009). Pyrazinacenes: aza
   analogues of acenes. The Journal of Organic Chemistry, 74(23), 8914-8923.
                                                                                                                                     Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche | 97
· Interestingly, the X was observed to ...
· This result is somewhat counterintuitive.
· Interestingly, this correlation is related to ...
· The more surprising correlation is with the ...
· Surprisingly, only a minority of respondents ...
· The most surprising aspect of the data is in the ...
· The correlation between X and Y is interesting because ...
· The most striking result to emerge from the data is that ...
· Interestingly, there were also differences in the ratios of ...
· The single most striking observation to emerge from the data comparison was ...

This is a/an (rather)  surprising                                                  result.
                       significant                                                 outcome.
                       interesting
                       remarkable
                       unexpected
                       disappointing

Results Goal 3 Strategy: Acknowledging Limitations

Acknowledging limitations is important in any study in order to justify what went wrong in the study,
avoid over-generalizations about the study's findings, anticipate potential criticism from other scholars in
the field, and possibly transition to recommendations for future research.

       Examples

    · It was not possible, however, to conclude from the derived s-value what the molar mass of this species is due to
        uncertainties of hydrodynamic shape and because the reaction boundary of a rapidly interacting system always
        sediments slower than the sedimentation coefficient of the complex species.10

    · Due to the unexpected low bird number (an inadvertent error during bird transfer from the brooder barn to the
        grower barn) and considerable bird number changes of flock 1 at the tom site, data for one entire investigated
        flock had to be excluded from the ER assessment, as they were not representative of natural flocking patterns.11

10. Barda-Saad, M., Shirasu, N., Pauker, M. H., Hassan, N., Perl, O., Balbo, A., ... & Samelson, L. E. (2010). Cooperative interactions at
    the SLP-76 complex are critical for actin polymerization. The EMBO Journal, 29(14), 2315-2328.

    98 | Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche
   Because the presentation of results can become quite complex, you will need to distinguish between what
   you have accomplished (your methods) and what you found (your findings). As you are moving between
   your various findings, you might find it useful to use some of these suggestions from the Academic
   Phrasebank website:

       · If we now turn to ...
       · A comparison of the two results reveals ...
       · Turning now to the experimental evidence on ...
       · Comparing the two results, it can be seen that ...
       · The next section of the survey was concerned with ...
       · In the final part of the survey, respondents were asked ...

         Key Takeaways

        These strategies for Construing the Niche can help you to consider which aspects of your results to focus on.
        More than likely, all readers will choose to read this portion of your paper, even if they don't read other
        sections. Here are the strategies again:

             · Comparing results with literature review, and/or
             · Accounting for results, and/or
             · Explicating results, and/or
             · Relating to expectations, and/or
             · Acknowledging limitations.

11. Li, H., Xin, H., Burns, R. T., Jacobson, L. D., Noll, S., Hoff, S. J., ... & Hetchler, B. P. (2011). Air emissions from tom and hen turkey
   houses in the US Midwest. Transactions of the ASABE, 54(1), 305-314.
                                                                                                                                     Results Goal 3: Construing the Niche | 99
Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche

The final goal in the Results section is called Expanding the Niche. The main aim of Goal 4 is to further
develop the evaluations of the results that come from Goal 3. This expanded commentary helps to relate
your current study to the broader context of the discipline.
Like Goal 3, this particular objective (Goal 4) may or may not appear in the Results section. If your paper is
organized with the Results and Discussion sections combined, Goal 4 is more likely to appear. Nevertheless,
if the Results section and Discussion section are separate, Goal 4 may not appear in the Results but would
be in the Discussion section instead.

Strategies for Results Communicative Goal 4: Expanding
the Niche

  · Generalizing results
  · Stating the value
  · Noting implications
  · Proposing directions
We'll now discuss each of these and provide some examples from published research.

Results Goal 4 Strategy: Generalizing Results

Generalizing results infers, or deduces meaning, from results and develops general claims or conclusions.
Authors typically generalize results by summarizing or synthesizing major findings or making deductions
from the findings to broaden the scope of specific results, expand the meaning of the principle findings
outside the framework of the study, or deliberate on (consider) the generalizability, transferability, and/or
validity of the results.
Here are two examples of how you can accomplish this step:

100 | Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche
         Examples

       · In conclusion, through the separate experiments, we determined that the addition of 1-CO2H to an ethanol
           solution of zinc acetate does not result in quenching of the emission.1

       · Because of their disabilities, combat veterans have trouble working, which leads them to stop looking for
           work and leave the labor force. This is further evidence that combat veterans experience direct cumulative
           disadvantage. Figure 3 presents predicted probabilities of disability by age and combat status, demonstrating that
           combat veterans were somewhat more likely than non-veterans and much more likely than non-combat veterans
           to be disabled throughout the work life.2

 Results Goal 4 Strategy: Stating the Value

  Stating the value is another important strategy in Goal 4. You can use this strategy to demonstrate the
  noteworthiness, or importance, of your study by pointing out the most relevant findings. By employing this
  strategy, authors can advocate for the importance of their results and/or the study as a whole and can
  highlight their specific contribution[s] to the discipline.

  Consider the following examples:

         Examples

       · In an historical context, these findings are especially significant in that local governments were the most
           vehement opponents of CAMA, and especially its local planning requirements, when the statute was enacted
           some 25 years ago (Heath, 1974).3

       · The most noteworthy finding is that GEB24 a variety well known for all filled spikelets and Jaya--also known for
           good grain filling, exhibited high AGPase activity until 20 dpa. In contrast, in the hybrid CoRH2, known to have
           high number of spikelets but a significant number being unfilled, the AGPase activity was lower and dropped
           after 15 dpa.4

1. Rossini, J. E., Huss, A. S., Bohnsack, J. N., Blank, D. A., Mann, K. R., & Gladfelter, W. L. (2011). Binding and static quenching
   behavior of a terthiophene carboxylate on monodispersed zinc oxide nanocrystals. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115(1),
   11-17.

2. MacLean, A. (2010). The things they carry: Combat, disability, and unemployment among US men. American Sociological
   Review, 75(4), 563-585.

3. Norton, R. K. (2005). More and better local planning: State-mandated local planning in coastal North Carolina. Journal of the
   American Planning Association, 71(1), 55-71.
                                                                                                                                     Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche | 101
  Following are some examples from the Academic Phrasebank website that you might consider using as
  sentence starters:

     · What stands out in the results is ...
     · It is apparent from these results that ...
     · The most interesting aspect of the findings is ...
     · What is striking about the results is ...
     · What is interesting about the outcomes is that ...
     · This finding is quite revealing in several ways.

 Results Goal 4 Strategy: Noting Implications

  Noting implications informs readers of the potential implications and/or application of the results and/or
  the entire study. This strategy helps you explain how your results could be applied more broadly to research,
  practice, theory, etc. in the discipline, show the larger impact of the results and/or study beyond the current
  work, and point out possible consequences of either the findings or of the study itself.
  The examples below illustrate this strategy in use.

         Examples

       · With the added advantage of inclusion of only those lines maturing in the target area of its use, this panel will be
           an excellent resource for future association studies.5

       · In summary, the micro-PIV measurements suggest that the theoretical solution for a fully developed laminar
           channel flow expressed in Eq. 1 can be used to effectively estimate the flow velocity distribution inside the
           square microchannel even though the micro-flow was in transient state during the flow decay process.6

4. Devi, T. A., Sarla, N., Siddiq, E. A., & Sirdeshmukh, R. (2010). Activity and expression of adenosine diphosphate glucose
   pyrophosphorylase in developing rice grains: Varietal differences and implications on grain filling. Plant Science, 178(2),
   123-129.

5. Hansey, C. N., Johnson, J. M., Sekhon, R. S., Kaeppler, S. M., & De Leon, N. (2011). Genetic diversity of a maize association
   population with restricted phenology. Crop Science, 51(2), 704-715.

6. Wang, B., Demuren, A., Gyuricsko, E., & Hu, H. (2011). An experimental study of pulsed micro-flows pertinent to continuous
   subcutaneous insulin infusion therapy. Experiments in Fluids, 51(1), 65-74.
   102 | Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche
Following are some examples from the Academic Phrasebank website that you might consider using as
sentence starters:

  · It can therefore be assumed that the ...
  · It can therefore be assumed that the ...
  · An implication of this is the possibility that ...
  · The present study raises the possibility that ...
  · One of the issues that emerges from these findings is ...
  · Some of the issues emerging from this finding relate specifically to ...
  · These findings may help us to understand ...
  · This finding, while preliminary, suggests that ....
  · This finding has important implications for developing ...
  · This observational study suggests that a diet rich in X may help prevent ...
  · These findings raise intriguing questions regarding the nature and extent of ...
  · This combination of findings provides some support for the conceptual premise that ...

        Key Takeaways

     There are four strategies that can help you attain the objective of Goal 4: Expanding the Niche:
         · Generalizing results, and/or
         · Stating the value, and/or
         · Noting implications, and/or
         · Proposing directions

                                                                                                                                 Results Goal 4: Expanding the Niche | 103
Chapter 5 Synopsis: Writing Results Sections

We have now reviewed the four communicative goals for writing a Results section and explained a variety of
strategies that you can use to help. The image below provides a snapshot of this chapter:

        Key Takeaways

     The Results section has more communicative goals (four) than the preceding sections. This doesn't necessarily
     mean that the Results section will be longer, but it does mean that you need to be careful to attend to all four of
     these goals. Remember: Goals should ALL be accomplished like a checklist. Strategies are simply options for
     completing the goals (i.e., you probably will not employ all of them).

Other resources:

We have now reviewed the four communicative goals for writing a Results section and explained a variety
of strategies that you can use to help. Consult the following free, online resources for additional tips on
reporting results in a clear and concise manner:

  · Tips on Writing Results for a Scientific Paper
  · Ten Simple Rules for Better Figures

104 | Chapter 5 Synopsis: Writing Results Sections
    Explore + Apply

Before you begin applying what you've learned in this chapter to your Results section, explore published
writing in your discipline or in a target journal that you've identified. Look for the goals and strategies
presented here to see where you might find similarities and differences that are discipline- or journal-specific.
When you have located them, determine how you will incorporate similar patterns into your own Results as you
outline the section.

                                                                                                               Chapter 5 Synopsis: Writing Results Sections | 105
Chapter 6: Discussion/Conclusion
Section(s)

        Learning Objectives

     After completing this chapter, you should be able to ...
         · articulate the distinction between the Results and Discussion sections,
         · recognize the communicative goals of the Discussion and Conclusion sections,
         · strategize to achieve communicative goals,
         · optimize the language for writing about your Discussion and Conclusion, and
         · understand how to conclude your argument efficiently and effectively.
             An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online here:
             https://iastate.pressbooks.pub/preparingtopublish/?p=617#h5p-10

106 | Chapter 6: Discussion/Conclusion Section(s)
Conceptualizing the Research Article

You may remember from Chapters 3-5 that research articles have specific sections regardless of discipline
or journal. Generally, there are five commonly acknowledged sections of an empirical research manuscript:
Introduction (including the Literature Review), Methods, Results, Discussion/Conclusion.

Notice that the figure depicts an article in the shape of an hourglass. That shape provides a way for us to
consider which sections of a research article will be general and which will be specific. The final part --
the Discussion/Conclusion -- is one of the most general or broad parts of the entire article. You started
out from a broad/general perspective, then as you moved toward the middle of your research manuscript,
your content became more and more specific, reaching its most specific point in the Methods and Results
section. In this chapter, we will present the goals and strategies for writing the Discussion/Conclusion.

      Warm-Up

     Why do you think the Discussion/Conclusion section needs to be more general than Methods and Results,
     which are more narrow/specific. What aspects of the Discussion/Conclusion contribute to its generality?

                                                                                                                                Conceptualizing the Research Article | 107
Goals of an Effective Discussion/Conclusion Section

As noted in the previous chapter, there is variation in how writers, journals, and disciplines choose to
organize/structure a manuscript. In some cases, the Results and Discussion sections are combined and the
Conclusion stands alone. In other cases, the Results stand alone, and the Discussion and Conclusion
section is combined.

Sometimes the research itself (the topic/content) drives a writer's decision to adopt one structural pattern
or the other. Moreover, there are times when the discipline or the journal tends toward one or the other.
It's your job as a writer/researcher to know which option is the best by taking into account all of the
stakeholders as well as your own style preferences. This chapter will help you think through some of those
issues.
The main point of this chapter is to understand the five objectives of the final section of a research article.
The following is a list of the goals for finalizing your article:

 1. Re-establish the territory
 2. Frame the principal findings
 3. Reshape the territory
 4. Establish additional territory

108 | Goals of an Effective Discussion/Conclusion Section
You'll notice that the names of these goals are familiar because they echo the names of the goals in other
parts of a manuscript. Given that review is a primary focus of the final section of a paper, it makes sense
that there would be some overlap in the naming of these goals. Wallwork (2016) notes that many novice
researchers find the Discussion section to be the most challenging section to write. The key to overcoming
this is to learn what goals successful writers use when composing this section. Wallwork (2016, p. 311) also
gives two other general pieces of advice:

  · be "positive about your own limitations, and constructive when discussing what you believe to be the
      limitations of others."

  · "... interpret your results without repeating them."

The Academic Phrasebank website also notes that many writers find the final section of their manuscript
to be the most difficult to write because of their complexity and the need to use cautious language.
Throughout this chapter, we'll refer to the complex nature of this ultimate part of the research article, and
give you some language suggestions to help you get started implementing the strategies you need to reach
the goals.

 On the next pages, we'll review each goal and its accompanying strategies in the format that you should be very
 familiar with by now.

                                                                                                          Goals of an Effective Discussion/Conclusion Section | 109
Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the
Territory

The first goal in the Discussion and Conclusion section is called Re-establishing the Territory. The name
of this goal should sound familiar to you if you think back to Chapter 3 and our discussion of the goals for
the Introduction section, where the first aim is to Establish the Knowledge Territory. Now that you have
come to the final section of your manuscript, you will revisit this idea of "territory," as the functions of these
two sections' goals are similar. The Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1 (Re-establish the Territory) functions to
remind the reader how your research fits into the bigger picture, or territory, of the field. Effective writers
use this goal to provide a foundation for the Discussion and better contextualize the argument that follows.

Strategies for Discussion/Conclusion Communicative Goal
1: Re-establishing the Territory

  · Drawing on general background
  · Drawing on study-specific background
  · Announcing principal findings
  · Previewing content

 Next, we'll explore each of these strategies and examine some examples from published articles in high-impact
 journals.

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1 Strategy: Drawing on General
Background

Drawing on general background means that a writer prepares the reader for the upcoming discussion of
the research results in broader/more general terms. To do this, you must incorporate your understanding
of the theories and frameworks that underlie your study. You can do this with information from your
own background knowledge, with citations, or with a combination of both tactics to provide needed
informational background and a conceptual frame of reference for the reader, to remind the reader of the
problem, issue, gap, etc. that motivated the study, and to show how the current study fits in the targeted
knowledge/research space.

 Remember: This is the part of the article where the writing becomes general again, signifying a shift from the
 narrow/detailed nature of the middle two sections (Methods and Results), and a return to a more expansive picture
 of how the study fits into the literature.

Here are two examples of how you can accomplish this strategy:

110 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory
         Examples

            · It is not inconceivable, then, that whilst the sector perhaps rightly distinguishes a wide variety of
                professional tasks, the homogeneous nature of its personnel places too heavy a burden on all their
                shoulders - and hence on the sole training program for the job. The fact is that in countries like the
                theUnited Kingdom (see Peeters, 2008) and the United States (Hyson &Biggar, 2006), which have long
                had a variety of training schemes leading to a variety of qualifications - associate, foundation, Bachelor's,
                and Master's degrees, at both initial licensure and advanced level - there is clearly greater
                differentiation in the nature and level of content standards (see also Busch-Rossnagel & Worman, 1985)

                      1

            · A relationship between carbohydrates and rooting of cuttings has been reported (Bartolini et al. 1996,
                2000; Murai et al. 1999), but high carbohydrate content has not always been associated with high rooting
                and sprouting potential, as this study showed. Hansen et al. (1978) and Veierskov et al. (1982) observed a
                negative correlation between carbohydrates and rooting (when light was given to alter stock plant
                carbohydrate content).2

  If you are referring back to literature (whether it is in the literature review in your Introduction, or not),
  you can use specific wording (sentence starters) to indicate to your reader that you are re-establishing the
  territory. Here are some suggestions from the Academic Phrasebank website:

      · Several reports have shown that ...
      · As mentioned in the literature review, ...
      · Prior studies that have noted the importance of ...
      · Very little was found in the literature on the question of ...
      · Previous studies evaluating X observed inconsistent results on whether ...
      · A strong relationship between X and Y has been reported in the literature.
      · In reviewing the literature, no data was found on the association between X and Y.

  If your goal is to note a similarity or contrast to previous findings, Academic Phrasebank provides separate
  lists for each of those communicative purposes:

1. Fukkink, R. G. (2010). Missing pages? A study of textbooks for Dutch early childhood teacher education. Teaching and Teacher
   Education, 26(3), 371-376.

2. Tsipouridis, G., Thomidis, T., & Bladenopoulou, S. (2006). Seasonal variation in sprouting of GF677 peach× almond (Prunus
   persica× Prunus aygdalus) hybrid root cuttings. New Zealand Journal of Crop and Horticultural Science, 34(1), 45-50.
                                                                                                    Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory | 111
               Support Previous Findings                           Contradict Previous Findings

These results  · further support the idea of ...                   · are contrary to those of Smith et al. (2001)
...            · confirm the association between ...                  who found ...
               · are consistent with data obtained in ...
               · match those observed in earlier studies.          · are in opposition to previous studies which
               · are in line with those of previous studies.          have suggested that ...
               · are in agreement with those obtained by ...
               · are in accord with recent studies indicating      · are higher/lower compared to those of other
                                                                      studies.
                  that ...
               · seem to be consistent with other research         · do not support the previous research.
                                                                   · differ from the findings elsewhere.
                  which found ...                                  · are far below those observed by Smith et
               · support previous research into this brain
                                                                      al. (2007).
                  area which links X and Y.                        · differ from X (2003), but they are broadly
               · corroborate the ideas of Smith and Jones
                                                                      consistent with ...
                  (2008), who suggested that ...                   · are inconsistent with other research.
                                                                   · seem inconsistent with other studies.
                                                                   · call into question the results of others.

Another way to accomplish this strategy is to contribute background information by making reference back
to the research question or aim/objective, as exemplified in these sentence starters from the Academic
Phrasebank website:

· The third question in this research was ...
· An initial objective of the project was to identify ...
· The first question in this study sought to determine ...
· It was hypothesized that participants with a history of ...
· The present study was designed to determine the effect of ...
· With respect to the first research question, it was found that ...
· This study set out with the aim of assessing the importance of X in ...

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1 Strategy: Drawing on Study-Specific
Background

Drawing on study-specific background is similar to the previous strategy in that it attempts to justify and
further reflect on the results. This strategy reiterates relevant study specifics (e.g., methods, approaches,
experimentation, procedures, analysis, hypotheses/research questions, etc.) to help the reader understand
how the results were obtained, remind the reader of study specifics relevant to the results, and/or claims
discussed further, clarify the connection between certain study specifics and respective results, and/or re-
emphasize the reliability of discussed findings.

Consider the following examples:

112 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory
         Examples

            · This analysis considered the efficacy of a suite of even- and uneven-aged treatments to address fire
                hazard in Colorado based on their ability to reduce crown fire initiation and spread. The treatment
                simulations were performed over a broad area using available forest inventory data and consistent
                assumptions about surface fuels and weather conditions. 3

            · Since we consider sinusoidal bottom contours we describe the hydraulic jumps in terms of the Froude
                number at the inclination angle of the channel. This results in hydraulic jumps at Froude numbers
                smaller than 1 in the fit of Fig. 10.4

  The Academic Phrasebank website offers a few suggestions for sentence starters useful to employing this
  strategy:

      · This study has identified ...
      · This study has shown that ...
      · The research has also shown that ...
      · The second major finding was that ...
      · These experiments confirmed that ...
      · X made no significant difference to ...
      · This study has found that generally ...
      · The investigation of X has shown that ...
      · The results of this investigation show that ...
      · X, Y, and Z emerged as reliable predictors of ...
      · Multiple regression analysis revealed that the ...
      · The most obvious finding to emerge from this study is that ...
      · The relevance of X is clearly supported by the current findings.
      · One of the more significant findings to emerge from this study is that ...

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1 Strategy: Announcing Principal
 Findings

  Announcing principal findings is a way to highlight results by explaining, synthesizing, and/or reviewing
  what you discovered. The purpose is to emphasize takeaways, show how you've accomplished the objectives
  of the research, and/or demonstrate which specific discoveries occupy the identified niche in the sub-area
  of your discipline or field.

3. Huggett Jr, R. J., Abt, K. L., & Shepperd, W. (2008). Efficacy of mechanical fuel treatments for reducing wildfire hazard. Forest
   Policy and Economics, 10(6), 408-414.

4. Wierschem, A., & Aksel, N. (2004). Hydraulic jumps and standing waves in gravity-driven flows of viscous liquids in wavy open
   channels. Physics of Fluids, 16(11), 3868-3877.

                                                                                                   Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory | 113
         Examples

            · The processes involved in aerial pathogen movement can be divided into five stages of (i)
                preconditioning in a source area, (ii) release, (iii) horizontal transport, (iv) deposition, and (v) impact at
                the receptor area (Isard and Gage, 2001). Ecological and environmental factors that influence organisms
                during each stage of the dispersal process are important for understanding the movement of plant
                pathogens and the development of plant disease epidemics (Aylor, 1986; Madden, 1992). However, there
                is limited information about some of these processes, especially for the deposition of plant pathogen
                propagules from the atmosphere onto susceptible host plant tissues.5

            · A major finding of this study is that short and long-term androstenedione supplementation did not
                increase the serum testosterone concentration in young men with normal serum testosterone levels.6

  The Academic Phrasebank website provides these suggestions for starting out sentences in which you plan
  to discuss or draw conclusions about your findings:

      · One interesting finding is ...
      · The current study found that ...
      · Another important finding was that ...
      · The most interesting finding was that ...
      · In this study, Xs were found to cause ...
      · The results of this study show/indicate that ...
      · On the question of X, this study found that ...
      · This experiment did not detect any evidence for ...
      · The most important clinically relevant finding was ...
      · X provided the largest set of significant clusters of ...
      · It is interesting to note that in all seven cases of this study ...
      · The most obvious finding to emerge from the analysis is that ...
      · In the current study, comparing X with Y showed that the mean degree of ...
      · The results of this study did not show that .../did not show any significant increase in ...

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1 Strategy: Previewing Content

  Previewing content designates the organization of your writing. This helps to guide the reader through your

5. Dufault, N., Isard, S., "A portable rainfall simulator for evaluating the wet deposition of plant pathogens", Applied Engineering in
   Agriculture 26(1):71-78, 2010

6. King, D. S., Sharp, R. L., Vukovich, M. D., Brown, G. A., Reifenrath, T. A., Uhl, N. L., & Parsons, K. A. (1999). Effect of oral
   androstenedione on serum testosterone and adaptations to resistance training in young men: a randomized controlled
   trial. Jama, 281(21), 2020-2028.

   114 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory
  ideas, clarify how you envision the content fulfilling your communicative goals, and point out noteworthy
  features of the research.
  The following are examples of how you can realize this strategy:

         Examples

            · Next, we provide evidence that AAP2 functions in xylem-phloem transfer of amino acids. 7
            · Results underscore the promise of the WG vocabulary intervention for LM learners. There are multiple

                implications and discussion points - practical and theoretical - to address when interpreting the
                results of this pilot study. WG was implemented for only 15-20 min a day, and yet the treatment group
                students, more of whom were formerly identified as limited English proficient, gained knowledge of a
                substantially larger number of words than the contrast group. 8

         Key Takeaways

        The first communicative goal in the Discussion and Conclusion section is called Re-establishing the Territory,
        and there are four strategies that can be used to successfully accomplish this goal:

            1. Drawing on general background, and/or
           2. Drawing on study-specific background, and/or
           3. Announcing principal findings, and/or
           4. Previewing content.
        Note the use of and/or at the end of each strategy, an indication -- as in other chapters -- that it is not always
        necessary to utilize each individual strategy as these are variable by writer, discipline, and journal.

7. Zhang, L., Tan, Q., Lee, R., Trethewy, A., Lee, Y. H., & Tegeder, M. (2010). Altered xylem-phloem transfer of amino acids affects
   metabolism and leads to increased seed yield and oil content in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell, 22(11), 3603-3620.

8. Mancilla-Martinez, Jeannette. (2010). Word meanings matter: Cultivating English vocabulary knowledge in fifth-grade
   Spanish-speaking language minority learners. TESOL Quarterly, 44(4), 669-699.
                                                                                                   Discussion/Conclusion Goal 1: Re-establishing the Territory | 115
Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal
Findings

The next goal in the Discussion and Conclusion section is Framing Principal Findings. The function of this
goal is to discuss and establish the meaning of your research results. The name Framing Principal Findings
comes from the aim of positioning the outcomes of your study in a way that the reader can understand --
typically, within the already existing literature on the topic.
There are four strategies that can be used to achieve the communicative aims of Goal 2. Note that these
are primarily associated with discussion of results rather than drawing conclusions about the entirety of the
research.

Strategies for Discussion/Conclusion Communicative Goal
2: Framing Principal Findings

  · Accounting for results
  · Explicating results
  · Relating to expectations
  · Addressing limitations

 Now we'll delve deeper into each of the strategies you can use to achieve this goal in your own writing.

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2 Strategy: Accounting for Results

Accounting for results is a way for you to reflect on or further consider the findings of your study. This
could be accomplished with or without referencing previous works. You can use this strategy to clarify
what may have contributed to, caused, or otherwise affected the results or outcomes. You may also want to
suggest reasons or hypotheses that could account for certain findings, and justify the nature of results.
Here are two examples of how you can accomplish this strategy, with strategy-specific language in bold:

116 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings
         Examples

            · These changes are most probably related to modifications in N uptake into aap2 mesophyll cells, as
                suggested by upregulation of amino acid importer LHT1 (Figure 7A) and increased uptake of 14C-label.1

            · That multiple genes in this pathway are underexpressed in hybrids of both species pairs perhaps is a
                cause or consequence of their sterility.2

  The Academic Phrasebank website offers a wealth of sentence starters useful to writers in this stage of
  reporting their research:

  General comments and explanations:

     · A possible explanation for this might be that ...
     · Another possible explanation for this is that ...
     · This result may be explained by the fact that ...
     · There are, however, other possible explanations.
     · These relationships may partly be explained by ...
     · There are several possible explanations for this result.
     · These results are likely to be related to ...
     · It seems possible that these results are due to ...

  Reporting inconsistent, counterintuitive, or contradictory findings:

     · These differences can be explained in part by ...
     · This inconsistency may be due to ...
     · This discrepancy could be attributed to ...
     · This rather contradictory result may be due to ...
     · The observed increase in X could be attributed to ...
     · It is difficult to explain this result, but it might be related to ...

1. Zhang, L., Tan, Q., Lee, R., Trethewy, A., Lee, Y. H., & Tegeder, M. (2010). Altered xylem-phloem transfer of amino acids affects
   metabolism and leads to increased seed yield and oil content in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell, 22(11), 3603-3620.

2. Noor, M. A. (2005). Patterns of evolution of genes disrupted in expression in Drosophila species hybrids. Genetics
   Research, 85(2), 119-125.
                                                                                                      Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings | 117
     · The possible interference of X cannot be ruled out.
     · Differences between X and Y may have influenced ...
     · These possible sources of error could have affected ...
     · There are two likely causes for the differences between ...
     · The reason for this is not clear but it may have something to do with ...
     · Since this difference has not been found elsewhere it is probably not due to ...

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2 Strategy: Explicating Results

  The explicating results strategy explains the reported results in the context of the study and/or in a
  broader context of the discipline. Here is where you consider your results and their implications. Your
  readers, of course, will develop their own interpretations or explanations for why the findings turned out
  as they did; however, you will want to guide their views as you make an argument explaining your own
  reasoning.
  Here are a couple of examples from published articles in high-impact journals:

         Examples

            · We must therefore conclude, to use the terminology of Goodlad et al. (1979), that the content standards,
                as formulated by the relevant official bodies, have not been properly incorporated into the formal
                curriculum, despite their authoritative national status.3

            · This research also showed that the effectiveness of rotations at reducing the weed seedbank was
                dependent on the specific crop that initiated the rotations (Fig. 1-3).4

  The Academic Phrasebank website provides this list of suggested ways to report findings that are related to
  previous research:

  Reporting findings in line with previous research:

3. Fukkink, R. G. (2010). Missing pages? A study of textbooks for Dutch early childhood teacher education. Teaching and Teacher
   Education, 26(3), 371-376.

4. Teasdale, J. R., Mangum, R. W., Radhakrishnan, J., & Cavigelli, M. A. (2004). Weed seedbank dynamics in three organic farming
   crop rotations. Agronomy Journal, 96(5), 1429-1435.
   118 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings
     · Several reports have shown that ...
     · As mentioned in the literature review, ...
     · Prior studies that have noted the importance of ...
     · Very little was found in the literature on the question of ...
     · Previous studies evaluating X observed inconsistent results on whether ...
     · A strong relationship between X and Y has been reported in the literature.
     · In reviewing the literature, no data was found on the association between X and Y.
     · These factors may explain the relatively good correlation between X and Y.
     · It may be that these participants benefitted from ...
     · The observed correlation between X and Y might be explained in this way: ...

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2 Strategy: Relating to Expectations

  Relating to expectations reasons about the researchers' anticipated or unanticipated findings and/or
  observations. You can use this strategy to point out expected or unexpected results, express your attitudes
  about the results, often concerning surprise or unsatisfactory findings, and connect findings to initial
  hypotheses (i.e., to describe how findings were or were not confirmed, as seen in the following examples):

         Examples

            · Hypothesis 1 is verified by unchanged oil content values in rain-fed plot. 5
            · Interestingly, relative to inulin the dimer exhibited higher activity than the tetramer [35]. 6

  The Academic Phrasebank website recommends these phrases that are in line with using this strategy:

     · Surprisingly, X was found to ...
     · What is surprising is that ...

5. Bedbabis, S., Rouina, B. B., & Boukhris, M. (2010). The effect of waste water irrigation on the extra virgin olive oil quality from
   the Tunisian cultivar Chemlali. Scientia Horticulturae, 125(4), 556-561..

6. Artyukhov, V. G., Kovaleva, T. A., Kholyavka, M. G., Bityutskaya, L. A., Grechkina, M. V., & Obraztsova, T. B. (2009). Study of the
   oligomeric structure and some physicochemical properties of inulinase from Kluyveromyces marxianus Y-303. Biophysics,
   54(6), 675-680.
                                                                                                      Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings | 119
     · One unanticipated finding was that ...
     · Surprisingly, no differences were found in ...
     · This finding was unexpected and suggests that ...
     · It is somewhat surprising that no X was noted in this condition ...
     · Contrary to expectations, this study did not find a significant difference between ...
     · However, the observed difference between X and Y in this study was not significant.
     · However, the ANOVA (one way) showed that these results were not statistically significant.

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2 Strategy: Addressing Limitations

  Addressing limitations is used to evaluate the study by pointing out shortcomings and/or minimizing
  deficiencies in the research.
  The following are examples of how you can realize this strategy, with specific language for expressing these
  limitations in bold.

         Examples

            · However, the study area spans an overly large region encompassing several climatic zones, which calls
                into question whether chronologies can simply be averaged.7

            · Our study was not free of problems, however. For instance, the overall rate of participation in sending
                feedback by e-mail was just over 50% of all participants (23 corrective feedback e-mails to 44 transcripts
                in English sessions and 23 corrective feedback e-mails to 43 transcripts in Japanese sessions).8

  It's important to note that research reports do not provide information without taking a stance toward
  that information. Researchers may indicate more or less certainty about their interpretations, and this is
  especially true of Addressing Limitations. While it's important, of course, to point to the shortcomings of
  your study (as no study is perfect), it's important not to over-emphasize the deficiencies in your research.
  So, you may want to highlight a contribution that your study makes while simultaneously acknowledging

7. Black, B. A., Copenheaver, C. A., Frank, D. C., Stuckey, M. J., & Kormanyos, R. E. (2009). Multi-proxy reconstructions of
   northeastern Pacific sea surface temperature data from trees and Pacific geoduck. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology,
   Palaeoecology, 278(1-4), 40-47.

8. Bower, J., & Kawaguchi, S. (2011). Negotiation of meaning and corrective feedback in Japanese/English eTandem. Language
   Learning & Technology, 15(1), 41-71.
   120 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings
some aspect that was less than ideal. In that case, you would want to hedge or boost accordingly, as showing
in these sentence starters from theAcademic Phrasebank website:

Hedging                                                    Boosting

· These findings may be somewhat limited by ...            · In spite of its limitations, the study certainly adds to
· These findings cannot be extrapolated to all patients.      our understanding of the ...
· These data must be interpreted with caution
                                                           · Notwithstanding the relatively limited sample, this
   because ...                                                work offers valuable insights into ...
· These results, therefore, need to be interpreted with
                                                           · Obviously, caution must be advised, but we want to
   caution.                                                   emphasize ...
· In observational studies, there is a potential for bias
                                                           · Regardless of the imperfect design, there are
   from ...                                                   definite benefits to the study's methodology, and
· These results should be interpreted with caution.           those benefits contribute to the value of the results
                                                              by ...

Sometimes it isn't necessary to hedge or boost, but rather to simply present the information as neutrally as
possible.

· It could be argued that the positive results were due to ...
· Although the current study is based on a small sample of participants, the findings suggest ...
· While this study did not confirm X, it did ...
· Notwithstanding these limitations, the study suggests that ...
· Despite its exploratory nature, this study offers some insight into ...
· A note of caution is due here since ...
· Another source of uncertainty is ...
· These results, therefore, need to be interpreted with caution.
· In observational studies, there is a potential for bias from ...
· It is important to bear in mind the possible bias in these responses.

                                                           Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings | 121
        Key Takeaways

     Goal 2 of writing the Discussion/Conclusion section is related to Frame Principal Findings. There are four
     possible strategies that you can use to accomplish this goal:

         1. Accounting for results, and/or
        2. Explicating results, and/or
        3. Relating to expectations, and/or
        4. Addressing limitations.
     Remember: It isn't necessary to include all of these strategies -- they are simply possibilities for reaching the
     goal.

122 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 2: Framing Principal Findings
Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the
Territory

The next goal in the Discussion and Conclusion sections is Reshaping the Territory. The primary function
of Goal 3 is to redefine the research area based on what your study contributes to the literature. This
goal's name reflects the dual role of generating new knowledge and connecting it to prior knowledge from
previous studies about the research territory. In this way, Goal 3 gives an update on the topic within your
field.

Strategies for Discussion/Conclusion Communicative Goal
3: Reshaping the Territory

  · Supporting with evidence
  · Countering with evidence

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3 Strategy: Supporting with
Evidence

Supporting with evidence explains how the research findings reiterate findings from other studies. You can
use this strategy to highlight the complementary or supplementary contribution your results make. This
strategy confirms or supports the assertions made by other researchers and/or your assertions based on
the findings.
Here are two examples of how you can accomplish this step:

       Examples

         · This difference in outcome between the treatment groups did not reach statistical significance, but an
             overall survival rate of 80% was very similar to that reported in the recent literature [13].1

         · This supports previous findings that early and late growth in mice occur under different genetic
             regulation (Cheverud et al., 1996; Vaughn et al., 1999; Rocha et al., 2004).2

                                                                                                      Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the Territory | 123
  The Academic Phrasebank website recommends these phrases that are in line with using this strategy,
  including statements about one particular finding:

     · This finding was also reported by Smith et al. (1989).
     · This finding is consistent with that of Smith (2000) who ...
     · Comparison of this result with those of other studies confirms ...
     · This also accords with our earlier observations, which showed that ...
     · This finding broadly supports the work of other studies in this area linking X with Y.
     · It is encouraging to compare this figure with that found by Jones (1993) who found that ...
     · There are similarities between the attitudes expressed by X in this study and those described by ...

  Below are statements from Academic Phrasebank about the results as a whole:

  These results:

     · further support the idea of ...
     · confirm the association between ...
     · are consistent with data obtained in ...
     · match those observed in earlier studies.
     · are in line with those of previous studies.
     · are in agreement with those obtained by ...
     · are in accord with recent studies indicating that ...
     · seem to be consistent with other research which found ...
     · are consistent with those of Smith and Jones (2015) who ...
     · are in agreement with Smith's (1999) findings which showed ...
     · support previous research into this brain area which links X and Y.
     · corroborate the ideas of Smith and Jones (2008), who suggested that ...

1. Atherton, R. P., Furr, M. O., McKenzie, H. C., & Desrochers, A. M. (2011). Efficacy of Hyperimmunized Plasma in the Treatment
   of Horses with Acute Colitis. Journal of Equine Veterinary Science, 31(1), 19-25.

2. Ishikawa, A., Hatada, S., Nagamine, Y., & Namikawa, T. (2005). Further mapping of quantitative trait loci for postnatal growth in
   an intersubspecific backcross of wild Mus musculus castaneus and C57BL/6J mice. Genetics Research, 85(2), 127-137.
   124 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the Territory
 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3 Strategy: Countering with Evidence

  Countering with evidence is used when some or all of your results are contrary to those in previous
  research studies.
  The following are examples of how you can realize this strategy:

         Examples

            · Bontozoglou found a nonlinear resonance at a waviness smaller than ours [26]. However, the one he
                found numerically for the capillary-gravity regime in rather thick films is quite different from our
                observations.3

            · The molecular mass of deglycosylated inulinase from Aspergillus awamori var. 2250 constitutes 69
                kDa[18]; from Aspergillus niger 12, 81 kDa [38]; from aspergillus candida, 54 kDa [39]; from Aspergillus
                ficuum, 74 kDa [40]; from Aspergillus fumigatus, 62 kDa[41], which differ strongly from the results
                obtained for exoinulinase from Aspergillus versicolor, 230 ±20kDa [42].4

  The Academic Phrasebank website proposes the following sentence starters as ways for advising cautious
  interpretation of the findings:

     · This study has been unable to demonstrate that ...
     · However, this result has not previously been described.
     · This outcome is contrary to that of Smith et al. (2001) who found ...
     · This finding is contrary to previous studies which have suggested that ...
     · In contrast to earlier findings, however, no evidence of X was detected.
     · The yields in this investigation were higher compared to those of other studies.
     · However, the findings of the current study do not support the previous research.
     · Smith et al. (1999) showed that ... This differs from the findings presented here ...
     · The overall level was found to be 15%, lower than that of previously reported levels.
     · It has been suggested that ... (Smith et al., 2002). This does not appear to be the case.

3. Wierschem, A., & Aksel, N. (2004). Hydraulic jumps and standing waves in gravity-driven flows of viscous liquids in wavy open
   channels. Physics of Fluids, 16(11), 3868-3877.

4. Artyukhov, V. G., Kovaleva, T. A., Kholyavka, M. G., Bityutskaya, L. A., Grechkina, M. V., & Obraztsova, T. B. (2009). Study of the
   oligomeric structure and some physicochemical properties of inulinase from Kluyveromyces marxianus
   Y-303. Biophysics, 54(6), 675-680.
                                                                                                          Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the Territory | 125
  · The levels observed in this investigation are far below those observed by Smith et al. (2007).
  · These results differ from X's 2003 estimate of Y, but they are broadly consistent with earlier ...

       Key Takeaways

     Goal 3 of writing the Discussion/Conclusion section is related to Reshape the Territory. There are two
     possible strategies that you can use to accomplish this goal:

         1. Confirming with Evidence and/or
        2. Countering with Evidence
     Remember: It isn't necessary to include both of these strategies -- you should only use both of them, in fact, if
     some of your findings are in line with previous research and other aspects present contradictory evidence to
     what has been done in the field. As you probably know well as a researcher, nothing about research is simple,
     neat, or uncomplicated. Most research is somewhat messy, meaning that you may have results that lend
     themselves to incongruous, inconsistent, or even conflicting implications. This is the nature of scientific
     discovery, and we can use the writing goals and strategies from this book to keep us on track when reporting
     such issues.

126 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 3: Reshaping the Territory
Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing
Additional Territory

The fourth goal in the Discussion and Conclusion section is called Establishing Additional Territory. Goal 4 is
accomplished when the writer expands the conversation beyond the results of their research and presents
the bigger picture of how the findings fit into the literature. Goal 4 is entitled Establishing Additional
Territory, because enlarging the focus demonstrates the expansion of the research space for the issue
and the discipline. It is within this additional space that future research is able to extend the knowledge
generated in your study.

Strategies for Discussion/Conclusion Communicative Goal
4: Establishing Additional Territory

  · Generalizing results
  · Stating the value
  · Noting implications
  · Proposing directions

Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4 Strategy: Generalizing Results

Writers are generalizing results when they draw inferences to bolster their overall arguments and
conclusions. To use this strategy, it is often useful to summarize or synthesize your findings.
Remember that one main purpose of the research report is to demonstrate how your work fits into the
existing body of literature in the field. So, this strategy is a way for you to enhance the value of your
findings by generalizing and pointing out how the results transfer and compare and/or contrast to previous
conclusions. This is also a chance for you to highlight the reliability and/or validity of your study, thus
allowing your findings to be more generalizable.
Here are two examples of how you can accomplish this strategy:

                                                                                          Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory | 127
         Examples

            · The results of this study thereby show that the choice of the best model depends on the error
                measurement which depends on the ultimate purpose of the forecasting procedure.1

            · To summarize, the results from this study suggest that high calpastatin activity results in decreased
                calpain activity and, thus, decreased tenderness.2

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4 Strategy: Stating the Value

  Stating the value shows the centrality of the study within the field by characterizing the most salient
  results. Essentially, this strategy enables you to advocate for the significance of your work within your
  discipline. It's a chance for you to label your exact contribution.
  Consider the language in bold in the following examples:

         Examples

            · Therefore, the findings on QTLs contributing to naturally occurring variations in postnatal growth are
                expected to be novel.3

            · The finding that TAF7 functions independently of a TAF1/TFIID complex significantly extends the
                growing body of evidence that TAFs contribute to transcriptional regulation outside of their assembly in
                the intact TFIID complex.4

1. Corredor, P., & Santamaría, R. (2004). Forecasting volatility in the Spanish option market. Applied Financial Economics, 14(1),
   1-11.

2. Boehm, M. L., Kendall, T. L., Thompson, V. F., & Goll, D. E. (1998). Changes in the calpains and calpastatin during postmortem
   storage of bovine muscle. Journal of Animal Science, 76(9), 2415-2434.

3. Ishikawa, A., Hatada, S., Nagamine, Y., & Namikawa, T. (2005). Further mapping of quantitative trait loci for postnatal growth in
   an intersubspecific backcross of wild Mus musculus castaneus and C57BL/6J mice. Genetics Research, 85(2), 127-137.

4. Devaiah, B. N., Lu, H., Gegonne, A., Sercan, Z., Zhang, H., Clifford, R. J., ... & Singer, D. S. (2010). Novel functions for TAF7, a
   regulator of TAF1-independent transcription. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 285(50), 38772-38780.
   128 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory
 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4 Strategy: Noting Implications

  Noting implications is a strategy that allows you to highlight the potential implications of the results and/
  or the study as a whole. You can use this strategy to explain how the findings could be applied to future
  research, practice, the development of theory in the discipline. Also, this shows the larger impact of the
  results and/or study in the discipline, and notifies the reader of possible consequences of the study and/or
  results (note the examples below).

         Examples

            · Notably, even callers claiming to have a privately insured child faced an average wait time of 20 days
                when urgently requesting an appointment. These findings signal a need to consider refining specialty
                care delivery processes to more efficiently use the specialist workforce [28,29]. Two previous audit
                studies of pediatric specialty care have shown even lower Medicaid acceptance rates: 4% [13] and 8% [7].5

            · Soldiers exposed to combat were more likely than non-combat veterans to be disabled and unemployed
                in their mid-20s and to remain so throughout their work life. Policymakers and citizens should note
                these long-term consequences of war as U.S. soldiers continue to fight in Iraq and Afghanistan. As
                these wars continue, future combat veterans who sustain mental and physical injuries in battle will likely
                suffer, as did past combat veterans, in their socioeconomic attainment.6

 Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4 Strategy: Proposing Directions

  Proposing directions is a way to make recommendations or suggestions about the next step of either your
  research or further research within the same area. This is also a means of proposing practical applications
  of the results. You can employ this strategy to make an argument for the need for future research or the
  opportunity to expand the niche by contributing new information/knowledge.
  The following are examples of how you can realize this step:

5. Bednarek, P., Creinin, M., Reeves, M., Cwiak, C., Espey, E., Jensen, J. (2011). "Immediate versus delayed IUD insertion after
   uterine aspiration", New England Journal of Medicine 364(23):2208-2217.

6. MacLean, A. (2010). The things they carry: Combat, disability, and unemployment among US men. American sociological
   review, 75(4), 563-585.
                                                                                             Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory | 129
         Examples

            · It would be interesting to design breeding experiments to explore if high AGPase activity late in grain
                filling stage cosegregates with enhanced seed weight in population segregating for grain weight so that
                cause/effect relationship could be established.7

            · Further research is recommended to confirm the efficacy of the product, to ascertain an optimal dosage
                for the hyperimmune plasma used in this study, and to clarify whether enteral or parenteral
                administration is more beneficial to the patient.8

  The Academic Phrasebank website has a large number of sentence starters that serve to recommend further
  work. These are divided into two categories as noted in the table:

7. Devi, T. A., Sarla, N., Siddiq, E. A., & Sirdeshmukh, R. (2010). Activity and expression of adenosine diphosphate glucose
   pyrophosphorylase in developing rice grains: Varietal differences and implications on grain filling. Plant science, 178(2), 123-129.

8. Atherton, R. P., Furr, M. O., McKenzie, H. C., & Desrochers, A. M. (2011). Efficacy of Hyperimmunized Plasma in the Treatment
   of Horses with Acute Colitis. Journal of Equine Veterinary Science, 31(1), 19-25.
   130 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory
Recommendations for future research                       Recommendations for practice or policy

· The study should be repeated using ...                  · There is, therefore, a definite need for ...
· This would be a fruitful area for further work.         · Greater efforts are needed to ensure ...
· Several questions still remain to be answered.          · Another important practical implication is that ...
· A natural progression of this work is to analyze...     · Moreover, more X should be made available to ...
· More research using controlled trials is needed to ...  · Unless governments adopt X, Y will not be attained.
· More broadly, research is also needed to determine      · These findings suggest several courses of action for

   ...                                                       ...
· A further study could assess the long-term effects of   · A reasonable approach to tackle this issue could be

   ...                                                       to ...
· What is now needed is a cross-national study            · Continued efforts are needed to make X more

   involving ...                                             accessible to ...
· Considerably more work will need to be done to          · The findings of this study have a number of practical

   determine ...                                             implications.
· The precise mechanism of X in insects remains to be     · There are a number of important changes which

   elucidated.                                               need to be made.
· These findings provide the following insights for       · Management to enhance bumble-bee populations

   future research: ...                                      might involve ...
· Large randomized controlled trials could provide        · This study suggests that X should be avoided by

   more definitive evidence.                                 people who are prone to ...
· This research has thrown up many questions in need      · A key policy priority should therefore be to plan for

   of further investigation.                                 the long-term care of ...
· A greater focus on X could produce interesting          · This information can be used to develop targeted

   findings that account more for ...                        interventions aimed at ...
· The issue of X is an intriguing one that could be       · Taken together, these findings do not support strong

   usefully explored in further research.                    recommendations to ...
                                                          · Ensuring appropriate systems, services, and support

                                                             for X should be a priority for ...

Other important points about language

Discussion and Conclusion sections of research articles -- as noted -- are more general than the middle
sections (Methods and Results). As a result, the final sections of a research article typically employ language
to highlight that generality (e.g., Overall, In general, On the whole, etc.). It's also common for writers to use
overt transitional expressions to highlight their communicative goals. Some examples of this include the
following:

  · "Our major aim has been attained by ..."
  · "Some limitations of this study include ..."
  · "Future work will need to explore ..."

Writers tend to use a more positive tone, present-tense verbs to denote confidence and language that
highlights a level of certainty to demonstrate their belief in the validity, reliability, and strength of their
design, findings, and conclusions. It is also common to find past simple verbs, which review background
information, reiterate the study's objectives, or remind readers about the procedures, methodology,
hypotheses, and/or research questions.

                                     Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory | 131
       Key Takeaways

     Goal 4 of the Discussion/Conclusion section is Establishing additional territory. This allows you to expand on
     your comments and to really broaden the topic so that you can:

         · Draw conclusions or make generalizations, and/or
         · Assert the value of your work and/or
         · Remark on implications and/or
         · Suggest directions for future work.

132 | Discussion/Conclusion Goal 4: Establishing Additional Territory
Chapter 6 Synopsis: Writing the Discussion/
Conclusion

In this chapter, we learned how to finalize a research article. The four main goals and their strategies were
discussed and exemplified along with some advice about what language you can use. To review, let's look
again at the four goals:

 1. Re-establish the territory
 2. Frame the principal findings
 3. Reshape the territory
 4. Establish additional territory
Through these goals, writers provide readers with extended analyses and interpretations of the results by
evaluating their implications and situating them within the existing literature. While the two specific middle
sections of a research paper focus mainly on what's happening inside the research project, the Discussion/
Conclusion section tends to expand the meaning beyond or outside of the research at hand. In other words,
writers must indicate how the results add or relate to existing knowledge within the discipline, which points
out the value of the work. The final section of the manuscript is also the last aspect of your work that
your readers will examine, so it must convincingly finalize the scientific argument that has been unfolding
through each section.
According to the Phrasebank website, Discussions/Conclusions usually carry the following functions:
 1. To review and compile ideas and arguments, which may include a kind of retrospective view of the

      main areas covered in the writing;
 2. To evaluate the research overall, which could also involve recommending improvements and

      considering coming trends.

                                                                                                     Chapter 6 Synopsis: Writing the Discussion/Conclusion | 133
        Key Takeaways

     There are many ways to think about how to go about your task; however, as with other sections, you should
     remember that each writer, discipline, and journal has a unique set of stylistic norms. As you've probably
     deduced by now, there is no one "correct" way but rather many different best practices to keep in mind.

       Explore + Apply

     Before you begin applying what you've learned in this chapter to your Discussion/Conclusion section, explore
     published writing in your discipline or in a target journal that you've identified. Look for the goals and
     strategies presented here to see where you might find similarities and differences that are discipline- or
     journal-specific. Next, try outlining your next Discussion/Conclusion section using the structuring and
     placement of those goals and strategies as a model.

134 | Chapter 6 Synopsis: Writing the Discussion/Conclusion
Chapter 7: Writing Abstracts

Many academic fields utilize short summaries of scholarly work that are commonly referred to as abstracts.
However, abstracts vary in both form and function, and novice researchers often struggle to compose
succinct versions of their work. This chapter will provide an overview of the various uses and pieces of an
abstract and will give you some tips on how to compose one successfully and efficiently.

        Learning Objectives

     After exploring this chapter, you will be able to ...
         · Understand the fundamental concept of an abstract;
         · Articulate the various uses of an abstract;
         · Identify the parts of an abstract;
         · Connect those parts to the goals and strategies of the sections of a research article;
         · Design your own abstract based on best practices presented in this chapter.

Before moving on to our presentation of this aspect of research writing, spend a bit of time thinking about
your own conception of an abstract.

       Warm-up

     What kind of information goes into an abstract? What should be excluded?

                                                                                                                                            Chapter 7: Writing Abstracts | 135
Defining Abstracts

A recent handbook on academic writing defines abstract as "a short form, or synopsis, of a larger text or

                                                                                                                                                        1

project, describing work that is proposed, in development, or completed" . This definition underscores the
chronology of an abstract's use - future work, current work, or finished products. These varied uses of an
abstract contribute to its diverse forms because what is included in an abstract is heavily influenced by its
intended function. Basically, a good abstract should have the following features: accurate, self-contained,
concise and specific, non-evaluative, and coherent and readable (American Psychological Association,
2001).Other scholars have defined abstracts in other ways, including, but not limited to, the following:

· a description or factual summary of the much longer report, and is meant to give the reader an exact

                                                                                        2

   and concise knowledge of the full article

                                                                                                                                                       3

· an abbreviated, accurate representation of the contents of a document

Still others have noted what an abstract should contain, including descriptors such as accurate, concise, non-

                       4  5  6
evaluative, coherent and readable by categorizing them into sub-types or functional purposes . Categories

of abstracts include:

 1. Informative (summary of an article)
 2. Indicative/descriptive (explains general information but usually excludes results)
 3. Structured (summary that uses headings for each section of the RA)

                                                                                                                                                                   7

As the first type (informative abstract) is the most common form of abstract , and the one most closely
associated with the topic of this book (research articles), we will focus our attention on this type.
Nevertheless, it is important to point out that the third type (structured abstracts) could be a sub-
classification for either the informative or indicative type. In other words, either type 1 or type 2 could be
presented in a structured format.

So, now that we have narrowed down the type of abstract that we are referring to, let's examine the purpose

1. Curry, M. J., He, F., Weijia, L., Zhang, T., Zuo, Y., Altalouli, M., and Ayesh, J. (2021). An A to W of Academic Literacy: Key Concepts
   and Practices for Graduate Students. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

2. Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analyzing genre: Language use in professional settings. London: Longman.
3. ANSI. (1979). The American standard for writing abstracts. New York: ANSI Publication.
4. American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American psychological association (6th ed.).

   https://www. apa.org/pubs/books/4200066
5. Gladon, R. J., Graves, W. R., & Kelly, J. M. (2011). Getting published in the life sciences. John Wiley & Sons.
6. Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills (Vol. 1). Ann Arbor, MI:

   University of Michigan Press.
7. Gladon, R. J., Graves, W. R., & Kelly, J. M. (2011). Getting published in the life sciences. John Wiley & Sons.

   136 | Defining Abstracts
  of that type. In their seminal book on academic writing, Swales and Feak (2009) note two major functions of
  this particular kind of abstract:

     · Previewing or summarizing academic work
     · Proposing academic work
  That work may be a research article, a thesis or dissertation, a conference presentation, or a chapter of a
  book. In order to determine what is included in your abstract, you'll need to first answer some wh-questions:
     · Who is the audience for the abstract and what is their level of expertise on the topic or within the

        discipline?
     · Why was the research undertaken (e.g., what is the motivation/justification for the study)?
     · What are the research questions or hypotheses?
     · What methods were used?
     · What were the general findings/conclusions?
     · What are the implications for the subject matter or field?
     · Where will the abstract be published?
     · How should the abstract be formatted?

                                                                                                                                                                                                     8

  A successful abstract answers these questions as a way of becoming a stand-alone document .

    Now that we've explored the basic definition of an abstract and explained what it contains, we'll divide our
    discussion into two parts:

        1. Functions of an abstract (examining the purposes and goals for writing one); and
       2. Forms of an abstract (emphasizing the various language issues that might arise as you're writing).

8. Gladon, R. J., Graves, W. R., & Kelly, J. M. (2011). Getting published in the life sciences. John Wiley & Sons.
                                                                                                                                                              Defining Abstracts | 137
Goals of an Abstract

As noted in previous sections, abstracts serve many purposes. Abstracts may be used to apply for

conferences or to scaffold the presentation of theses/dissertations, but the particular type we will focus

on in this book is the informative abstract, which appears at the beginning of a research article and serves

                                                                                                                                          1

to provide "a miniature version, or microcosm, of the manuscript" . Because publication of research article

manuscripts is highly competitive, and because acceptance of the manuscript is often predicated on the

                                                           2

reading of the abstract alone , the function of an abstract is extremely important in the life of an academic.

                                                                                   3

The American Psychological Association notes the significance of abstracts by claiming, "A well-prepared

abstract can be the most important single paragraph in an article" (p. 26).So, what exactly are the purposes

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         456

of an abstract? How do they function to meet the needs of readers?Based on reviews of several sources

that specifically outline the functions of abstracts, we would like to highlight four main purposes that

coincide with the goals of this textbook:

1. To serve as stand-alone miniature versions of an article, summarizing the topic, motivation,
    methodology, and main results;

2. To act as screening devices, aiding choices about reading an article (or not);
3. To preview and contribute to a reader's navigation of the whole article;
4. To give reviewers a roadmap of the paper that they are reviewing.

That's a big job for such a small amount of text! However, there are a few helpful and specific goals and

7                     8
some guiding questions that can help you to get started. These goals/strategies coincide with each section

(IMRD/C) of the article, so you may also want to review the various goals/strategies in chapters 3-6.

1. Gladon, R. J., Graves, W. R., & Kelly, J. M. (2011). Getting published in the life sciences. John Wiley & Sons.
2. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2009). Abstracts and the writing of abstracts / John M. Swales, Christine B. Feak. (Michigan Series in

   English for Academic & Professional Purposes).
3. American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American psychological association (6th ed.).

   https://www. apa.org/pubs/books/4200066
4. Bordage, G., & McCaghie. W. C. (2001). Title, authors, and abstracts. Academic Medicine, 76(9), 945-947.
5. Huckin, T. N. (2001). Abstracting from abstracts. In M. Hewings (Ed.), Academic writing in context, Birmingham, UK: University

   of Birmingham Press.
6. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2009). Abstracts and the writing of abstracts / John M. Swales, Christine B. Feak. (Michigan Series in

   English for Academic & Professional Purposes).
7. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2009). Abstracts and the writing of abstracts / John M. Swales, Christine B. Feak. (Michigan Series in

   English for Academic & Professional Purposes).
8. null

   138 | Goals of an Abstract
                                              Goal                                    Guiding Question(s)
                                                                      What is already known about the topic?
Goal 1: Introduce the topic by providing background information and   Why is the topic important?
briefly motivating the study.                                         What is this study about?

Goal 2: Present the purpose/goals of the research.                    How was the study carried out?

Goal 3: Explain the methods, materials, participants, and techniques  What was discovered as a result?
used in the study.
                                                                      What do the findings mean?
Goal 4: Highlight the most important results.

Goal 5: Provide an overview of your conclusions by pointing out any
implications or recommendations.

Swales & Feak (2009) claim that Goals 2 and 4 are the most common and note that Goal 5 is the least likely to
appear in an abstract. This is probably because many researchers write abstracts prior to completing their
studies; consequently, it's difficult to explain what the findings mean if the abstract is written ahead of the
study's completion.

                                                                      Goals of an Abstract | 139
 Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice,
 and Grammar

  This section of the chapter will examine the formal features of abstracts, including length, word choice, and
  some grammatical issues. Please note that this is not a comprehensive guide but rather a few highlights of
  issues that we feel are particularly relevant to novice researchers.

 Length

                                                                                                                                        1

  In their book-length work on abstracts, Swales & Feak (2009) suggest that the first step to writing an
  abstract is to find out the word or character limit. Indeed, word/character limits are an especially
  noteworthy aspect of abstracts because they are so often used as a gateway into acceptance -- especially
  for conferences. Swales and Feak present several guidelines for writing abstracts, and the ones relevant to
  our discussion are as follows:

    1. Abstracts in journals are usually between 150-200 words without subheadings (unstructured) or a bit
        longer (~250 words) if structured (with headings).

   2. Disciplinary differences may allow for longer (~500 words or more) abstracts; specifically, those for
        conference submission are generally longer.

                               2

   3. The IEEE uses shorter abstracts (~50 words) for "short communications," which is a type of article in
        many of the journals that it publishes.

  Although length is often a challenging component of writing an abstract because it's difficult to summarize
  an entire study in only a few hundred words, it is a fairly straightforward aspect of this section of a research
  article. Each journal has a requirement, so you can look up their maximum word lengths on their website.

 Word Choice

  The primary determinant of the language used in an abstract is its function/purpose. The purpose drives
  the decisions you will make about what kinds of words and information to use or avoid. Prescriptive
  guidelines for abstracts are usually dictated by either the discipline or the journal/editor, and, as Swales

1. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2009). Abstracts and the writing of abstracts / John M. Swales, Christine B. Feak. (Michigan Series in
   English for Academic & Professional Purposes).

2. Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
   140 | Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar
                                                                                                                                                                                                        3

   & Feak (2012) note, there are often "not rules to follow, but rather choices you can make" about what
   language to include or exclude. The next sections provide some guidance to help you make those choices,
   and although we are including these in the chapter on Abstracts, the information can be applied to any
   aspect of research writing. However, as the abstract is a prominent way for others to be introduced to

                                   4

   your research , it is particularly important that the language be clear and appropriate. Several research
   writing guide books claim that because of the heavy reading requirements that researchers face, they must
   be extremely selective about what they choose to read. Many choose to read abstracts as a summary of

                                                                                                            56

   an article either as a preview or a replacement. One way to begin drafting your abstract is to consider
   that both its placement and function within an RA is to bridge the title and the text of the manuscript.

                                                                                                                                                                                                    7

   Therefore, one best practice is to include every important word from the title in the abstract . This will help
   you consider the content of the abstract, but there are other considerations as well. For instance, generally
   abstracts present information in the same order as the research article: IMRD/C. As noted previously, the
   final section may or may not be included based on what stage the research is in, but regardless, the abstract
   will flow in this general order/pattern.

   Next, we'll explore some particular word/grammatical categories in an effort to provide you with some
   ideas. These are not rules, but rather, are suggestions based on linguistic research and general academic
   writing standards.

  Pronouns

   The use of personal pronouns (e.g., I, me, my, you, s/he, you, they, etc.) in academic writing are a common
   source of confusion for many graduate students and other novice academic writers. Are pronouns
   acceptable in formal academic writing? Should they be avoided? If you are writing about someone else's
   work, the third person "they" or "s/he" is widely accepted. In contrast, the use of the second person "you" is

                                         8

   typically avoided .

   In general, there is much variation in the use of personal pronouns in academic writing even among expert

                    9

   writers . Most writing style guides advise against the use of first and second pronouns and the use of the

                                                   10

   singular masculine he . Often the suggestions about alternative structures include the use of passive voice,

 3. Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills (Vol. 1). Ann Arbor, MI:
    University of Michigan Press.

 4. Day, R. A., & Gastel, B. (2006). How to write and publish a scientific article, 3rd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
 5. Gladon, R. J., Graves, W. R., & Kelly, J. M. (2011). Getting published in the life sciences. John Wiley & Sons.
 6. Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2009). Abstracts and the writing of abstracts / John M. Swales, Christine B. Feak. (Michigan Series in

    English for Academic & Professional Purposes).
 7. Lebrun, J. L. (2007). Scientific writing. A reader and writer's guide. World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore.
 8. Hyland, K., & Jiang, F. K. (2017). Is academic writing becoming more informal?. English for Specific Purposes, 45, 40-51.
 9. Harwood, N. (2006). (In)appropriate personal pronoun use in political science: A qualitative study and a proposed heuristic for

    future research. Written Communication, 23, 242-250.
10. Paterson, L. (2014). British pronoun use, prescription, and processing: Linguistic and social influences affecting 'they' and 'he'.

    Springer.

                                                                                             Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar | 141
the combined s/he (which can be formed as she/he, he/she, or with the conjunction and between the two),
or they regardless of gender and number. In fact, studies show that the singular pronoun they is the most

                                                                                                                                       111213

frequent personal pronoun, and has been for at least two decades .

Given this information, we suggest that the use of they is very likely the best choice regardless of the number
(singular or plural) or gender. That is, the pronoun they can have antecedents that are male, female, singular,
or plural.

Verbs

Tense

Generally, the use of verb tenses varies by section within an abstract. Swales and Feak's comprehensive

                                                        14

guide to academic writing asserts that abstracts tend to begin and end in the present tense but vary

significantly in their mid-sections. While there has not been a large, cross-disciplinary study of verb tenses

in research article abstracts, there have been some studies about specific disciplines such as applied

15                    16
linguistics and medical research . The latter study found that past tense is often used to write about the

purpose/background of the article, to explain the Methods, and to highlight the most significant Results.

However, that study also notes that when a writer wants to focus on the generalizability or boost the

significance of the findings, authors will often opt for present tense. Note the difference in the strength of

these two sentences:

1. Our results showed that there were significant differences between the two types of X.
2. Our results show that there are significant differences in the two types of X.

The second sentence presents a stronger stance simply because it is in the present tense, which is typically
used for facts, general truths, or fixed circumstances. Simple past tense is used for actions started and
finished in the past but not necessarily continuing into the present. Therefore, choose your tense carefully
because it can be indirect evidence of your stance.

11. Baranowski, M. (2002). The most recent APA guidelines (7th edition) similar support the use of they as a third person singular
    pronoun. Current usage of the epicene pronoun in written English. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 6(3), 378-397.

12. LaScotte, D. K. (2016). Singular they: An empirical study of generic pronoun use. American Speech, 91(1), 62-80.
13. Newman, M. (1992). Pronominal disagreements: The stubborn problem of singular epicene antecedents1. Language in

    Society, 21(3), 447-475.
14. Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2004). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential tasks and skills (Vol. 1). Ann Arbor, MI:

    University of Michigan Press.
15. Tseng, F. (2011). Analyses of Move Structure and Verb Tense of Research Article Abstracts in Applied Linguistics. International

    Journal of English Linguistics, 1(2), 27.
16. Salager-Meyer, F. (1992). A text-type and move analysis study of verb tense and modality distribution in medical English

    abstracts. English for Specific Purposes, 11(2), 93-113.

    142 | Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar
Modality

Modal verbs indicate stance; in other words, they allow the writer to strengthen or weaken a claim. In
English, there are nine modal verbs as shown in the table:

          can         could     may
          might       should    must
          had better  ought to  will/shall17

It's important to note that each verb carries a level of certainty or doubt that is a really useful way to hedge
or boost your claims about findings. Since the abstract is such an important part of representing your work,
the careful use of modals is essential to striking the right tone in terms of your level of confidence. Of course,
there are other words you can use that also indicate the tentative nature of your work (e.g., adverbs and
adjectives such as possibly/possibly, obviously/obvious, etc.). You can explore those on your own as they are
outside the scope of this book. The important point to remember is that you always have a choice about
presenting your level of certainty, and modal verbs are important tools in your writing toolbox.

Clauses with that

In 2005, linguistic researchers did a study of over 200 abstracts from six disciplines. The most important
finding from the study was that writers tended to use that clauses when writing about their results. For
example, "The study's results indicate that ..." or "The findings confirm that ...". In the full research article,
you'll probably be using these clauses in the Introduction to review literature (e.g., "Other studies have
shown that ...") as well as to report the findings in the Results section. However, in an abstract, you will not
be reviewing literature at such a fine level of detail, so it's more likely that you'll use such a clause to highlight
your findings.

Reporting verbs are often used with the word that to form such clauses. So, it's important for you to
familiarize yourself with some of the more common reporting verbs. A few highly-frequent verbs of this type
are presented in the table below:

17. The modal "shall" is not typically used in American English, but is somewhat common in British English to make suggestions or
    offer help in either statement or question form.

                                                                                            Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar | 143
describe   show         reveal
study      demonstrate  note
point out  indicate     report
observe    assume       claim
assert     examine      state
believe    mention      reveal
argue      discuss      find
suggest    focus        provide
propose    reveal       write

Each verb has a level of certainty of its own (e.g., assert is more confident than indicate), so be sure that
you are familiar with the exact meaning of each verb. On top of that inherent meaning, such verbs can be
combined with adverbs (e.g., possibly, certainly, etc.) and/or modal verbs that can strengthen or weaken the
claim as well.

Citations in Abstracts

To cite or not to cite, that is the question. If you do a Google search "Can I cite sources in my abstract?" you'll
find an overwhelming number of negative responses (i.e., No, you should not.). However, as we've noted
in other sections, academic writing is often not black and white, wrong or right, no or yes. So, while the
internet majority may have very sure opinions, it's less clear than it seems.People provide several reasons
why citations in abstracts should be avoided, namely the following:

  · To focus on your work, not someone else's.
  · To present a self-contained work without the need for outside reference.
  · To reduce unnecessary words contributing to the small word count limit.

On the other hand, there may be some instances in which it is incumbent upon you to cite the work of
others. When you are doing research that is a direct response to another researchers' findings, theories, or
claims, then it's important to cite them. Likewise, if you are using a little-known term that was coined by
someone in particular, then it's important to reference that person. And undoubtedly, when you are doing a
replication study or some meta-analyses, it's necessary to have citations.

On the whole, though, the best practice is not to cite sources in an abstract unless it is absolutely

                    18

necessary . As with other topics in this book, there are different approaches within disciplines, journals, and
writers, who may all have variable stylistic approaches to this issue, so read the Instructions for Authors for

18. Belcher, W. L. (2009). Writing your journal article in 12 weeks: A guide to academic publishing success. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
    144 | Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar
your target journal. If there are no guidelines, then examine the abstracts of previously published papers in
that journal to see what the common rule seems to be. If all else fails, you can contact the editor.

                                                                                       Formal Features of Abstracts: Length, Word Choice, and Grammar | 145
Chapter 7 Synopsis: Writing the Abstract

In this chapter, we learned how to write an abstract for a research article. Five goals were presented as a
way to envision the communicative functions of the abstract.

Goal 1: Introduce the topic by providing background information and briefly motivating the study.
Goal 2: Present the purpose/goals of the research.
Goal 3: Explain the methods, materials, participants, and techniques used in the study.
Goal 4: Highlight the most important results.
Goal 5: Provide an overview of your conclusions by pointing out any implications or recommendations.

By using knowledge of these goals along with their guiding questions, research writers have a target for
achieving a concise yet clear summary of their work. As with so many other aspects of a journal manuscript,
there are variations at the level of writer, journal, and discipline, so we cannot provide prescriptive rules
about what should or should not be included. Pay attention to the Author Instructions for the journal to
which you are submitting, and notice what other writers in your field and in your target journal do.

         Key Takeaways

         · By using knowledge of these goals along with their guiding questions, research writers have a target for
             achieving a concise yet clear summary of their work.

         · As with so many other aspects of a journal manuscript, there are variations at the level of writer, journal,
             and discipline, so we cannot provide prescriptive rules about what should or should not be included.

         · Pay attention to the Author Instructions for the journal to which you are submitting, and notice what
             other writers in your field and in your target journal do.

146 | Chapter 7 Synopsis: Writing the Abstract
    Explore + Apply

Make a list of the journals that are ideal publication venues for your research. Explore their author guidelines to
see what kinds of standards they set for writing abstracts. Note the length, format (structured or unstructured),
and any other suggestions or requirements they have for writing this very short yet crucial piece of the
research writing puzzle. Using this information, model your own abstract on the functions and language you
see used in such writing in your field.

                                                                                                                     Chapter 7 Synopsis: Writing the Abstract | 147
About the Contributors

Sarah Huffman

Sarah Huffman, PhD, is the Assistant Director of the Graduate College's Center for Communication
Excellence at Iowa State University. Her research interests include genre analysis and academic writing
instruction, best practices for training graduate student writing tutors, and systemic functional linguistic
approaches to language development. Dr. Huffman teaches graduate-level courses in advanced academic
communication and research writing and science communication.

Elena Cotos

Elena Cotos, PhD, is an Associate Professor in the Applied Linguistics Program and in the interdisciplinary
Human Computer Interaction Program at Iowa State University. She is also the Director of the Center for
Communication Excellence of the Graduate College. Additionally, she serves as the Book Review Editor
for the English for Specific Purposes journal. Her research agenda bridges corpus-based genre analysis,
genre-based automated writing evaluation, writing pedagogy, and computer-assisted language learning and
assessment - all converging to address language teaching and learning needs.

Kimberly Becker

Kimberly Becker, PhD, is a Communication Consultant for the Center for Communication Excellence at
Iowa State University. Her research interests include disciplinary academic writing and corpus linguistics.
Dr. Becker leads webinars and workshops related to academic communication development and supports
postdoctoral scholars through one-on-one consultations.

Special Thanks

The authors would like to acknowledge Angeline Neo for her assistance with the visual presentation and
graphical elements in this e-book.

148 | About the Contributors
