Professional Writing and Communications for
                        Business
PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND
COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS

KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
Professional Writing and Communications for Business Copyright © by Kristopher Purzycki is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Introduction                                             1

About This Resource                                      3

About the Author                                         v

Acknowledgements                                         vi

Copyright Information                                    viii

PART I. INSIGHTS: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

1. The Four I's: Qualities of Professional Writing       11

2. Genre Conventions                                     16

3. Fundamental Professional Writing Genres               21

4. Rhetorical Appeals                                    24

5. Knowing Your Audience                                 26

6. Plain Language                                        31

7. Keep it Concise: The KISS Principle                   36

8. Inclusive Language                                    38

PART II. INFORMATION: RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONAL WRITING

9. Conducting Research                                   43

10. Locating Good Sources                                44

11. Verifying Sources                                    45

12. Issues in Researching                                48

13. Business Plans                                       50

PART III. IMPLEMENTATION: CONSTRUCTION AND STYLE

14. Introduction to Type Style                           57

15. Typefaces and Fonts                                  59

16. Typographic Emphasis                                 62
17. Type Size                                                 63

18. Spacing and Indentation                                   64

19. Headings and Subheads                                     65

20. Lists                                                     67

21. Putting it all Together: Style Guides                     69

PART IV. INTERFACE: YOUR PROFESSIONAL VOICE

22. Introduction: Correspondence and Email                    75

23. Emails                                                    80

24. Memos                                                     84

25. Cover Letters                                             86

26. Peer Review                                               95

27. Outreach: Press Releases                                  100

28. Creating Your LinkedIn Profile                            104

29. Building Your LinkedIn Network                            107

PART V. EXTRA: GROUP COMMUNICATION, TEAMWORK, AND LEADERSHIP

30. Group Communication, Teamwork, and Leadership             111

31. Group Problem Solving                                     112

32. Group Life Cycles and Member Roles                        119

33. What is a Group?                                          127

34. Teamwork and Leadership                                   132

35. Business and Professional Meetings                        137

Glossary                                                      147

References                                                    149
INTRODUCTION

A VERY SHORT HISTORY OF PROFESSIONAL WRITING
Some of the oldest examples of writing, such as that found in the above clay tablet, are professional
writing. Ancient Sumerians used these tablets to record inventories of produce and grains and
client accounts. Since then, professional writing has evolved technologically even while the core
functions--accounting, correspondence, and communicating information--have largely remained
unchanged. The printing press, for example, allowed writers to distribute information to a wider
audience which led to advertising as well as copyright laws (Osei-Hwere & Osei-Hwere).

Figure 1. Sumerian tablet containing inventory records. © Marie-Lan Nguyen / Wikimedia Commons

Computational technologies have had seismic impacts on the craft of professional writing. Desktop
publishing and word processing software promoted new skills in design and layout. The
commercialization of the internet in the late 1990s and early 2000s created a need for writers versed
in "search engine optimization" and HTML to populate the rapidly expanding digital landscape of
the web. Harnessing the "World Wide Web" to achieve almost immediate delivery and reception,
"electronic mail" quickly became the primary mode of professional communication.

   It wasn't long before the smartphone, a powerful pocket-sized computer with similar multimedia
capabilities, became the preferred computational device for many. Mobile devices and "short message
service" (SMS) functions further increased the speed with which people may communicate. Social
media benefited from the widespread adoption of mobile devices, empowering users to compose,
create, and publish to the world with a few finger flicks.

   Cloud-based services such as Microsoft's Office 365 and Google Workplace have also improved
collaboration. These productivity platforms include all the tools needed to create slide decks,
spreadsheets, and documents, as well as share them with coworkers without ever leaving your desk.

   In the autumn of 2022, OpenAI released ChatGPT, a tool that automatically creates human-quality

                                                                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 1
writing using simple requests. Since then, many platforms we already use, such as Google and
Microsoft, have added generative text tools as functions. With minimal effort, a user can compose a
professional-looking email response, report, and presentation slides.

   Throughout this remarkable period of human innovation, professional writing has not only
remained important but has emerged as one of the most high-demand skills by employers of all
fields: even with the automation of everyday writing tasks, writers are still needed to review, edit,
and "humanize" written content. Intrapersonal communications in the workplace still rely on archaic
genres like memos and emails to function, yet today's professionals must also be comfortable with
basic programming concepts, information visualization, social media, and other concepts that were
once the domain of others.

   Today's reality is that those "others" will likely be YOU. According to a recent report published
by the Bureau of Labor and Statistics (2019), there are very few in-house professional writers.
This means that accountants are now writing their own disengagement letters, wealth managers
are responsible for writing out plans for clients, and managers write supply chain policies. Human
resources personnel must demonstrate sharp writing skills and apply those to presentations, reports,
and many other formats for various audiences. For marketers, stylistic writing is a crucial component
in a skillset that includes multimedia asset management and analytical skills.

   The business professional is--more than anything else--a professional writer.
   It is precisely because writing is such a crucial skill that global corporations like Microsoft, Google,
Apple, and others have poured billions into developing writing tools that help professionals write
better. Spell-checkers and auto-complete functions, now built into writing services like Microsoft
Word and Google Docs, have eliminated much (though not all!) of our worry over spelling and
grammar. Other tools like Grammarly help us polish our writing to be as clear as possible. At the time
of this writing, ChatGPT still has an uncertain impact on the professional realms.
   Yet writing consistently remains the professional skill employers cite as one of the most sorely
lacking workplace skills. In their 2022 report, "The State of Business Communication," Grammarly
reported that a staggering $1.2 trillion is lost each year by American businesses because of poor
communication (p. 4). Although we would be wise to dig deeper into these numbers (poor writing is
Grammarly's bread and butter!), we would be hard-pressed to find a professional that doesn't agree
with the sentiment. A survey conducted by business writer Josh Bernoff (2016) revealed that over
80% of respondents implicated poor writing as a key inefficiency (p. 18). According to Bernoff, the
reasons for this could be boiled down to poor training, the elimination of professional editors from
most workplaces, and the distractions that come with reading on screens.
   Although we can't do away with screen-reading (this is a digital resource after all), we can certainly
do our best to develop our writing and editing skills. Our focus here is on clear, concise, and precise
writing that clearly communicates your message to the reader. Although writing for marketing can be
more evocative and compelling, the principles are the same.

2 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
ABOUT THIS RESOURCE

Professional Writing and Communications for Business is an open educational resource (OER) created
to help prepare emerging business professionals and students to develop the writing skills currently
in demand. Instead of a textbook or writing manual, this work focuses on fundamental professional
writing concepts rather than language-level instruction.

   One significant lack of Professional Writing and Communications for Business, for example, is the lack
of guidance regarding grammar, syntax, sentence structure, and other finer points. There are several
reasons for this:

     · I lack the expertise in those skills to speak to them adequately.
     · Two outstanding resources, Professional Writing Today, by Sam Schecter, and Technical and

         Professional Writing Genres, by Michael Beilfuss, Staci Bettes, and Katrina Peterson cover a lot
         of ground. Several chapters from each have been incorporated into this OER for the
         convenience of my colleagues. See the References page for further information.
     · Many professionals (and students) use tools like Grammarly as well as the built-in functions of
         their writing tools.
     · Many of these tools, particularly Google Docs and Microsoft Word, have implemented AI
         assistants that can offer suggestions when prompted. I have added a chapter to help exploit
         these tools for these purposes.

The ambition of this resource is to be a "living document" that is regularly maintained and revised to
reflect technological and professional changes as they emerge.

   Several key principles motivate the guidance offered in this work. I've found these principles to be
important in the classroom but even more so in the workplace.

     · Writing is a technology. No one is born knowing how to write and it is a tool that must be
         learned. It is also a tool that is rarely mastered. Even professional journalists, authors, and
         professors need editors to proofread, make suggestions, and share their points of view.

     · Writing is hard and requires practice. Like any technology, it takes time to acquire basic
         skills in writing. It takes many more to reveal your writing "voice," and only a few of us would
         ever be considered masters of the craft.

In its current version (Spring 2025), this resource is designed to work with Writing Foundations
courses at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay (UWGB) or another college. The specific course
this resource has been created for, Professional Writing for Business Majors, focuses on the writing
skills sought by regional business leaders, UWGB colleagues, and the students participating in my
courses.

   This work was reviewed and copyedited by Kephren Pritchett through the generous support of the
Cofrin Library.

                                                                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 3
4 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

My name is Kristopher (Kris) Purzycki, and I am an Assistant
Professor at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay. Although I've
been a writing, media, and humanities instructor for over a decade,
this work also draws from my experiences as a designer, visual
artist, public communications officer, and multimedia creator.

   Professional Writing and Communications for Business was created
to address the questions and concerns of the students who have
participated in my courses. Their feedback has also helped revise
much of the content herein. In that spirit, please direct any
questions, critiques, and suggestions to me at purzyckk@uwgb.edu.

                                                                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 5
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work is dedicated to all students with the sincerest hopes that they find personal and professional
success in a world that feels much more uncertain than when I was on that side of the desk.

   Professional Writing and Communications for Business was only possible because of the OER Program
at UWGB. Special thanks go to the directors of that program, especially Kate Farley, whose patience,
collaboration, and memes made the development of this project a joy.

   Thanks also go out to Carli Reinecke, our OER Librarian, who has proven to be a dedicated
advocate of open-access resources and an invaluable guide in forming this work.

   A huge thanks goes out to Kephren Pritchett, who reviewed and copyedited the resource. Her work
was generously supported by Carli Reinecke and Paula Ganyard, Cofrin Library Director.

   Special thanks also go out to Dr. Jennie Young, who took a gamble by replacing the textbook for
WF 200 with this project.

   Thanks to Dr. Paul Belanger, whose course materials helped determine which subjects to focus on.
Since this project began, we've begun redesigning WF 200 to be more adaptive to generative AI, and
his guidance and contributions are peppered throughout (most significantly, the "four-eyed" model
used to organize this resource.

   One of the priorities of this project has been to provide the flexibility to respond to trends and
technologies, and this latest phase of the information age should ensure constant updates.

   My thanks go out to all the individuals and teams whose efforts helped me develop Professional
Writing and Communications for Business. To expedite matters, portions of two exceptional OER have
been incorporated into this work: Professional Writing Today, by Sam Schecter, and Technical and
Professional Writing Genres, by Michael Beilfuss, Staci Bettes, and Katrina Peterson.

   Other Creative Commons-licensed works have also been used, as well as resources from our UW-
Green Bay campus. The list of these resources follows:

     · Beilfuss, M., Bettes S., and Peterson, K. Technical and professional writing genres. PressBooks.
         https://open.library.okstate.edu/technicalandprofessionalwriting/

     · Schecter, S. Professional writing today: A functional approach. PressBooks.
         https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/communicating/

     · University of Wisconsin-Green Department of Bay Career Planning & Professional
         Connections.

     · University of Wisconsin-Green Bay Cofrin Library

ADAPTATION STATEMENT

Portions of Business Communication for Success have been incorporated as a section, "Group
Communication, Teamwork, and Leadership." This work was produced and distributed under a
Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-SA) in 2010 by a publisher who has requested that they
and the original author not receive attribution. The 2015 adapted edition was produced by the

6 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
University of Minnesota Libraries Publishing, and is available online at: http://open.lib.umn.edu/
businesscommunication/. Please see the forward of the section for more details specific to this OER.

   Portions from Arley Cruthers's Business Writing for Everyone, have also been adapted into this
resource. Specifically, the chapters on "Emails," "Inclusive Language" and "Plain Language." Business
Writing For Everyone is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0
International License, except where otherwise noted.

                                                                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 7
COPYRIGHT INFORMATION

   Professional Writing for Business is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

   You are free to:
     · Share -- copy and redistribute the material in any medium or format
     · Adapt -- remix, transform, and build upon the material

The licensor cannot revoke these freedoms as long as you follow the license terms.
   Under the following terms:
     · Attribution -- You must give appropriate credit, provide a link to the license, and indicate if
         changes were made. You may do so in any reasonable manner, but not in any way that
         suggests the licensor endorses you or your use.
     · NonCommercial -- You may not use the material for commercial purposes.
     · ShareAlike -- If you remix, transform, or build upon the material, you must distribute your
         contributions under the same license as the original.
     · No additional restrictions -- You may not apply legal terms or technological measures that
         legally restrict others from doing anything the license permits.

Notices:
     · You do not have to comply with the license for elements of the material in the public domain
         or where your use is permitted by an applicable exception or limitation.
     · No warranties are given. The license may not give you all of the permissions necessary for
         your intended use. For example, other rights such as publicity, privacy, or moral rights may
         limit how you use the material.

8 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
                               PART I.

INSIGHTS: FUNDAMENTAL CONCEPTS

                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 9
10 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 1.

THE FOUR I'S: QUALITIES OF PROFESSIONAL WRITING

When my colleague Dr. Paul Belanger and I were redesigning our writing course, we often joked
about the dizzying number of what I affectionately call the "C models" found in writing studies. These
models are intended to be easy-to-remember formulae for recalling important tenets of professional
writing. What we found funny was that these models vary in range from four up to ten. Arley
Cruthers, whose excellent OER Business Writing for Everyone provided several chapters for this
resource, includes a chapter on "Sailing the 7 Cs." It doesn't help that the professional organization
for writing instructors--the Conference on College Composition and Communication--is commonly
called the "4Cs."

   Clarity, concision, consistency, and coherence are some of the most common among these C
models. Dr. Belanger and I followed this pattern when devising a rubric that addressed generative
artificial intelligence usage: connection, cognition, content, and construction. My colleague recently
suggested we tweak our rubric and replace the C terms with comparable words that begin with the
letter "I." This was due to Dr. Belanger's experience, "telling students that they put the `I' into AI"
(Teams chat, Jan. 13, 2025).

   Brilliant!
   Insight, information, implementation, and interconnection became the new rubric for our course
and the guiding structure for this resource. Replacing "accountability" is also "integrity," a value we
both find crucial for professional writing in the age of GAI. This revision, in turn, led to a welcome
reorganization of this resource. Readers will likely encounter remnants of the original rubric and
other "C models" used by the authors curated for this resource. Riffing off of a common taunt aimed
at eyeglass-wearing folks like myself, what follows is an introduction to this "four-eyed" model and
how each category is defined:

THE "FOUR-EYED" MODEL FOR PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATIONS

What follows is an overview of the four pillars that help structure and organize this resource. This
structure mimics the learning objectives of Dr. Belanger and my curriculum re-design of our business
writing course. As mentioned, this re-design aims to accommodate high demand for the course.
Ultimately, however, the criteria below address the changing demands of students by educators and
future employers. The workforce is already changing and will continue to change. Our graduates will
be expected to guide those organizations fortunate to hire them through these changes.

INSIGHT

One of the strengths of GAI is its capacity for illuminating connections among subjects. The flip
side of this, however, is that these connections are not contextualized by the lived experiences,
histories, cultures, and perspectives of humans. These insights help us contextualize information and
hopefully guide us to use that information for the betterment of our communities. One of the ways

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 11
we strengthen our powers of insight is through critical reading, engaging with texts and interpreting
them through our lived experience and world knowledge. GAI can help us with the how, but it takes
human insight to understand why.

   Applied critique can reveal a new understanding and innovations, which is reinforced
through reflection. We take for granted that the information we take in has been processed over time
through discourse, debate, and experimentation. Being a part of a professional discourse community
requires sharing our insights. This expression of knowledge is a creative act that the developers of
GAI have worked hard to echo through simulated insight. Without the human powers of insight,
critique, and reflection, however, the responses provided by GAI tools should be taken with a healthy
dose of skepticism.

INFORMATION

Before we express our newly-formed insights in a professional setting, it is best to check our
perspectives and beliefs through research and other forms of verification. Producing information
from our insights is a process that is slow. Conducting research, for example, takes time when done
correctly. In laboratories and library stacks, we are engaging in various forms of experimentation,
testing our insights and beliefs against the forces of nature as well as the debates of other experts.
This process can be uncomfortable. Many of us do not like to be wrong and avoid confrontation.
Transforming our insights into information and innovation, however, often demands that we
revise--and even discard--our beliefs. This presents one of the principal challenges of our day.
Information that is manipulated to misrepresent reality can have disastrous and lethal effects.

   When our research is properly and ethically conducted, and we allow for our insights and
perspectives to change in reflection to our findings, we avoid the risk of misinforming others.
It is also a good method of ensuring that we are not engaging with misinformation--or worse,
disinformation, the presenting of false information to manipulate others. ChatGPT and other GAI
tools have, to date, struggled to overcome issues with misinformation (getting the facts wrong). The
term "hallucinations" was often used to describe the tendency of GAI to create information that
seemed genuine. ChatGPT's job is to provide us with the information we want in a natural manner,
so it is prone to generating misinformation. Which means that we often have to verify any responses
these tools provide!

IMPLEMENTATION

Several years ago (before the release of ChatGPT), I noticed that the cover letters students were
writing seemed similar. Although the writers of those letters did a good job of expressing interest in
a job and sharing their experience, some of them shared similar grammatical styles and structures.
For starters, it was perfect. Students consistently wrote with the mastery of most copyeditors. So
consistent were these perfections, I found myself having to check grammar guidelines because they
contradicted my own understanding of those arcane rules (turns out I was wrong!). In conversations
with students, it turned out they were using Grammarly, a pumped-up spellchecker that also helps
with grammar, syntax, and structure.

   Grammarly and other tools are immensely helpful in "ironing out the wrinkles" in our writing--to a
point. As students have pointed out, Grammarly and GAI tools iron out too many wrinkles. Everything
sounds the same: flat and vanilla. It may be perfect writing, but it isn't human. So while GAI should

12 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
not be used to generate insights and cautiously used (if at all) to provide information, these tools do a
decent job of implementing conventional forms into original work. Is there a catch? Of course.

   As my example above illustrates, artificially-generated or edited language is "flat" and has become
more recognizable as GAI-generated content takes over popular media. Words like "delve" and
"leverage," for instance, have become signals that GAI tools were probably used. Consider this in light
of the fact that we are extremely suspicious and distrusting of things that pretend to be human, and
you can see why we should be reluctant to rely on ChatGPT too much--even for light editing!

   Going forward, I anticipate that GAI will become better at adopting our individual "voice" and
we will be able to generate content that actually sounds more like us (wrinkles and all). Even when
that day comes, we should be cautious about relying on these technologies. Along with insight and
information creation, the implementation of our thinking is part of this recursive process of
writing. In organizing this very page, for example, I felt that the order of the "four eyes" was awkward
and somewhat illogical. As I compose this section, I have found myself ping-ponging between this and
other sections to make sure I'm consistent. Could ChatGPT help me with this? Perhaps. But I would
be missing out on my own learning, curtailing the writing-thinking relationship that is vital (another
Grammarly term) to our professional selves.

INTERFACE

The rote definition of interface is the point at which two or more complex systems interact with one
another. We most often use the term to describe a form of technology: I am writing this using the
keyboard to provide input to my computer; the monitor displays that the words I intended to type
were input correctly; I click save on the website interface to ensure I don't lose my work. Several
complex systems are in play--computational, internet networks, writing platforms--and engaged
through a variety of interfaces. The primary form of interaction with GAI is also through interfaces.
One of the reasons that GAI has become such a phenomenon is due to the "natural" way we humans
can interface with enormously complex machine learning (ML) and natural language processing
(NLP) systems.

   But this popular, computationally-focused definition often ignores that individual creatures are
also complex systems. We interface with one another through face-to-face dialog, writing, images,
artwork, music, games, text messages...The focus of this resource are those interfaces--the forms of
communication we use to interface with other professionals--and strengthening our interfaces so
that they are appropriate to our situation. As we will discuss, this requires an audience-centered
approach that employs empathy and considers the needs of those we are communicating with.
Whether it's one-on-one peer review or giving presentations to a room of professional colleagues,
the content of our interfacing should always be guided by our audience.

INTEGRITY

One of the understated priorities of education is helping us develop personal codes of conduct that
are the foundation of being good citizens. Across the United States, there are laws and policies that
serve to create a national ethical code for the citizenry. These layers of policy, law, and rules are
designed to inform the proper, acceptable behaviors expected of all people living in America. States
apply another layer of educational standards that further reinforce those values prized by our regional
communities. Both national and state policies are parsed out into guidelines and rules of conduct

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 13
by school systems. In most classes, we begin each semester reviewing these ethical codes. In some
courses, such as the Business Ethics course taught here at the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay,
these are further unpacked, evaluated, and discussed.

   Slightly different are the moral codes that guide our ability to distinguish right from wrong. Unlike
ethics, morals may not be defined by policy and law but are often unspoken agreements between
individuals in a community. Ideally, these morals help guide us to pursue good and avoid, or at least
reduce, the harm done to others. Like laws, they change and adapt to new information. As history
through today's news affirm, however, moral codes are as varied as individuals. We can't always agree
on what's acceptable, nor do we define what is right and wrong the same.

   I mention this because GAI has prompted us to pause and think about these codes. Writing courses
the world over are wrestling with the morality of using GAI to conduct writing. Many instructors
are sympathetic to the students and professionals who are being bombarded by different ethical
and moral codes. Is using ChatGPT plagiarism? Is it cheating? Is using Grammarly to polish my
writing acceptable? What about the spellchecker in my word processing software? Is Google search
okay for research? What about Wikipedia? In my lifetime, there have been several of these "pauses"
that have raised debates in our schools, making us confront long-standing ethical and moral codes.
Unfortunately, our schools have become debate halls over this matter.

   Why are these codes important? Because trust is important! In our academic writing, for example,
it is why we quote others in a way that reflects their intentions and cite their work accordingly. As
an instructor, it is how I recognize your integrity as a student. In business, trust is fundamental to
building those relationships that are crucial to any successful business. Would you buy a product
from a manufacturer who you knew compromised safety to increase profits? What about a restaurant
reported to have failed multiple health inspections? Trust is a value that can be hard to win, but very
easy to lose. Sometimes trust is built on fessing up, coming forward, and accepting the consequences.

   Regardless of where GAI takes us, accountability is certain to become a highly-prized professional
value going forward. Whether or not we use ChatGPT to assist us with writing, it is we who are
responsible for our communications. Being accountable for our choices--even when they're not
the best--is one facet of professional integrity, a code of conduct that includes honesty, fairness,
transparency, and other qualities. This code is comparable to the academic integrity policies that
discourage plagiarism and other ethical breaches.

   A professional of integrity writes in a manner that reflects their adherence to these principles. At
the college level, you are expected to act with integrity but also develop those ethical qualities that
are important to your field. Just like writing classrooms worldwide, the world of business is currently
wrestling with the effects that GAI will have on these codes. Is using ChatGPT plagiarism? Is using
GAI to communicate confidential information to clients appropriate? There are many debates (and
lawsuits) that are posing similar questions and it will be you--tomorrow's professional--that will have
to be accountable for the new expectations, conventions, and ethics that will emerge.

   A short, concluding section ("Integrity") that addresses the use of GAI in professional
communications is currently being developed for this OER. In writing this section, I assume that
readers will have knowledge about the rules their schools and employers have regarding GAI usage.
I am not, at this time, equipped to direct writers in their morals either. This is simply because the
expectations for GAI usage are so varied, dynamic, and fluid at this time.

   The one certainty is that we will continue to be accountable for our writing, be expected to conduct
our professional and personal affairs with integrity, and be ethical and moral citizens.

14 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 15
CHAPTER 2.

GENRE CONVENTIONS

In a business writing context, genre

conventions are standards we follow to meet

professional expectations. These conventions

apply to the form (style, formatting, and

structure) as well as the content (language, tone,

imagery) of the writing. Because a reader

recognizes these conventions, they can more

efficiently locate and review the information

they need. Meeting the expectations of your

reader is, therefore, extremely important, as

defying those conventions can signal a lack of

professionalism.

That's not to say these "traditions" of business

writing are impervious to change. Consider the

memo (fig. 1), for example. Because of

technology and other changes, email has

replaced memos for many uses. Still, more than

just a list of necessary components, these

conventions signal that the writer recognizes the

expectations of a professional community.

Because the values of those communities change

over time, genre conventions may change as well     Fig. 1: Memo from Lee Joannes, Green Bay Packers President.
to reflect the community's perspective.             Courtesy of the Cofrin Library Archives.

   On a practical level, following genre

conventions regarding form is also important for efficient readability. For example, emails that adhere

to professional standards contain a short yet specific subject line that can help the recipient determine

the nature of the message without even opening it. Reports and other longer forms of writing also

follow genre conventions but are often adapted to reflect an organization's in-house style and

branding.

Incorporating genre conventions into personal branding can be a worthwhile challenge for those

whose professions rely upon creativity and innovation. Custom-designed stationery, for instance,

should provide the same information in a familiar fashion so that the recipient may still locate

important contact information.

16 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
        FOLLOW BUSINESS CONVENTIONS

           Conventionality refers to your ability to conform to professional expectations (format, style, etc.). For
        instance, a résumé looks like a résumé, a report looks like a report, and an email looks like an email.
        Following conventions is important in business because it implicitly signals that you belong in the
        community. You know the rules, and you know how to follow them. Alternatively, if you break the mold,
        you do it with high-quality creativity so that your receiver has no doubt that you still know the rules and
        belong in the community.

        Conventions of business communication are culturally bound.

        They differ from country to country and, to a lesser extent, from

        organization to organization or industry to industry. Generally,      This section is excerpted
        conventions remain fairly constant and slow to change, although    from Business Communication:
        they may change rapidly with new technologies or as societal       Five Core Competencies, by
        standards change.                                                  Kristen Lucas; Jacob D.

        You can see some of the changes to conventions most vividly in     Rawlins; and Jenna Haugen

        how people dress for business, how email technologies have

        changed how people write memos, and how text messaging and

        instant messaging have changed the way people write emails. For

        example, dress codes have become decidedly more relaxed following the COVID-19
        pandemic.1 Communication has become somewhat more casual over the years, and it has become more
        common for business people to use emojis in emails.3

        IDENTIFY AND FOLLOW CONVENTIONS

           So, how do you identify conventions, especially in business writing and presentations? There are
        numerous examples provided in books, from how to write cover letters to how to develop a PowerPoint
        presentation. We won't go into details of all the different conventions here. Instead, we offer basic steps you
        can follow to learn what the conventions are for any type of message.

        Gather Examples of a Particular Message Type (business letters, annual reports, etc.)

           These will be most helpful if they are gathered from within your own company or at least your own
        industry. You can also search the Internet for examples of any kind of document.

        Look for Similarities Across the Examples

           These can be in how things are formatted (fonts, colors, white space), how content is ordered, or even
        how particular turns of phrase are used with regularity. The similarities you notice are the standards of the
        conventions.

           For example, if you look at business letters, you will likely notice several similarities. Business letters
        normally appear on some form of company letterhead (i.e., the stationery with the company logo). The

1. 2
2. [1]
3. 4
4. [2]

                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 17
      information is ordered in the same way (date, name, and address of the receiver, a salutation, the letter
      itself, and a signature block). Paragraphs are single-spaced with blank lines in between. Those are the
      standards, and you should not deviate from them.

          Look for Differences Across the Examples

         Now, look for ways in which the documents differ from each other. The differences demonstrate where
      there is wiggle room.

         Things that might look different are varying fonts. Sometimes the salutation uses "Dear," and sometimes
      not. Sometimes the closing says "Sincerely," but other times it says "Regards," "Best," or something similar.
      Sometimes, paragraphs are indented, and sometimes they are not. Those are the areas of wiggle room. In
      those regards, you can use your judgment and personal preference to decide how you want to write the
      letter.

          Check for Company Guidelines

         Another thing to keep in mind is that your company may have its own strict guidelines for how it wants
      messages to be formatted. Company standards are more common in large companies than in small ones.
      For instance, your company may have a designated template to use for PowerPoint presentations that
      includes approved company colors, fonts, and logos. These can be called "brand standards," and they are
      particularly important if you are communicating with external receivers.

         BREAK CONVENTIONS CAREFULLY

         In some instances, you may decide you want to break the conventions to catch your receiver's attention.
      You can do this by exhibiting high-quality creativity. The catch is that any time you break the conventions,
      it must be both high quality and creative. Anything less risks looking like an unprofessional error. You have
      to decide whether the potential payoff of breaking the convention to catch attention is worth the risk of
      being judged as unprofessional or incompetent.

         Résumés are a common document in which people break conventions. Let's face it: The job market is
      competitive, and you need to stand out. Unconventional approaches to résumés can include things like
      infographics, online portfolios, video showcases, and QR codes that link to websites or blogs.5
      Nontraditional formats like these can draw positive attention and show off your skills--especially if you
      are seeking a job in a creative field. But other human resource professionals warn that creative résumés
      may actually prevent you from getting called for an interview. If you are not sure about your ability to
      demonstrate both high quality and creativity, you are more likely to have a better outcome following the
      established conventions.

            1. For a story about how dress codes have become more relaxed since the COVID-19 pandemic,
                 check out Rachel Martin and Milton Guevara, "The Pandemic Has Changed Workplace
                 Fashion. What Does That Mean to You?" NPR, July 7, 2022, https://www.npr.org/2022/07/07/
                 1109317208/pandemic-workplace-fashion. 

            2. Research has shown that when leaders use emojis, it can help them better communicate with
                 their employees and reduce defensiveness. See Tomoko Yokoi and Jennifer Jordan, "Using
                 Emojis to Connect with Your Team," Harvard Business Review, May 30, 2022, https://hbr.org/
                 2022/05/using-emojis-to-connect-with-your-team. 

5. 6
6. [3]

   18 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
         3. See Cheryl Vaughn, "The 7 Best Alternative Resume Formats for Professionals," Make Use Of,
              February 19, 2022, https://www.makeuseof.com/best-alternative-resume-for-professionals/. 

GENRE VS. MEDIUM VS. PLATFORM

One important distinction to be mindful of is the difference between genre and medium. While genre
refers to the type of document you are composing, the medium describes the method you are using to
distribute that document. These two are similar in that the purpose and audience for your document
will determine both. In the example above, the genre used is a memo while the medium is good old-
fashioned paper!

   To add to this, we might also consider the platform being used to distribute your documents. How
would Mr. Joannes distribute his memo? At the time, it was probably snail mail sent through the post
office. In this case, the post office is providing a service which is the foundation of any platform:
identifying which service we use will likely be determined by the medium used but, more importantly,
can help us better adapt our professional voice to that platform.

   Reviewing each medium and platform is beyond the scope of this resource, but be sure to consider
these factors for each professional writing genre we encounter.

   Aisha, the Marketing Intern

      Aisha, a marketing manager at a tech startup, has been asked to create a promotional piece about their
   new productivity app. Her boss, David, initially only offers vague instructions: "Get the word out there,
   Aisha! Make it exciting!"

      As she sits down to plan, Aisha realizes she needs to clarify a few things before she starts creating. She
   heads to David's office for a quick meeting.

      "David, about this promo piece... to make sure I'm on the right track, can you help me figure out some
   specifics?"

      "Sure thing, Aisha," he replies. "What do you need?"
      "First, what genre are we thinking? Should this be a blog post, a social media campaign, a video
   explainer, or something else entirely?"
      David thinks for a moment. "You know, a video explainer would be great! Short, snappy, gets the point
   across."
      "Okay, great! Now, what about the medium? Should we create a high-definition video for our website, or
   maybe a simpler animated video for social media?"
      "Let's go for high-definition. We want to showcase how sleek and user-friendly the app is."
      "Perfect. So I'm thinking that the platform we will use to distribute this will be our website. We can also
   post high-def videos to our business profiles on YouTube and LinkedIn. These also provide low-res options
   which will help accessibility."

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 19
   "Excellent point, Aisha," David beams. "I hadn't thought about that. But what about email to clients and
other social media platforms? Won't high def videos be too big?"

   Aisha thinks for a second before responding. "For email," she begins, "we can share a thumbnail image
with a link to the video. For social media accounts, we can also export lower resolution videos."

   "Hot diggity, Aisha--that sounds perfect!"

   --

   Aisha leaves David's office with a clear understanding of her task. By determining the genre, medium,
and platform, she can now create a targeted and effective promotional piece for the new app.

   If we were to break this down into a rubric, we might come up with something like this:

Question                                               Genre               Medium                    Platform

   What type of content will best showcase the app        Video explainer     N/A - Medium is           N/A - Platform is
and its features? What is the purpose of this                              not relevant to the type  about distribution, not
promotional piece? What kind of tone and style            N/A - Genre is   of content, but rather    the content itself.
should it have?                                        about the type of   its format.
                                                       content, not its                                 N/A - Platform is
   What format will be most engaging and effective     format.                High-definition        about where content is
for our target audience? What level of visual quality                      video                     shared, not the format of
do we need? What are our production resource              N/A - Genre is                             the content.
constraints?                                           about the type of      N/A - Medium is
                                                       content, not its    about the format of the      Website, YouTube,
   Where does our target audience spend their time     distribution.       content, not its          LinkedIn, Facebook,
online? What platforms will give us the best reach?                        distribution.             Instagram
What are the best platforms for sharing
high-definition video content?

   GAI USAGE

   This scenario and chart were generated by Google Gemini, a generative AI platform, and then edited by
me. How do you think I used GAI to create these? What prompts do you think I used? Can you identify
what edits I made to the scenario? What skills did I need to accomplish this?

20 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 3.

FUNDAMENTAL PROFESSIONAL WRITING GENRES

Although there are many business writing genres, it is helpful to first focus on some fundamental
formats and break down the qualities of each. This can help compare how each is different as well
as the similarities between them. The table below provides an easy reference for the writing genres
found in this resource.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 21
                                                                             Table 1. Breakdown of Fundamental Bus

                 Genre                      Purpose            Audience                               Content
Formal Business Letter
Internal Memo           To conduct business activities in a    External audience, such as    Typically includes a formal salutation, a clear and concise W
Email                   professional and formal manner         clients, customers, or partners message, and a professional in
Job Application                                                                              closing co
Cover Letter
Press Release           To communicate internally within an organization, often for Internal audience, such as Short and to the point, Si
Business Plan                                                  employees or colleagues       addressing a specific issue or lin
                        announcements, updates, or policy
Research Brief                                                 within the same organization topic
                        changes
LinkedIn Profile
                        To communicate quickly and                                           Can vary widely depending L
                                                                                             on the purpose and audience, m
                        efficiently with individuals or groups, Internal or external audiences but should be clear and w
                        both internally and externally
                                                                                             concise                     co

                        To express interest in a job opening                                 Tailored to the specific job, emphasizing the applicant's Fo

                        and highlight the applicant's          Hiring managers or recruiters skills and experiences a

                        qualifications                                                       relevant to the position an

                        To distribute news and                 Focuses on newsworthy Journalists, editors, and the events, providing key St

                        announcements to media outlets and general public                    information and quotes for he
                        journalists                                                          journalists to use an

                                                                                             Includes sections on the

                        To outline the goals, strategies, and financial projections for a business or Investors, lenders, or internal company's mission, products Fo or services, market analysis, a
                                                               stakeholders
                        project                                                              financial projections, and  in

                                                                                             management team

                        To provide a concise summary of        Includes a clear overview of  Structured with headings and C
                        research findings or a specific topic  the research question,
                                                               methodology, key findings,    subheadings to organize     us
                                                               and conclusions
                                                                                             information logically       la

                        To create an online professional       Other professionals, potential Includes sections on the St individual's work experience, hi
                        presence and network with other        employers, or recruiters
                        professionals                                                        education, skills, and interests se

22 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
Genre                            Purpose                  Audience  Content

                         To present information or ideas to an Typically includes a title slide, an introduction, body slides Organized with a clear flow C
Presentation Slide Deck  audience in a clear and concise  with supporting information, of information, using visuals ap

                         manner                           and a conclusion and bullet points an

GAI Usage

   The table above was generated by uploading a PDF of this resource to Google Gemini. By providing GAI
tools with content this way, we can limit and guide the responses provided. There was plenty of editing to
do still. How might you use this approach in your GAI usage? What measures should we take to ensure the
content produced is accurate and effective? How might we improve the integrity of this table?

                                          PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 23
CHAPTER 4.

RHETORICAL APPEALS

Like any form of communication, writing aims to establish and maintain (as well as occasionally sever)
connections with an audience. In addition to defining "audience," this chapter also describes some
ways to better assess and accommodate our readers. In addition, we'll consider some strategies for
better understanding our audience's needs and how our writing can best address those needs.

   You might be surprised to know that the foundation of modern communication strategies has
deep roots in ancient Greece. Although Plato (~427-347 B.C.E.) advocated for clear and thoughtful
speech, the philosopher was not especially fond of writing. In Phaedrus (~370 B.C.E.), he describes the
written word as an "invention [that] will produce forgetfulness in the minds of those who learn to
use it, because they will not practice their memory" (Bizzell & Herzberg 165). Although Plato was
skeptical of writing, he offered many important teachings about the power of communication (even
if he favored the spoken word over the written one). For Plato, knowledge was developed through
engaged dialog rather than reading through an unresponsive text.

   Aristotle (384-322 B.C.E.), on the other hand, was a champion of writing despite being one of
Plato's students. In his notes and lectures collected in Rhetoric, Aristotle unpacks rhetoric as "the
available means of persuasion" (Bizzell & Herzberg 181). Published nearly 2500 years ago, the Rhetoric
presented many of the strategies used for communicating to this day. The majority of these strategies
cannot be covered here. One important concept to discuss, however, is what we often refer to as the
"rhetorical triangle." This triangle is comprised of three primary methods of persuasion, ethos, pathos,
and logos.

     · Ethos describes using one's credibility to develop a trusting connection with an audience. A
         diploma or certification, for example, is one way to demonstrate training and knowledge,
         therefore creating credibility. These "ethical" appeals can be subtle and less obvious but are
         extremely powerful.

     · Pathos is the use of emotions to compel an audience to behave a certain way. These
         "passionate" appeals are often more overt than ethos but are exceptionally persuasive. Think
         about some of the advertisements you've seen--what emotions are used to convince you to
         buy products or check out a website?

     · Logos is a complex rhetorical strategy that is essentially the use of "logic" and reasoning to
         persuade an audience. This appeal also relies upon evidence and proof to persuade an
         audience that your message is true. By extension, this sense of "truth" is implied in order,
         structure, and cohesive design.

As you may have guessed, these concepts are not exclusive nor distinct but overlap and blend. These
appeals are also subjective, which means that they are interpreted differently by each individual.
A politician, for example, may seem ethical and credible to many. For others, however, that same

24 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
politician may be entirely unbelievable. Time, culture, background, social and economic status and
many other factors also impact the rhetorical power of a text.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 25
CHAPTER 5.

KNOWING YOUR AUDIENCE

Understanding one's audience is extremely

important         when  composing      effective

communications. Although we might be able to

define "audience," how do we get to know that

audience well enough to connect with them? In this

chapter, we'll first unpack the complex definition of

the audience and then consider some fundamental

strategies for connecting with various communities

and individuals.

AUDIENCE DEFINED

Everything from music to board games, smartphone       Photo by Derzsi Elekes Andor, CC BY-SA 3.0, via Wikimedia
interfaces to architecture, is designed with the       Commons
audience, user, or player in mind. But what do we

mean by "audience"? Who are they and how do their perspectives determine our message? Douglas

Park once wrote that audience, "points to the final cause for which form exists, to the

purposefulness--or its lack--that makes a certain piece of prose shapely and full of possibility or

aimless and empty" (p. 247). Park is telling us, in other words, that the audience determines the design

and goal of any work.

As you can guess, Park's definition provided here is a good start but only scratches the surface.

When we post an update to social media, for example, we are not simply addressing one audience but

several: family, friends, and colleagues, as well as their acquaintances. Have you ever edited a post to

accommodate certain groups?

My own rough, general definition of "audience" is any individual or group who receives some form

of communication. When we dig a little deeper into this definition, we can start to see how much

more complicated the audience can be.

PRIMARY, SECONDARY, AND PERIPHERAL AUDIENCES

Before we focus on the various aspects and qualities of audiences, let's first broaden our scope to
identify which will be our priority. We should also be sure to consider those audiences that may be
interested in our message even though they may not be directly invested.

   In a professional setting, these questions and others are vital to sending the intended message.
Should the language of an email be formal or can it be casual? How much background information do
we need to provide in an annual report?

26 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
   As important as it is to understand your audience, doing so is a bit more complicated. This section
looks at some of the distinctions that may be considered when considering your audience.

   Let's begin by distinguishing what we mean by primary and secondary audiences.

Primary Audience

A primary audience is one for which any form of communication is intended. My writing should be
written according to my understanding of that person's needs and expectations. If I'm texting my
friends, for example, my language reflects the informal quality of our relationship. On the other hand,
if I'm writing a cover letter to a potential employer, my language is going to be formal, using clear
language (and no emojis!).

   In a private person-to-person setting, we are almost always writing to a primary audience. In a
more public setting, our primary audience is often made up of individuals we want to communicate
directly with. When I put together a music playlist online, I will add songs that I believe will interest
an audience interested in a particular genre of music. I might also add some tracks that I think fit into
the playlist and appeal to an audience.

   In many cases, we will be familiar with our primary audience and know the best means of
communicating with them. I don't typically have to think about how I'm going to text my family as
we have known each other a long time. In a professional setting, we often need to communicate to
primary audiences that we know very little or nothing about.

   Meeting Your Primary Audience's Needs
   In any case, the primary audience probably has a specific need or set of needs that must be
addressed by your writing. Whether or not you are familiar with your audience, you should first assess
what those needs are. Once those needs are recognized, they help determine several qualities of your
writing.
   Imagine that you receive an email from your supervisor asking about the status of a report that was
due...yesterday. While your report is complete, you had forgotten to send it after completing some
late-night revisions from home. You promptly begin writing a response. What does your supervisor
need?
   The report of course! You attach your completed report to the draft email and begin writing the
response email. Although you are addressing your supervisor's need (to obtain the report), the fact
that the report is late should also affect how you compose the actual email. Does your supervisor need
to know why the report is late? Is your response formal and apologetic?
   Many of these questions may seem obvious. What are some of the additional conditions that might
also factor into your response? How comfortable are you with your supervisor? Is this your first time
being late with a project?

Secondary Audience

While every instance of communication has a primary audience in mind, many situations demand
we also consider our secondary audiences. These are the individuals and groups who may be interested
in our writing even though they are not those we have in mind when communicating. Secondary
audiences can be just as important as they may be impacted, often becoming our primary audience in
the process.

   Meeting Your Secondary Audience's Needs
   Once we have identified our secondary audience, we can begin assessing what their needs may

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 27
be. In many situations, we may want to focus on which of those needs align more closely with
our purpose. For an instruction manual on how to build a coffee table, for example, our secondary
audience may be those who want to see how difficult assembling the product might be. The
information you provide may be important in their decision to purchase the product. Clear
instructions are important, but offering additional methods for receiving help may also be a smart
addition. Contact information for a helpline with a positive, reassuring message ("Need help? Call
us!"), as well as clear imagery are other means.

   Addressing the secondary audience is important but we should also be careful not to overwhelm
the primary audience with information that may not be relevant. Providing alternative methods such
as links to webpages with additional guidance is a good strategy.

Peripheral Audiences

Much of our professional communications occur online, on social media, or in public venues.
Although good practice demands we consider primary and secondary audiences, it is best to also
consider those audiences that are more circumstantial. These "hidden" audiences are those that we are
not intentionally targeting with our message or product but may be affected in some way.

   Meeting Your Peripheral Audience's Needs
   Assessing the needs of the peripheral audience may not be a feasible priority. Peripheral audiences
may be impacted by your writing so you should be considerate of their needs and perspectives even
if you cannot tailor your message to them. Ideally, individuals from the periphery might be interested
enough to pursue further information. There are occasions, however, when unanticipated audiences
may take issue with your message. To address these issues, it is worth developing a mitigation plan for
quickly responding to individuals or communities who are negatively impacted by your writing.

AUDIENCE INTEREST LEVEL

Once we distinguish our primary and secondary audiences, we can begin thinking about the range of
interest levels with which audiences will engage with our work.

Intentional

An intentional audience is attentive to the work being communicated. They have likely sought out the
information for a purpose. Examples include research articles and government information.

Engaged

An engaged audience is willing to invest resources (such as time and money) into the purpose
conveyed through the work. When a non-profit organization requests volunteers, for example, it is
hoping to entice individuals who are aligned with the purpose of that organization or event.

Agreeable

Unlike dismissive audiences, those that are agreeable will receive your work with more interest than
a passive audience.

Passive

The passive audience encounters the work but is noncommittal to engaging with it further. A passive

28 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
audience is likely to be secondary or peripheral but can become a primary audience if the work
compels them to invest more interest.

Dismissive

Due to any number of factors, you'll eventually encounter an audience that simply rejects your work.
While this cannot be avoided, it's worth considering those dismissive audiences to help define the
scope of your message.

Hostile

Unfortunately, you may encounter audiences that are hostile to your work. There is no shortage of
daily news featuring hostile responses to social media. Other examples include delivering bad news.
A memo to employees letting them know that they will be laid off is an example of writing few of us
ever want to compose.

AUDIENCE QUALITIES

In addition to interest levels, we also need to consider the various qualities of our audience. These
qualities will help determine the language, terminology, design, attitude, and tone of our writing. The
list below is only partial, however. What other audience qualities can you think of?

Uninformed

These are audiences that have little to no background information on your work. An example of this
might be an instruction manual on how to build a wooden table for non-carpenters. The language
therefore should avoid complex concepts and terminology that is more commonly used among
experts.

Expert

Addressing an audience of experts means that you can present your work using terms and concepts
that are likely to be familiar to the reader. One of the issues with a lot of technical writing, for example,
is that it is often written for an audience of those familiar with fundamental concepts.

Social, economic, cultural

Works of professional and technical writing do not typically distinguish communities of different
social, economic, or cultural backgrounds. Not explicitly at least. When we are considering our
audience, however, it is important to use the opportunity to think about the perspectives of those
outside our own communities. Cultural differences in language use, for example, are why we avoid
clichés and figures of speech that may not be familiar to those for whom English is a second language.

Access and Accommodation

One of the principal challenges of modern technical and professional writers is writing in such a
way that accommodates all readers regardless of physical ability. Universal design, for example, is
an approach to communicating that better accommodates differences in sensory input (vision and
hearing) as well as physical ability. We will discuss this extremely important concept at a later time.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 29
30 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 6.

PLAIN LANGUAGE

While there was a time when many business documents

were written in the third person to give them the impression

of objectivity, this formal style was often passive and wordy.     Note: This chapter is
Today, it has given way to active, clear, concise writing,      excerpted from Arley
sometimes known as "plain English" (Bailey, 2008). Plain        Cruthers's Business Writing
language style involves everyday words and expressions in a     for Everyone (2021)

familiar group context and may include contractions. Many

people see plain language as an ethical means of

communication. For example, one legal expert rewrote

Instagram's terms of use to be in plain language, then showed her version to teenagers. They were

shocked by what Instagram was able to do with their photos, and would not have consented if they

had read the plain language version instead of the one written in complicated legal jargon.

No matter who your audience is, they will appreciate your ability to write using plain language.

Here are five principles for writing in plain language:

PRINCIPLE 1: USE ACTIVE VOICE

To use active voice, make the noun that performs the action the subject of the sentence and pair it
directly with an action verb.

   Read these two sentences:

· Matt Damon left Harvard in the late 1980s to start his acting career.
· Matt Damon's acting career was started in the late 1980s when he left Harvard.

In the first sentence, left is an action verb that is paired with the subject, Matt Damon. If you ask
yourself, "Who or what left?" the answer is Matt Damon. Neither of the other two nouns in the
sentence--Harvard and career--"left" anything.

   Now look at the second sentence. The action verb is started. If you ask yourself, "Who or what
started something?" the answer, again, is Matt Damon. But in this sentence, the writer placed
career--not Matt Damon--in the subject position. When the doer of the action is not the subject, the
sentence is in passive voice. In passive voice constructions, the doer of the action usually follows the
word by as the indirect object of a prepositional phrase, and the action verb is typically partnered with
a version of the verb to be.

Writing in the Active Voice

Writing in active voice is easy once you understand the difference between active and passive voice.
First, find the verb. Then, ask yourself who did the verb. Is the subject present?

                               PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 31
      Review Active vs. Passive Voice

      Identify the sentences with active voice:

         1. Mika kicked the ball.
         2. The ball was kicked by Mika.
         3. Great students attend Kwantlen Polytechnic University.
         4. The university is attended by great students.
         5. I made a mistake.
         6. Mistakes were made.

      Answers: 1, 3, and 5

Using the Passive Voice

While using the active voice is preferred, sometimes passive voice is the best option. For example,
maybe you don't know who's responsible for an action or you don't want to place the blame on
someone. For example, you might say "a lamp was broken at our recent party" to avoid saying who
broke the lamp.

PRINCIPLE 2: USE COMMON WORDS INSTEAD OF COMPLEX WORDS

Sometimes, new communicators believe that large words feel more appropriate to a business
environment. Also, the world is filled with wonderful, long words that are fun to use. Often, however,
long words cause more confusion. Worse than that, they can exclude anyone who doesn't understand
that particular word. Maybe you've had the experience of reading an academic article or textbook
chapter and having to read the same sentence three times over to try to figure out what it was trying
to say. Then, when you asked your instructor, they explained it in a simple way. If you've ever thought,
"Why didn't they just say it simply from the beginning?" you can understand the power of plain
language.

   Again, the trick is to use words that are appropriate to the audience, the context and your purpose.
As we've said, time is the biggest constraint, so simple words likely meet most audiences' needs. In
specialized environments, however, more complex words are required. For example, a lawyer has to
use specific, technical language to precisely lay out a case. A doctor has to use medical language to
convey a patient's exact symptoms and diagnosis.

   When you enter into a new workplace context, look at how your coworkers are writing to
determine the level of formality the situation requires. You can also use one of the many free online
tools such as Readability Formulas to determine the reading level of your writing. When you use these
tools, you copy and paste some text into the tool and it will estimate the reading level.

PRINCIPLE #3: USE A POSITIVE TONE WHENEVER POSSIBLE

Unless there is a specific reason not to, use positive language wherever you can. Positive language

32 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
benefits your writing in two ways. First, it creates a positive tone, and your writing is more likely to be
well-received. Second, it clarifies your meaning, as positive statements are more concise. Take a look
at the following negatively worded sentences and then their positive counterparts, below.

 Examples:
    Negative: Your car will not be ready for collection until Friday.

 Positive: Your car will be ready for collection on Friday.
    Negative: You did not complete the exam.

 Positive: You will need to complete the exam.
    Negative: Your holiday time is not approved until your manager clears it.

 Positive: Your holiday time will be approved when your manager clears it.

Writers don't just create a positive tone on the sentence level. They can also create this tone by
choosing what details to include. If something negative is unimportant to the reader, you can leave
it out. Kitty O. Locker called the practice of using "positive emphasis" (Locker, 2016) to meet your
audience's needs "You Attitude."

   This is especially important if a situation is negative to you but not the audience. For example,
imagine that you held a fundraiser that didn't raise as much money as you hoped. This might really
impact your budget and the future of some programs you run. But if you're sending out an email with
the goal of getting people to fill out a survey asking for ways to improve the fundraiser, none of this
matters.

   Read the following two examples, then ask yourself which version would make you more likely to
fill out the survey:

           Negative Details: Unfortunately, this year's Gala Under the Stars only raised half of its expected
        profit. This means that we will need to cancel our Little Stars after-school program and lay off
        part-time staff. Obviously, this is devastating to our organization, so we need to make sure it
        doesn't happen again. Please fill out this survey to help make the Gala Under the Stars better.

           Positive Details: Help us make Gala Under the Stars even better next year. Fill out this five-
        minute survey and be entered into a draw for two movie tickets.

In the first example, the reader has to wade through negative details in order to get to the survey.
They might not even read the email long enough to find out about the survey. In the second example,
however, the benefit to reader (free tickets) and what's being asked of them (to fill out a survey) is
listed first. Positive details don't just lead to a positive tone, they also help you fulfill the purpose of
the communication.

PRINCIPLE 4: WRITE FOR YOUR READER

When you write for your readers and speak to an audience, you have to consider who they are and
what they need to know. When readers know that you are concerned with their needs, they are more
likely to be receptive to your message, and will be more likely to take the action you are asking them
to and focus on important details.

   Your message will mean more to your reader if they get the impression that it was written directly
to them.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 33
Organize your Document to Meet your Readers' Needs

When you write, ask yourself, "Why would someone read this message?" Often, it is because the reader
needs a question answered. What do they need to know to prepare for the upcoming meeting, for
example, or what new company policies do they need to follow? Think about the questions your
readers will ask and then organize your document to answer them.

PRINCIPLE 5: KEEP WORDS AND SENTENCES SHORT (CONCISENESS)

It is easy to let your sentences become cluttered with words that do not add value to your message.
Improve cluttered sentences by eliminating repetitive ideas, removing repeated words, and editing to
eliminate unnecessary words.

Eliminating Repetitive Ideas

Unless you are providing definitions on purpose, stating one idea twice in a single sentence is
redundant.

Removing Repeated Words

As a general rule, you should try not to repeat a word within a sentence. Sometimes you simply need
to choose a different word, but often you can actually remove repeated words.

 Example:
    Original: The student who won the cooking contest is a very talented and ambitious student.
    Revision: The student who won the cooking contest is very talented and ambitious.

Rewording to Eliminate Unnecessary Words

If a sentence has words that are not necessary to carry the meaning, those words are unneeded and
can be removed.

 Examples:
    Original: Gagandeep has the ability to make the most fabulous twice-baked potatoes.
    Revision: Gagandeep makes the most fabulous twice-baked potatoes.
    Original: For his part in the cooking class group project, Malik was responsible for making the mustard reduction sauce.
    Revision: Malik made the mustard reduction sauce for his cooking class group project.

Avoid Expletive Pronouns (most of the time)

Many people create needlessly wordy sentences using expletive pronouns, which often take the form
of "There is ..." or "There are ...."

   Pronouns (e.g., I, you, he, she, they, this, that, who, etc.) are words that we use to replace nouns (i.e.,
people, places, things), and there are many types of pronouns (e.g., personal, relative, demonstrative,
etc.). However, expletive pronouns are different from other pronouns because unlike most pronouns,
they do not stand for a person, thing, or place; they are called expletives because they have no "value."
Sometimes you will see expletive pronouns at the beginning of a sentence, sometimes at the end.

 Examples:
    There are a lot of reading assignments in this class.
    I can't believe how many reading assignments there are!
    Note: These two examples are not necessarily bad examples of using expletive pronouns. They are included to help you

 first understand what expletive pronouns are so you can recognize them.

34 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
The main reason you should generally avoid writing with expletive pronouns is that they often cause
us to use more words in the rest of the sentence than we have to. Also, the empty words at the
beginning tend to shift the more important subject matter toward the end of the sentence. The above
sentences are not that bad, but at least they are simple enough to help you understand what expletive
pronouns are. Here are some more examples of expletive pronouns, along with better alternatives.

 Examples
    Original: There are some people who love to cause trouble.
    Revision: Some people love to cause trouble.
    Original: There are some things that are just not worth waiting for.
    Revision: Some things are just not worth waiting for.
    Original: There is a person I know who can help you fix your computer.
    Revision: I know a person who can help you fix your computer.

When you find yourself using expletives, always ask yourself if omitting and rewriting would give
your reader a clearer, more direct, less wordy sentence. Can I communicate the same message using
fewer words without taking away from the meaning I want to convey or the tone I want to create?

Choose Specific Wording

You will give clearer information if you write with specific rather than general words. Evoke senses
of taste, smell, hearing, sight, and touch with your word choices. For example, you could say, "My
shoe feels odd." But this statement does not give a sense of why your shoe feels odd, since "odd" is an
abstract word that does not suggest any physical characteristics. Or you could say, "My shoe feels wet."
This statement gives you a sense of how your shoe feels to the touch. It also gives a sense of how your
shoe might look as well as how it might smell, painting a picture for your readers.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 35
CHAPTER 7.

KEEP IT CONCISE: THE KISS PRINCIPLE

The KISS principle has less to do with a 1970s glam band, but is a saying to remind ourselves to
keep our writing concise. The first mention of the KISS principle is attributed to an aircraft engineer
named Kelly Johnson (Rich, 231). Johnson is best known for designing the SR-71 Blackbird, a long-
range, high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft that could reach speeds up to MACH 3. After retirement,
Johnson worked as a senior advisor with Lockheed. Here, his mantra, "Keep it simple, stupid," was a
reminder to design with minimal unnecessary features and functions that could create conflicts.

   Nowadays, the "stupid" is often replaced because the term can easily be interpreted as insulting.
However, Johnson believed military machines should be designed so that someone in a combat zone
could make repairs on the fly with basic tools. Therefore, the "stupid" is another adjective that
describes the lack of technical complexity.

KEEP IT SHORT AND SIMPLE

Although not the person responsible for re-interpreting the principle, Susan Rooks, writing as the
"Grammar Goddess," states that K.I.S.S. stands for "Keep it Short and Simple." According to Rooks,
the application of the K.I.S.S. principle entails the following:
Consider the reader's understanding of the subject. What do they know? What do they need to
know? Don't assume that they have the knowledge or perspective that you have--you're the expert!
Remember that, as a professional, you have expertise your audience may not have. Don't assume that
any concepts familiar to you are also to others. If you need to explain complex information
Keep sentences short. Less writing means less reading, which is important in busy professional
environments. Shorter statements mean that your meaning and purpose must retain nearly as much
meaning without losing clarity.
Stay away from jargon. Every profession uses jargon, or those terms and phrases familiar to
practitioners in that field. Business professions use terms and acronyms that most readers (myself
included) do not recognize or understand. In addition, many organizations have proprietary, or "in-
house," language that outsiders aren't privy to. Jargon should be avoided in most forms of professional
writing unless you are certain the audience will be familiar with them.

KEEP IT SHORT, SPECIFIC

I first encountered the KISS principle when taking computer programming courses. Although
"stupid" was still included at that time (and may still be), I still appreciate the slightly different take
of programmers, who applied it to ensure their programs would be easy to understand by other
programmers. "One of the most important ways to do this is to write clear code," describes veteran
software designer Martin Fowler, "making it easy to understand what the program is supposed to do"
(martinfowler.com).
In other words, good programmers will create code that accomplishes a specific task as clearly and

36 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
concisely as possible. If you're a non-programmer looking at a screen full of code, it probably looks
like gibberish. It may be surprising that, ideally, even non-programmers should be able to understand
what the program does by looking at the code. This would be accomplished the same way we write
professionally!

   In addition to Rook's strategies, use the following to keep your writing simple and specific:
     · Avoid generalizations. Terms like "society" and "the world" imply a significance rarely
         appropriate to professional writing. With nearly 8 billion individuals inhabiting the Earth, few
         experiences are universal. If referring to a specific population, take time to identify them.
         Recognize differences as often as possible and avoid sweeping statements that rely on
         common sense. This is one of the true hallmarks of a thoughtful professional!
     · Use precise terminology when necessary.
         Write out acronyms. Whenever we use an acronym, we write out the first usage, followed by
         the acronym in parentheses. For example: "As an instructor at the University of Wisconsin-
         Green Bay (UWGB), I have taught numerous writing courses."
     · Use headings and subheadings strategically. When you have a longer document, structure
         and organize your content using headings and subheads. Headings help categorize and
         manage your content, but too many can create more confusion. Avoid beginning each
         paragraph with a heading. Pay close attention to your hierarchy because screen readers also
         use these elements to read content aloud to those who use assistive devices. Please see the
         chapter in the Style section for more details.
     · Read your writing out loud. For those prone to run-on sentences (like yours truly), reading
         out loud is a great way to catch over-complicated sentences. You will not only hear some
         spelling and grammar errors but also get a better sense of the cadence and tone that your
         audience will be reading in. If you feel like you're winded after reading--simplify!

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 37
CHAPTER 8.

INCLUSIVE LANGUAGE

   Note: This chapter is           Good communicators include everyone and don't make
excerpted from Arley            assumptions about their readers. You can make your language
Cruthers's Business Writing     more inclusive by:
for Everyone (2024)
                             · Using the singular "they" instead of "he or she." For example,
                                instead of saying, "A communicator should understand his or
                                her audience," you could say, "A communicator should
                                understand their audience" or "Communicators should
                                understand their audience."

· Being specific when discussing a person's identity and using the terminology they prefer. For
   example, instead of saying "Marilyn Gabriel is a First Nations person," you could say "Marilyn
   Gabriel is a member of the Kwantlen Nation." Usually, a person's disability isn't relevant, but if
   it is, use neutral and specific language. For example, instead of saying "Brent is confined to a
   wheelchair" (which is both inaccurate, negative, and vague), you could say "Brent uses a
   wheelchair" or "Brent has cerebral palsy and uses a wheelchair." When in doubt, ask the
   person what terminology they prefer.

· Question the assumptions that you make about your audience. Consider that many of your
   readers might not share the same cultural values or experiences. For example, before writing a
   sentence like "Every child waits all year for Christmas morning," consider that many of your
   readers might not have shared this experience.

· Avoid expressions or idioms that would be confusing to English language learners.
   Workplaces are increasingly global, and your writing should be understood by people from
   many different backgrounds.

Words and phrases also often have complex histories. For example, often we don't think twice about
calling a decision "stupid" or "dumb," but these words have a long history rooted in harm against
people with cognitive or intellectual disabilities. One way that we can address ableism, racism, sexism,
xenophobia, fatphobia, and other forms of discrimination is to replace these words with words that
are more precise. For example, saying "our manager's decision is stupid" is vague, whereas "our
manager's decision will make life harder for the interns" or "our manager's decision ignores the data
that Cody presented at the meeting last week" is much more specific.

   You should be especially careful when writing about groups of people in a way that might reinforce
stereotypes. For example, in his book Elements of Indigenous Style, Gregory Younging discusses how
subtle bias can have a big impact when non-Indigenous people write about First Nations, Metis,
and Inuit people. For example, instead of portraying Indigenous people as victims, focus on their

38 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
"resilience, agency and future" (2018, p. 77). Instead of portraying an Indigenous culture as something
static that existed in the past, focus on how that culture is thriving and changing.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 39
40 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
                                                              PART II.

                 INFORMATION: RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONAL
                                               WRITING

Over this past summer, my home computer stopped working. Because I built the computer myself, I
don't have a company like Dell or Apple to turn to for tech support. To identify which part (or parts)
malfunctioned, I had to search online for guidance. I found numerous forums and sites with possible
information, but most of them were not helpful or ads for software cleverly disguised as blog posts or
articles.

  I eventually found instructions that helped me identify the problem. By
process of elimination, I was able to determine that the motherboard had
expired. I then discovered that the motherboard was no longer being
manufactured, which meant I had to now figure out a suitable replacement.
Computer technology quickly becomes obsolete so I had to be sure to buy
parts that were compatible. Before long, the cost of purchasing separate parts
prompted me to question whether or not I should just buy a pre-built computer
instead.

  This led me to look up computer manufacturers...

Throughout this process, research skills were vital to determining the cause of the malfunction, the
status of the part, the cost of replacement parts, and reliable computer brands. Much of my research
turned up bad or unhelpful information. Many of my questions were answered, but those answers
usually yielded more questions! Once I had the necessary information, I could compare my options,
analyze the costs and benefits, and choose. Even though the pre-built computer cost more, I decided
that the tech support and time it would take to build another computer from scratch made it
worthwhile.

It may not seem obvious from this sad tale of my broken computer, but
research is all about making an argument. These are rarely the type of
arguments made on a debate stage or that involve obnoxious siblings, friends,
or roommates. To make a professional argument, you are asserting a position
and providing evidence that supports that position.
In this scenario, my research helped me construct an argument for buying a
pre-built computer over building another one. In the world of business,
research is also used to construct arguments. Should this candidate be hired?

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 41
Could a new pizza restaurant succeed in a particular neighborhood? What data
can we use to determine whether or not a social media campaign is working?
What sorts of arguments are we making when we answer these questions?
What questions are among the most asked in your field?

In other words, conducting research is how we become part of the professional dialogue or
"conversation." With sufficient research, we can help ourselves, our coworkers, supervisors, and
clients make better, well-informed decisions. But business is also about connecting with others,
identifying trends, solving problems, and identifying gaps in our existing resources. These are
also--not so coincidentally--the same research skills that you need in your academic and
professional careers!

The results of your research should confirm your argument while providing
contextual information that helps situate your position in a specific context. A
pizza restaurant in one neighborhood may not last long in another; a
marketing campaign may perform incredibly well on Facebook while failing on
Reddit.
Conducting research also helps develop our expertise in a subject, reinforcing
our professional persona. When we engage in that "conversation" mentioned
earlier, it demonstrates our dedication to the profession. Although flawed or
weak arguments can also be valuable, presenting a well-researched argument
establishes credibility among your peers and displays expertise.

In this chapter, we'll review research procedures that complement your professional writing. We'll
distinguish scholarly resources from more popular ones, such as journalistic publications.
Professional trade publications--which you may find yourself contributing to in your career--are
also valuable sources to consider. We'll also review three fundamental forms of citing sources and
some best practices for incorporating your research into your work.

We'll conclude the chapter by thinking about misinformation and the
importance of verifying sources. As we'll examine, it is incredibly easy for
anyone to compose and publish an article based on faulty or false information
that appears to be an accurate work of quality research. Fortunately, there are
usually clues that can help us distinguish works of misinformation from those
that are more authentic.

Even more important than being aware of misinformation is the understanding that you--the
researcher--are engaging in an ongoing dialogue about the subject you are researching. Applying the
work of scholars and experts to answer your own research questions isn't enough! You must also be
willing to question and critique those experts.

42 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 9.

CONDUCTING RESEARCH

When beginning your research process, it is essential to consider a fundamental question: why am I
researching? Is it to acquire a basic understanding of an unknown topic? Will your research be used to
address information gaps in an existing project? Are you searching for expertise that reinforces an
opinion or argument you may have? Or perhaps you're seeking conflicting views?
Answering this basic question will help determine the most effective research methods. Before we
start scouring databases, however, consider what type of information we're looking for.

     · Quantitative research involves gathering numerical data and then using statistical methods
         to analyze it. This type of research often includes surveys, experiments, and observational
         studies. It's commonly used in psychology, economics, and marketing, as well as health and
         social sciences.

     · Qualitative research aims to understand human behaviors, experiences, emotions, and social
         contexts holistically, and it is often used in fields like sociology, anthropology, psychology, and
         education. Methods include conducting surveys, focus groups, observations, and case studies.

    · Mixed Methods Research combines the above methods to
       comprehensively answer a question or problem. Researchers using this
       approach use data to corroborate qualitative findings; conversely,
       quantitative researchers may seek out observational data and interviews
       to help interpret their data into formats that are more accessible to
       audiences.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 43
CHAPTER 10.

LOCATING GOOD SOURCES

For business professionals, much research is accomplished by searching for sources online using one
of many tools like Google Scholar and library databases. If you are a student, you are likley expected
to use a combination of primary and secondary sources to help support your thesis, proposal, or
argument.
PRIMARY SOURCES
First-hand accounts of events such as reporting, footage, correspondence, as well as tangible artifacts
are considered primary. Journalistic articles and interviews are also good primary sources.
SECONDARY SOURCES
Sources that interpret, analyze, or critique primary sources are referred to as secondary. Textbooks
and academic journals are also examples of secondary sources that you should be familiar with.

   Industrial and trade publications, which focus on issues, events, and trends in specific professions,
are also good secondary sources as well as excellent ways to stay on top of your profession. Some
specific examples include those for:

     · Marketers: Adweek*, Ad Age*, and Campaign*
     · Accountants: The CPA Journal, Accounting Today*, and Accountancy Age
     · Supply chain managers: Industry Week, Supply and Demand Chain Executive, and Logistics

         Management*
     · Business owners: Be sure to check for trade publications that are relevant to your business.

         There are also several publications that cover entrepreneurship including, Entrepreneur,
         Inc*., and Fortune Small Business
     · Financial Wizards: In addition to venerable news publications like the Wall Street Journal*,
         financiers should also consult with Barron's*, and Financial Times*
     · Human Resource personnel: People + Strategy Journal is published by the Society for Human
         Resource Management--both are excellent sources as well as Human Resource Executive.
*Note: these publications offer student-rate subscriptions. Highly recommended!
   For more information on primary and secondary sources, check out the UWGB Resource Guide.

44 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 11.

VERIFYING SOURCES

Taking extra time to verify your sources can help better ensure the integrity of your research.
Verification is more than simply checking to ensure that a source exists, however, but is also a method
for determining the quality of the source.

   There are several methods for verifying sources. We'll examine one: Lateral Reading. If you prefer
catchy, relevant acronyms, check out Michael Caulfield's SIFT and Ellen Carey's P.R.O.V.E.N. method.
These methods approach verification uniquely but draw from lateral reading as a starting point.
LATERAL READING
As you're reading this resource, you'll come across various links and citations. Did you click on
any of them? One easy method for verifying a source is to browse the source for clues about the
author's background and any affiliated organizations. What else has the author published? What is the
purpose of any organizations that they are affiliated with? These questions can help you determine
the credibility of the author(s).
How do you know this resource, Professional Writing and Communications for Business, is of
quality? Why should you trust me--the author--as someone who has any expertise when it comes to
talking about writing?

   The easiest way would be to look me up and verify my credentials. When you Google my name,
you'll find links to an outdated personal site, my LinkedIn profile and other social media accounts,
a few events, and writing I've done. From my LinkedIn profile, you can tell I've taught writing since
2013, and before that, I worked as a "public relations specialist" and designer. From this information
alone, I hope you are convinced I have enough experience teaching writing and writing professionally.
You might also check my affiliations: can you assume that my employer, the University of Wisconsin-
Green Bay, has checked and verified my experience and credentials?

   Lateral reading is a technique for evaluating a source's credibility by comparing it to other sources.
It involves reading "around" a resource to evaluate bias, inaccuracy, and hidden assumptions.

   The UWGB Library offers a resource guide and infographic (shared below) that can help guide you
through the process.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 45
46 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
"Evaluating Sources Using Lateral Reading" courtesy of the UWGB

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 47
CHAPTER 12.

ISSUES IN RESEARCHING

As a researcher, you are responsible for ensuring that the information you gather and use is valid.
Additionally, it is also imperative that your research is presented correctly. The following are among
the more problematic issues related to research.

MISINFORMATION & DISINFORMATION

The internet provides us access and connectivity to massive information stores for research. It also
allows us to publish and share our research with others. Although this powerful tool enables creative,
innovative, and entrepreneurial endeavors, it is also used for counterproductive--even
harmful--purposes.

In Digital Citizenship, Sarah Gibbs (2021) defines misinformation as "wrong or
misleading information." Gibbs further breaks this definition by noting that
misinformation may not always be intentional but somewhat incomplete or
unclearly presented information.
When someone knowingly presents flawed or false information, this is
sometimes called disinformation. In recent years, the term fake news has
been used to describe sources of information that knowingly broadcast
incorrect, misleading, or false news stories to their audience. Accusations of
being fake news are also cast on news sources when people disagree with the
information being presented. This is made more difficult when organizations
(such as Fox News) argue that their information is more for entertainment
than factual information.
Misinformation is especially difficult to correct once consumed by an
uncritical audience. Even when news organizations correct information, it can
be difficult for those invested in that information to correct their own
perspective (Cook, Ecker, & Lewandowsky, 2015). This can have deadly
consequences: a recent study by the National Bureau of Economic Research
found that those communities who consumed misinformation about the
COVID-19 pandemic were the worst impacted by the illness.
Because of misinformation, it has become even more important for us to
genuinely conduct our own research--not just present information that
confirms our own beliefs. When conducting research, it is our responsibility to
ensure that our sources are sound and verifiable. We should also be sure to cite
our sources. This way, others can also verify the information we've provided!

48 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
PLAGIARISM
When at school, plagiarism is one of the biggest concerns of students, instructors, and administrators
alike. This form of "academic misconduct" is, according to a 2010 study, a source of several negative
responses, including confusion, fear, and anxiety about potential consequences (Gullifer and Tyson).
With the popularization of ChatGPT (Barnett, 2023) and several high-profile cases of plagiarism in
the news, the subject has become even more complex and concerning.

Simply put, plagiarism is sharing ideas and information while passing them off
as your own work. We should never take credit for someone else's ideas--that
goes without saying--but sometimes it can happen unintentionally:
Sometimes, writers forget to add quotation marks to a quote. This common
yet simple mistake should be looked for when reviewing your work.
Improper paraphrasing can also be viewed as plagiarism. Paraphrasing is
when we rework someone else's ideas in our own words. This is an important
skill to practice because using others' words and ideas too much can detract
from your own argument. It can also help maintain a consistent voice and tone
in your work. There are several examples of paraphrasing on this page!
Inaccurate citations, which can prevent readers from verifying sources, are
also considered plagiarism. Double-checking citations and references is an
important part of the review process. Take time and ensure that your Works
Cited and References pages are perfect!

For some examples of plagiarism, check out the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay library's
resource guide on the subject.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 49
CHAPTER 13.

BUSINESS PLANS

Developing and implementing a business plan can be a daunting task for most of us. We might
assume that the creative practitioner--especially those without a background in business--would
find this process even more challenging. When we think about what developing a business plan
entails, however, we find that the creator is actually well-suited to meet this challenge: introspection,
observation, and expression are traits of the successful entrepreneur!

   A business plan can assist in translating those creative skills into tangible visions, bringing them
into the world as a foundation for your practice. The challenge is speaking to your strengths, ideals,
and aspirations in a clear manner that is easily structured. The formulaic structure of a business plan
can feel constraining at first, so let's consider the purpose of this document:

WHAT IS A BUSINESS PLAN?

According to the United States Small Business Administration, a properly crafted business plan offers
a, "roadmap for how to structure, run, and grow your new business." For organizations, the business
plan is a way to share that roadmap with employees as a way to help navigate uncertainties and
fluctuations in the market (Henry). The plan can also be instrumental in reminding individuals what
the core values of the enterprise are.

   For many artists, the business plan is an opportunity to brand their work. This is a different
approach than those entrepreneurs who have a tangible product or process to pitch. Instead, the
creator is pitching themselves as both product and process! Despite these differences, the important
similarity is that the business plan must provide details that the investor, agent, grantor, or purchaser
needs to proceed with consideration.

HOW TO WRITE A BUSINESS PLAN?

There is no one true way of crafting a business plan and there numerous templates and models
available online and within the shelves of how-to books. Some of the core components of most
business plans include:

     · Mission statement
     · Problem
     · Solution
     · Target audience or market
     · Budget and revenue stream
     · Expenses
     · Contingency plan

50 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
     · Milestones

In The Corporate Energy Strategist's Handbook, Jimmy Jia states that it is most important to consider
what the audience finds most important (p. 156). What information do they need first? For creative
practitioners, knowing your audience is complicated because your immediate audience--an agent or
publisher, for example--is often different from your ultimate, ideal audience; an editor or producer
will want to be sure your work is profitable; an agent will want to be confident that they can
adequately represent your work to potential publishers; a grant proposal reviewer will want to be sure
that your work addresses the needs of the project.

   Each of the statements below should be included in your business plan. The order you arrange them
in, however, may change depending on who your immediate audience is.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The executive summary is a short, yet well-crafted summation of your values, objectives, and target
market. Like any introduction, this should be written last--once you have the remainder of your
business plan completed.

Mission Statement

Whether you're a corporate strategist or an up-and-coming author, your business plan should start
with a mission statement. In this statement, you should address the following questions:

     · What is your practice, your craft and process? What do you make?

     · Why do you create? What values inspire you?

     · Who will you be creating for?

The mission statement should be very clear and concise. A more conceptual mission statement may
come off as unclear or obtuse. But doesn't that convey the creative spirit of my work? Consider what the
audience for a business plan is after: consistency, reliability, and stability. An editor, for example,
will want to know that you'll have the manuscript finished on time. A public arts commission that is
offering grant support will want to also be sure that the project will be completed in a timely manner.
The mission statement conveys these ideals.

Value Statement

The value statement can be an optional addition if you want to communicate how you identify
with the purpose of a grant, or are aligned with a particular quality of a publisher. At a time when
personal values are cultural capital, a value statement can help articulate how your work will also
reflect a publisher or organization in the greater community. This is especially important for those
just beginning their professional practice and may yet be relatively unknown.

Ideal Audience

Unlike a "target audience," which is typically a data-driven construct formed by demographics and
analytics, the ideal audience is the community or audience that you have in mind when you are
creating. Who is this community you are writing to? Who is that person you think will value your
work because it "speaks" to them?

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 51
   What are the needs and wants of this idealized audience? What are their problems you hope
to alleviate? What is their desired lifestyle, their aspirations, and dreams? Following your value
statement, a description of your ideal audience communicates your ability to connect with similar
audiences being sought by the publisher or organization.

Your Voice. Your Niche. Your Brand

When discussing your creative work, it can be challenging to describe the qualities that distinguish
your work from others. Your voice describes the signature characteristics of your work. To put it into
marketing terms, this is your brand.

   Are your characters realistic or satirical? Are you exceptional at describing fantasy settings? Do you
specialize in honest (at times scathing even) commentary? You may also need to describe your genre
and medium as well.

DESCRIPTION OF PRODUCTS AND SERVICES

In this section, you'll lay out a "menu" of the skills you offer to a client. What are the tasks you're
able to perform? What are your specialties? What services can you also provide? Don't overlook those
services that may be secondary--even those that you might not be thrilled to offer! Some examples:

Fiction            Creative Non-Fiction  Social Media            Screenplays
Editing            SOPs                  Manuals                 Resumes
Correspondence     Technical Writing     Web Content             WordPress

   While you will want to prioritize those skills that are relevant to your objective and audience, you
should also include those that a client may find beneficial. Design skills, for example, indicate an
appreciation or knowledge of layout and style treatments. Some secondary skills might include:

Layout             Outreach              Instructional Design    Livestreaming
Document Design    Media Relations       Video Capture           Broadcasting
Survey Design      Presentations         Audio Editing           Photography

   You should also include so-called "soft skills," which describe your work process and how you work
with others. Research and problem-solving skills are considered soft skills as well as collaboration and
leadership. Although these skills might not be included in a "menu" of offerings, you may consider
adding a short list of these qualities. Additional soft skills include:

Strong work ethic  Creativity            Adaptability            Project Management
Organization       Open to Criticism     Committed to Diversity  Goal Setting
Stress Management  Flexibility           Detail-oriented         Listening

   How you indicate and describe these offerings and skills is up to you. A list may be a good way to
stack up your secondary skills. Your primary, applied skills might be more elaborate and descriptive.

52 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
INDUSTRIES WORKED

Create a list of industries you have worked in. This is valuable because it displays the contexts
in which you developed your skills. Working in restaurants, for example, teaches you a number
of soft skills (communication, managing multiple tasks). Restaurant experience can also provide
insights about the needs of the service industry: menus and promotion, outreach and employee
communications.

WORKS

Develop a list of works you've completed and those currently being worked on. This is useful
for demonstrating a work history but also provide yourself with documentation of your
accomplishments. This list may be short now but it can provide a good reminder of what your
objectives and goals are.

Completed works

You will also want to present a list of products and projects you've completed. These are published
works as well as presentations given, apps you've developed, and lengthy projects you've collaborated
on. Include dates completed.

Works in progress

In this section, you should also present a list of projects you're currently working on. This is important
to indicate what your current focus is. Include products that are actively being designed, creative
works that need to be revised, and accounts that are in negotiation. Include anticipated dates of
completion.

Avoid listing ideas and "dream" projects

For most of us, this list is much longer than lists of our completed projects and those in progress.
A good practice is to begin a document of ideas and keep track of your brainstorming. Because the
business plan needs to be concise and precise, however, these should be kept separate. Consider these
goals to work into your future plans!

PRODUCTION

Once you have thoroughly described what you can do, you'll want to describe your work process,
schedule, and plan of operation.

EDUCATION

Although your previous and current education is important, it's crucial you are attentive to the areas
for further development. Your formal training says a great deal about your goals and objectives at
a specific time in your life and career. For the purposes of a résumé or CV, these are important to
include. In a business plan, however, you want to focus on your growth and development.

     · What areas do you need to improve?
     · What skills do you need to thrive in your target market?

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 53
WORKS CITED
Henry , Zoë. "How to Write a Business Plan: A Step-By-Step Template." Inc.com. www.inc.com.
Accessed 14 Sept. 2022.

   Jia, Jimmy Y. Communication: Using Structures to Send Information. In: The Corporate Energy Strategist's
Handbook. Palgrave Macmillan, 2020.

   U.S. Small Business Administration. "Write Your Business Plan." www.sba.gov. Accessed 14 Sept.
2022.

54 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
                                                              PART III.

                 IMPLEMENTATION: CONSTRUCTION AND STYLE

INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL STYLE
Professional writers should always aspire to communicate as effectively as possible. As we've
discussed, clarity and concision are the hallmarks of business writing. But how about the look of
the document? How does the organization and design of a document affect the effectiveness of our
communication?
USING STYLE FOR CLARITY
First, recall that writing for business purposes should be clearly written. Not only should our purpose
be explicitly stated, we should also use language that is appropriate for the intended audience. This
clarity of purpose also extends through the rest of our writing, and every word supports the delivery
of our message.

   The style with which we write should also add clarity. The typeface selected should be appropriate
for the delivery method. Bold type, for example, highlights important words, phrases, and statements.
Headings and subheadings can also organize the document so the reader can quickly locate
important sections.
USING STYLE FOR CONSISTENCY
Communicating with a consistent voice is expected in the professional world. This is accomplished
by establishing a style that works well with a brand. A unique style connected with an organization's
brand can help consumers and audiences quickly connect with the product in some way. BMW, for
example, is a brand of luxury vehicles that enforces strict adherence to the corporate style across all
dealerships. Any dealers deviating from the consistency of the BMW brand receive multiple warnings
before facing more serious financial consequences!

   Even though you may not (yet) work for a global corporation like BMW, it is still important to be
strategic with your professional writing style.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 55
56 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 14.

INTRODUCTION TO TYPE STYLE

Typestyle refers to the visual appearance of the writing and is a combination of font, sizing,
alignment, spacing, and other factors.

   In business communication, the choice of type style can have a profound impact on how the
information is received and understood. Here's a breakdown of its importance. Although not often
as important as the content of your writing, the type styles used should support the efficient
communication of your message.

   For many large organizations, a style guide will likely be provided as a reference so that your
professional writing will be consistent. When a style guide is not available, it is useful to have a basic
understanding of how type styles impact your writing.

   A comprehensive look at type style for business is beyond the scope of this resource, but this section
provides a broad overview of some fundamentals. As we'll discuss, knowing what makes a good
professional style can be subjective--what type face represents your brand?--but should always work
towards improving or supporting the following:

     · Readability and Accessibility: The primary goal of professional writing is to communicate
         clearly and effectively. A well-chosen type style enhances readability, making it easier for the
         audience to understand the text. For example, a sans-serif font like Arial is often considered
         more readable for digital text, while a serif font like Times New Roman is traditionally used
         for printed material. Adequate font size and appropriate line spacing are also crucial for
         accessibility, especially for readers with visual impairments.

A visual comparison of Arial and Times New Roman fonts

     · Tone and Professionalism: Type style contributes to the tone of the document. A more
         traditional font can convey formality and professionalism, while a more modern font might
         suggest innovation or creativity. The choice of type style should align with the purpose of the
         document and the expectations of the intended audience.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 57
A visual comparison between Futura and Garamond fonts

What sort of font represents you? A classic, traditional typeface like Garamond or the sleek Futura font?

               Hierarchy and Organization: Different type styles and sizes are used to create a visual
                  hierarchy in the text, making it easier for readers to navigate the document. Look at
                  this very page, for example: there is a title as well as headings and body text to help
                  guide you through the content in an organized fashion. Even this unordered list has
                  bolded subheadings to make it easier to read.

               Branding and Identity: In business writing, type style can be a part of the
                  organization's brand identity. Consistent use of a specific typeface across all documents
                  and platforms helps build a recognizable brand image. UW-Green Bay, for instance,
                  uses the Montserrat font for headings and Helvetica Neue for body copy on their web
                  pages. UW-Madison uses slightly different fonts (primarily Verlag and Vitesse) to
                  distinguish its campus from others in the system.

     · Emphasis and Highlighting: Type styles like bold, italic, and underline emphasize important
         points or keywords in a text. This selective emphasis helps in drawing the reader's attention to
         critical pieces of information.

58 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 15.

TYPEFACES AND FONTS

   A typeface is a designed style of lettering (also called a "family") that often includes a large set of

variants called fonts. There are tens-of-thousands of available typefaces. Many must
be purchased, while many more are offered for free. Public Sans (see above), is a
free typeface that was designed by the U.S. Government to be used primarily for
digital services. Typefaces are categorized according to their most prominent
design features. The basic categories of professional quality typefaces are serif
and sans serif. More designerly typestyles that are not often used professionally
outside of logos are script and decorative typefaces.

SERIF
The extra strokes of these classic typefaces are best used for printed materials like books and
pamphlets. Serif fonts are designed to guide the reader's eye across the page as effectively as possible,

making it easier to read longer works. Some popular serif fonts are Times New Roman,
Garamond, Cambria, and Georgia.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 59
SANS SERIF
Typefaces that do not have extra strokes are categorized as sans serif and are generally used for
writing that will be presented on a screen. American highway signs also use sans serif fonts because

those typefaces are faster to read. Some popular sans serif fonts include Helvetica,
Arial, Calibri, and Century Gothic.

"US Highway 53 - Wisconsin." Photo by Dougtone, 3 Sept, 2011 CC BY SA

   There are many other typefaces that are not often found in professional writing except for
occasional use in branding or marketing materials. Even then, they should be used sparingly and not
for general purpose.
SCRIPTS
Typefaces that appear more like handwriting are categorized as script. These are not typically used
for professional writing outside of design because they are more difficult to read.

60 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
DECORATIVE
These typefaces are often used for graphical works such as posters and not for routine professional
writing.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 61
CHAPTER 16.

TYPOGRAPHIC EMPHASIS

Emphasizing select portions of your writing can help direct the reader's attention. Care must be taken
not to overuse these techniques, however, as it could have adverse effects and make your writing more
difficult to read.

   Bold Text
Bold text is a good example of using emphasis to highlight short portions of writing. For example,
bolded text can help a reader quickly scan a large portion of text at the beginning of each item in an
unordered list.

   You can also use bolded text for the following:
     · Highlighting Key Information: Used to make important details stand out.
     · Headings and Subheadings: Helps in differentiating and organizing sections.
     · Drawing Attention to Warnings or Cautions: Ensures critical warnings are noticed.
     · Stressing Terms or Concepts: Emphasizes specific terms for focus or learning.

Italicized Text
Another method of highlighting our professional writing is to italicize specific terms or concepts.
Titles of films, television series, and publications are italicized (ex. Hyperion is a book by Dan
Simmons.), as are the names of vessels (ex. Titanic, Voyager II) and court cases (ex. Brown v. Board of
Education).

   Underlined Text
When I was younger, we used to underline book and movie titles. We rarely, if ever, underline our
writing anymore, however, because the practice is now associated with the interactive hyperlinks
found on web pages. Underlining text also adds more elements to a page or screen which reduces
reading efficiency.

62 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 17.

TYPE SIZE

Type is measured in points. A point is equal to 1/72 of an inch, which means that a 72-point font
will be approximately an inch tall.
For most professional documents that are printed or presented on screen, the size of your type
should be 11 or 12 points.
For slide decks, your type should be around 30 points for legibility.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 63
CHAPTER 18.

SPACING AND INDENTATION

One noticeable difference between academic and professional writing is the spacing and indentation
used. You probably wrote essays for school using double-spaced lines, for example, to provide
instructors with space to provide feedback. We rarely use double-spacing in professional writing.
Some individuals may prefer double-spacing when reviewing drafts, but it will be reformatted before
the distribution of the final draft. Like all professional writing, the efficiency of communications,
genre conventions, and stylistic choice should help determine spacing levels. Sometimes, I select 1.15
spacing in Word when the typeface warrants it.

   Indenting the first line in paragraphs is also used infrequently, especially when writing for the
screen. The amount of blank, "negative" space should be considered when composing longer
professional documents such as cover letters, reports, and memos. Too much spacing can be
distracting, while too little can be exhausting to read. Many of our tools automatically set these
elements for us, yet these default settings are not always preferred.

LINE SPACING

Line spacing is the measure between lines on the written page or screen. The space between lines is
automatically adjusted to accommodate whatever font is used (approximately 130% of the font size).
Double-spaced lines are typically reserved for academic writing. The space between lines should be
set to single or 1.15. When drafting professional documents, 1.5 may be used.

SPACES BETWEEN PARAGRAPHS

Providing a small amount of space between paragraphs is a good method for relieving the strain of
reading on screen. For Microsoft Word, the default is 8 pts. of spacing.

INDENTATION

For longer printed documents, a half-inch indentation can help distinguish the beginning of
paragraphs. Instead of indentation, it is also acceptable to add space between paragraphs; the default
in Microsoft Word is 8 pt. Indentations are not typically used when writing for the screen. Spacing
between paragraphs is preferred.
Memos are not typically indented but incorporate added space between paragraphs instead.

MARGINS

Margins for documents written on standard, 8.5 x 11 sized pages should be one inch on each side. If
there is any design work, such as a letterhead on the page, be sure to retain the 1-inch margin. Do not
increase the margin size for page numbers.

   Review this for some spacing examples.

64 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 19.

HEADINGS AND SUBHEADS

To help visually organize a longer document or web page, use headings and subheadings to designate
each section and create a hierarchy of information. Proper use of headings can help readers quickly
identify key focus areas when arranged in logical order. In longer documents, headings and
subheadings help readers navigate to interesting sections.

A look at the difference between a title, a subtitle, and headings 1-4.
BENEFITS OF HEADINGS
When using many writing tools like Microsoft Word, headings and subheads are also used to
generate tables of contents automatically. For audiences that use screen readers, headings and
subheadings can help a listener quickly navigate to the desired section. Headings also contain HTML
tags which enable web designers to link directly to those sections.
For marketers, subheadings can also be used as vehicles for keywords that help strengthen your
search engine optimization (SEO) efforts.
LENGTH OF HEADINGS
Headings should describe--in 70 characters or less--the section that follows them. Besides being
more efficient to read, a shorter heading is less likely to be impacted by size constraints.
WHEN TO USE SUBHEADINGS
If it makes sense to further break down the information in that section into subsections, smaller
headings (subheadings) are used to distinguish those subsections further.
A section should contain at least two lines of writing beneath it.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 65
How Many Subheadings?

This is subject to preference but I will only use subsections if I have at least three distinct subjects to
focus on. Too many subsections and the hierarchy may become too congested with subsections.
When there are more than 5 subsections, I try to combine some of them or create a whole new
section.

66 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 20.

LISTS

Ordered and unordered lists are essential in business writing, offering a clear and structured way to
present information. Ordered lists use numbers or letters to show sequence, hierarchy, or priority,
making them ideal for step-by-step instructions, rankings, or processes. Unordered lists, on the other
hand, use bullet points or another visual element to group related items without implying order
or precedence, making them practical for summarizing key points, listing features, or organizing
ideas. Both enhance readability, help emphasize critical information, and allow readers to scan and
understand content quickly.

ORDERED LISTS

Information that is best read in a specific order should be presented as an ordered list. Numbered
lists are best used for instructions and items that are ranked. For example:

Example of Ranked List: Horizon League Top 5 (Jan. 13, 2024)

    1. Green Bay Phoenix
    2. Cleveland State Vikings
    3. Purdue Fort Wayne Mastodons
    4. Wright State Raiders
    5. Detroit Mercy Titans

Example of Instructions: How to Change a Car Tire

    1. Secure the Vehicle: Park your car on a flat, stable surface. Apply the parking brake and place
         wheel wedges under the opposite tires.

   2. Loosen the Lug Nuts: Using a lug wrench, turn the lug nuts
       counterclockwise about ¼ to ½ of a turn, but do not remove them
       completely yet.

   3. Lift the Vehicle: Place the jack under the vehicle frame near the tire that
       you are going to change. Raise the vehicle until the tire is about six inches
       off the ground.

   4. Remove and Replace the Tire: Remove the lug nuts completely and
       remove the tire. Mount the spare tire on the lug bolts, then put the lug
       nuts on and tighten them by hand as much as possible.

   5. Lower the Vehicle and Tighten Lug Nuts: Use the jack to lower the

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 67
       vehicle so that the tire touches the ground but doesn't bear the full weight
       of the car. Tighten the lug nuts with the wrench, then lower the vehicle
       completely and remove the jack. Ensure the lug nuts are tightened fully.

           Style choice: Notice how I bolded each point in the list above? This is so that the reader can
        more easily follow the instructions by scanning along the left-hand side of the list.

UNORDERED LISTS

Unordered (or "bulleted") lists are ideal for grouping related items where sequencing is not as
important. Unordered lists are good for presenting a list of features or summarizing key points in a

slide presentation. Notice in the example below that even though there is no
explicit order, the items are listed in a way that makes sense. The backpack is
listed first, as it may be assumed to hold the remainder of the items. Each item
is also bolded in this example, followed by a short description.

Example of an Unordered List: Items to Bring for a Day Hike

     · Backpack: A comfortable, lightweight backpack to carry all your items.

    · Water: At least 2 liters per person to stay hydrated.
    · Snacks: Energy bars, trail mix, or fruit for sustenance.
    · Map and Compass/GPS: For navigation, especially in areas with limited

       cell service.
    · Sun Protection: Sunscreen, sunglasses, and a hat to protect against

       sunburn.

Example of a Presentation Slide Containing an Unordered List

In this sample slide, an unordered list is used because the acronym AIDA provides the order.

                        Slide from a presentation about the AIDA Method. Source Kris
                        Purzycki.

68 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 21.

PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: STYLE GUIDES

WHAT IS A STYLE GUIDE?

For any organization, the development of one's brand is key to establishing a presence in the market.
Through our brand, we articulate a specific "voice" and those desirable values that can connect us with
a particular audience. Visual branding, such as a logo, used on everything from marketing campaigns
and merchandising to professional stationery, creates a standard by which everyone may identify and
make connections. When did you last strike up a conversation with someone because you recognized
the logo on their shirt?

   Beyond logo design, branding can also extend to the preferred typefaces, colors, and documents
an organization uses. As the brand of an individual or organization grows, it becomes increasingly
important to develop a professional style guide. These guides serve as a comprehensive manual for
providing clear instructions on every brand element, ensuring everyone represents the organization
consistently. Coca-Cola, for example, has trademark rights on a specific red called, appropriately
enough, "Coke Red." For example, the style guide for the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay includes
fonts, colors, and the desired placement of these elements on various professional documents. As
in this example, many style guides also include guidance on preferred spellings, grammatical usage,
formatting, and citation styles.

ACADEMIC STYLE GUIDES

You have probably worked with style guides already when assigned essays for school. Depending on
the class, you were likely using one of a handful of academic style guides commonly used to lay out
the conventions for formatting your essay or report, cite sources, and ensure consistency in your
writing. Much like branding, style guides enhance your credibility and show that you recognize and
appreciate the genre conventions of that field of study. Here are some summaries of the more popular
academic styles.

APA Style (American Psychological Association)

APA is widely used in the social sciences and emphasizes clarity, objectivity, and the ethical
presentation of data. Reports, white papers, and analytical documents are typically written using APA
style as it provides clearly defined rules for using charts and figures. One benefit of APA is that the
style may be adapted to meet the needs of an organization or publication.

MLA Style (Modern Language Association)

Majors in the humanities rely on MLA style, which focuses on citing sources in a clear, concise
format. Whereas APA is used more for genres that use quantitative data, MLA is built for citing
qualitative data. Case studies, cultural and audience analyses are often written in MLA formatting.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 69
Chicago Style (University of Chicago Press)

Although coming from a major academic press, Chicago and its offshoots have become more popular
in commercial use due to its versatility. Footnotes are the hallmark of Chicago style, a useful technique
when creating visual forms of information like presentation slides and infographics.

AP Style (Associated Press)

Used in journalism and corporate communications, AP Style is unique in that it rarely uses formal
citations but instead integrates sources into the writing itself. On the other hand, AP carries an
extensive list of recommendations for abbreviations, proper nouns, dates, and numbers. AP focuses
on concision and avoiding jargon so it is especially useful in journalism as well as corporate
communications.

IEEE Style (Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers)

Like MLA and APA, IEEE is designed to work especially well in a specific field of study. Used
primarily for technical documents, the precision and structure of IEEE is most often used in
technology sectors, information systems, project managements, and data analytics.

   Academic style guides are more than just rules for formatting; they are tools for effective
communication. As business writing students, mastering these guides prepares you to create
professional documents that meet the standards of academia as well as industry. Understanding when
and how to use different guides will help you adapt to the diverse demands of business and technical
communication.

   In my own professional experience, I've found that most organizations have incorporated one or
more of the above styles into their own branding. Outside of higher education, in other words, I have
rarely been asked to use MLA or APA. Instead, I have had to learn a proprietary, "in-house" style guide
or create one for clients.

   So what goes into an in-house or personal style guide? Many of the same components of the
academic styles you've already worked with!

PERSONAL STYLE GUIDES

A personal style guide is a set of guidelines that you create for yourself to help you write consistently
and effectively. It can be tailored to your individual writing style, preferences, and needs. Here are
some important questions to help you consider your personal writing style:

     · Tone and style: Consider the tone and style that you want to use in your writing. Do you
         prefer a formal or informal tone? Should your writing be conversational or more technical?
         Include guidelines on the type of language and vocabulary you prefer to use in your writing.

     · Formatting: Consistency in formatting can help your writing look more polished and
         professional. Consider guidelines for headings, font sizes and types, paragraph spacing, and
         other elements of formatting.

     · Terminology and spelling: If you frequently use technical terms or jargon in your writing, it
         may be helpful to create a list of preferred terms and spellings. This can help you ensure
         consistency and accuracy in your writing.

70 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
     · References and citations: If you frequently use references or citations in your writing, it may
         be helpful to develop guidelines for how to cite sources, what types of sources to use, and how
         to format references and citations.

     · Writing process: Consider developing guidelines for your writing process, including how to
         brainstorm ideas, organize your thoughts, and revise your writing.

     · Voice and audience: Consider the voice and audience for your writing. Should your writing
         be more formal or conversational? Who is your target audience, and how can you tailor your
         writing to their needs and expectations?

Overall, a personal style guide is a tool for helping you write consistently and effectively. It should
reflect your individual writing style and preferences, and include guidelines for tone and style,
formatting, grammar and punctuation, terminology and spelling, references and citations, writing
process, and voice and audience. By following your personal style guide, you can produce high-quality
writing that meets your communication goals and reflects your unique voice and perspective.

SETTING UP YOUR STYLE GUIDE

Before setting up your style guide, be sure to do the following:

    1. Choose a specific context or audience for your style guide. For example, you might create a
         style guide for writing technical documentation, business communication, academic writing,
         or social media content.

    2. Conduct research on existing style guides for your chosen context or audience. You can use
         the internet, books, or other resources to find examples of style guides that are relevant to
         your project.

    3. Review the guidelines and best practices in the existing style guides and take notes on what
         you find useful, effective, and relevant.

    4. Develop a set of guidelines and best practices for your own style guide, using the
         information and insights you gained from your research. Consider issues such as tone,
         language, formatting, style, and referencing.

    5. Write your style guide, making sure to clearly define and explain each guideline and best
         practice. Use clear and concise language, and provide examples and illustrations wherever
         possible.

    6. Review and edit your style guide to ensure that it is consistent, coherent, and effective. Make
         any necessary changes or revisions based on feedback from peers or instructors.

WRITING THE INTRODUCTION

Some questions to address in your style guide introduction include:

     · What context or audience did you choose for your style guide, and why? What were some of
         the key considerations or challenges specific to this context or audience?

     · What guidelines and best practices did you include in your style guide, and why? What did
         you find useful or effective about the guidelines and best practices in existing style guides, and

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 71
         how did you adapt them for your own project?
     · How did you ensure consistency and coherence in your style guide? What tools or strategies

         did you use to achieve this?
     · What feedback did you receive on your style guide, and how did you incorporate this

         feedback into your final product? What changes or revisions did you make, and why?
     · If you were to create another style guide in the future, what lessons would you take from this

         project? What would you do differently, and what would you keep the same?

Other Components to Include

Your style guide should be a reflection of you, your personality, and professional experiences and
aspirations. What it should demonstrate is an attention to the purpose and audience and how those
concepts are expressed through small design choices.

72 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
                                                              PART IV.

                      INTERFACE: YOUR PROFESSIONAL VOICE

Today's workplace is a dynamic environment that
is undergoing numerous changes. The widespread
shift from working in person to working from
home, for example, has radically altered how we
communicate with one another. Job markets have
meanwhile become increasingly competitive as
employees search for the best opportunities
among employers who struggle to maintain a
stable workforce. Meanwhile, new tools built
from artificial intelligence technologies have had a
profound impact on every occupation and the
skills required of the workforce.

   Despite these exciting challenges, one skill remains in constant--if not higher--demand: good
writing skills. AI tools like ChatGPT have teased a likely future where mundane writing tasks might
someday be accomplished with a few strategic prompts. But the ability to connect with audiences,
new clients, and consumers demands we make those intrapersonal connections that AI is incapable
of simulating. Understanding the specific needs and desires of others while being attentive to their
individual cultural, physical, and social perspectives, for example, is a distinctly human trait--one that
is conveyed in our writing.

Making Connections

Correspondence and other forms of direct communication are forms of writing in which these skills
are required. A job application cover letter, for example, remains a necessity despite recent skepticism
about whether it is still necessary. Résumés have also changed of late, but if you're thinking that
a snappy, creative video résumé means you're off the hook, think again: even a video introduction
requires a well-crafted script. The résumé, whether it's on your hard drive or LinkedIn, persists as a
minimum requirement that should be maintained.

   Over the next few chapters, we're going to work on some conventional types of writing. Our first
unit delves into some of the fundamental writing genres that remain important in the professional
realm. We will work through some of these--the email, memo, and cover letter--because they are, at
the very least, a crucial foundation for your professional experience. You probably have written many

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 73
of these before and have copies on hand. Memos, on the other hand, might be a little less familiar.
Our goal here is to gain experience with them because, as we'll discuss, many of the new, creative
approaches still rely on older genres.

Sources

Image: "Rockset Office in San Mateo, California." by Rodbauer, CC BY-SA 4.0

74 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 22.

INTRODUCTION: CORRESPONDENCE AND EMAIL

"A letter that is unattractive in appearance leads the reader to feel instinctively that the subject shares
this quality."
~ Harrison McJohnston, Business Correspondence, 1919

INTRODUCTION

According to a recent poll conducted by Grammarly (2021), American businesses lose an estimated
$1.2 trillion each year due to poor communication practices[1]. The vast majority of business leaders
surveyed for the report agree that good communication skills are vital and that candidates' writing
skills are being increasingly scrutinized. In a different study, over 90% of business leaders confirmed
that an applicant's poor writing had hurt their candidacy (Droz & Jacobs, 2019). In other words,
writing skills are crucial to the workforce--so much so that those skills help set us apart from the rest
of the applicants in today's competitive job market.

   So why is writing so important to business?
   Broadly speaking, your writing represents your professional self and your perspective toward the
organization you're writing to or on behalf of. As we'll discuss in a moment, your attitudes toward
the organization you're writing for, your understanding of your audience's needs, and even your level
of expertise are reflected in how you write. In the business world, your writing expresses a range of
values--trustworthiness, honesty, and integrity, to name a few--that potential customers and clients
need to perceive to respond positively. This is especially true for writing genres in which professionals
must initiate action through direct contact.
   Most of this contact happens in emails, letters, memos, as well as text messages. Writing these
forms of correspondence makes up the day-to-day work of the business professional: attracting
new clients, alerting personnel to new work processes, and promoting new products are just a few
functions of correspondence.
   Correspondence can be both internal and external. Internal correspondence is writing sent to others
within the same organization. These are typically memos, emails, and text messages. The most
popular forms of external correspondence sent outside the organization include emails and letters.
For example, let's say I'm the manager of a small business. I have assigned a report to one of
my recently hired employees and have scheduled an afternoon meeting with them to review their
findings. That is, until I receive this email (see fig. 1):

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 75
Figure 1. Bad email. Screen capture by author.

Although it's baffling why I would hire someone with the same name, this email is equally
confounding! The message is clear: my doppelganger employee is unprepared to discuss their report.
While I might be willing to accept this setback as a minor inconvenience, the writing is more
troublesome: the informal tone, lack of justification for the delay, and grammar issues present some
concerns to me as the manager. Why? After all--they're just words!

   Consider how this message represents the person making the request. The subject line, "Hey," is
incredibly informal (even if it's addressed to myself) and fails to mention what the email is about. The
language I'm using is both grammatically incorrect and oddly casual--especially for someone who is
asking their manager for extra time on a report.

   There is also an absence of information that helps justify the request. Why does the employee need
more time? Why have they waited until the last possible moment to make this request? Based on the
closing, "Thanks, bruh," the employee seems to assume that the delay is approved. The employee also
demonstrates a lack of respect for authority--not a good strategy for someone who is asking for extra
time to complete an assigned task.

   Here is the same email written more professionally (see fig. 2). Notice the difference?

76 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
Figure 2. Better email. Screen capture by author.

While we all make mistakes, these are not qualities we like to see in the professional environment.
Someone who writes carelessly is likely to make mistakes in other work areas. Employees who don't
recognize organizational hierarchies and protocols may not know client relations.

   In other words, professional writing is more than words strung together. They're a reflection of
our personalities, values, and skills. In our correspondence, our professional selves come through in
our writing.

WHY PROFESSIONAL CORRESPONDENCE IS IMPORTANT

Professional correspondence reflects your professionalism. Correspondence is how we represent
our professional selves to our colleagues, customers, and communities. Why does an email to your
supervisor take more time than one to a friend? Simply because we recognize our audience, our role,
and the level of care we must use in our writing.

   These are what we refer to as stakes. For friends and family, the stakes are usually pretty low--our
roles are familiar and comfortable. However, the stakes are a bit higher when writing in a professional
setting. Linguist Kim Sydow Campbell (2014) speaks to this, noting that "[your] audience determines
your reputation based on what you put into that email message. To succeed, you have to be able to
predict how they will interpret what you wrote." Understanding your audience, in other words, is of
utmost importance and will help your writing "make sense" as well as determine which roles you must
take up.

   Professional correspondence needs to make sense. If good professional communication skills are
invaluable in the world of business, correspondence is the most prolific genre. Reports, spreadsheets,
and proposals are significant. But it is the letter, email, and memo that we use to share ideas, inspire
action, and drive relationships. It's how things get done! Anne Surma (2013) stresses how important
it is that professional writing "make sense" (p.21). While this may seem obvious, Surma unpacks this
common phrase, describing how complex and significant this task is; in addition to making sense
mechanically (grammar, spelling, etc.), professional writing also makes sense in other ways:

     · Business sense: is the writing considerate of the organizational impact? Is that email

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 77
   necessary?
· Literary sense: is the writing clear and effective?
· Political sense: does the writing respect the organization's hierarchy? Does the writing

   respect the agendas and protocols of the organization and community?
· Rational sense: Is the argument logical and thoughtfully organized?
· Emotional sense: is the tone professional and composed in an appropriate manner?
· Aesthetic sense: does the writing look good? Is it clean and organized?
· Social sense: Does the writing respect the social and cultural expectations of the organization

   and the community?

These considerations should factor into every work of professional writing and help the writer

determine which role--or voice--they must write in.

The professional writer has many roles to play. If "making sense" wasn't difficult enough, the

business professional must also be adept at writing in multiple voices. The foremost reason for

this is that so many audiences must be addressed. As Christopher Tribble (2004) studied, written

correspondence is the principal form of relationship building, demanding that the professional be able

to take on multiple roles (p. 290). If you're an accountant explaining finances to a client, you're taking

on the role of a guide. To sever ties with a client, you'll need to take on the litigator role in crafting your

disengagement letter.

As another example, consider the social media influencers and how important it is to be attentive

to followers' values and care about dominant trends to develop their audience. Depending on the

approach, that influencer might be taking up the role of artist, traveler, model, or activist. When you add

video, imagery, and music to the mix, the social media marketer becomes a producer and multimedia

editor.

This is why describing those goals clearly in your writing is important. Many of us have exciting,

innovative ideas--new concepts, procedures, and inventions we want to make real. The challenge is

effectively presenting those ideas in a format that provides direction on making those ideas happen.

If you're reading this, we can assume you are familiar with emails and text messages. But how

often have you written a professional letter? Maybe you've written a cover letter, but even those

are becoming outdated. It's even more unlikely that you've written memos, an internal form of

correspondence that has been displaced by email somewhat but is still a preferred mode of

communicating with employees but also a method of record keeping.

                                      This week, we will look at some of the more prominent

                                      forms of correspondence in the business world: emails,

            Many of the terms         memos, and cover letters. For each of these, we'll examine
         bolded in this resource are  what are known as genre conventions. Simply put, these
         further explained in the     qualities are associated with different types of media. The
         glossary.                    genre conventions of a horror movie, for example, include

                                      suspenseful music, dark and ominous visuals, and a few

                                      surprising moments that might make us jump out of our seats.

                                      Fans of horror movies might also distinguish between

different sub-genres. While all share most of these conventions, sub-genres have their own set of

78 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
conventions that set them apart. Zombie horror, for example, typically features some undead
variation, while psychological horror relies more on mental tricks to fool the audience.

   For professional writing, it is important to recognize the conventions that distinguish the genre
from other forms of communication. The conventions of professional writing include a formal tone
and clear, efficient writing free of spelling and grammatical errors.

   We'll look at several sub-genres of correspondence including memos, and cover letters. Each of
these has its conventions that make them distinct. Let's first take a more in-depth look at emails as the
most popular form of professional correspondence.
[1] Note: It's worth mentioning that Grammarly produces tools to help professionals write better. While this
doesn't necessarily mean that these statistics are false, we should recognize that the company has a motivation to
research, curate, and present information in such a way that it makes their product look more valuable.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 79
CHAPTER 23.

EMAILS

           Author's Note: This chapter is excerpted from Arley Cruthers's Business Writing for Everyone and
        was edited for consistency with the course. In the introduction to this section, we examined an
        example of a lousy email alongside a more professional version. To expand on this some more, let's
        unpack the proper composition and structure of an email. Despite being the most prolific form of
        business correspondence, I have found that emails are where the most fundamental professional
        writing practices are overlooked. Cruthers offers an excellent overview of email structure and how
        we should be mindful of the expectations of professional audiences.

While it may be used like text messaging, or synchronous chatting, and it can be delivered to a cell
phone, email remains an asynchronous communication tool. In business, email has largely replaced
print hard copy letters for external (outside the company) correspondence, as well as taking the place
of memos for internal (within the company) communication (Guffey, 2008). Email can be very useful
for messages that have slightly more content than a text message, but it is still best used for fairly brief
messages.

           Author's Note: Consider the type and timing of the response you expect from your
        correspondence. Emails should typically be responded to in 24 hours or less, depending on the
        urgency. Although the expectations vary, you should also consider the time of day and week you
        send your emails. Each individual and organization may have its own guidelines (check out the
        syllabus for my own!).

Emails may be informal in personal contexts, but business communication requires attention to
detail, awareness that your email reflects you and your company, and a professional tone so that it
may be forwarded to any third party if needed. Email often serves to exchange information within
organizations. Although email may have an informal feel, remember that when used for business, it
needs to convey professionalism and respect. Never write or send anything that you wouldn't want
read in public or in front of your company president or CEO.

80 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
TIPS FOR EFFECTIVE BUSINESS EMAILS

If you're struggling to write an email, err on the side of not wasting the reader's time. Many readers
get hundreds of emails a day. While a reader might sit down to read a letter or a memo, they will
usually spend a few seconds scanning an email for relevant information before moving on to the next
one.

   Unless your email is sensitive or you are breaking bad news, it's nearly always a good idea to state
the main point of the email clearly and to clearly tell the audience what you want them to do.

   It may be helpful for you to think of this as building a frame around your email. In the first part of
the frame, you open by telling the reader why you're writing and clearly state your purpose. If you
are making a request, you may want to follow this with a justification of some context as to why you
are making the request. Then, in the body, you give the main message. In the bottom part of the frame,
you end by telling the reader what to do next. This is what we frequently refer to as a "call to action."

   Here's an example. The grey shaded parts represent the frame.

           Frame: I'm writing to congratulate you on being named Employee of the Month.

           In your nomination form, your manager noted that you've always had exceptional customer
        service skills, but last month you stood out by helping an elderly customer troubleshoot her
        computer issues. Your patience and dedication was inspirational to the rest of the team.

           Frame: We would like to present you with a certificate and your $100 cheque at the staff meeting
        on Monday, June 5th. Please confirm whether or not you'll be in attendance so we can plan
        accordingly.

           Congratulations once again. We are lucky to have you part of our team!

First, the writer tells exactly why they're writing. Then, they provide the supporting details. Last, they
tell the reader what to do (confirm whether or not they'll be at the meeting).

           Author's note: Review the "Anatomy of an Email" handout for an illustrated overview of email
        structure.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 81
Here are some more tips for sending successful emails:

     · Proper salutations should demonstrate respect and avoid mix-ups in case a message is
         accidentally sent to the wrong recipient. For example, use a salutation like "Dear Ms. X"
         (external) or "Hi Barry" (internal). Be sure to use the formal title when first communicating
         with an individual. They may suggest dropping the formal title as the connection builds but
         defer to their preference.

     ·

           Screen capture of email client window. The subject column is too narrow to display a long Subject line.

         Subject lines should be clear, brief, and specific. This helps the recipient understand the
         essence of the message. For example, "Proposal attached" or "Your question of 10/25." Be aware
         that many email clients will not display the full Subject line (see above) if the recipient has not
         expanded the Subject column. Keep the subject short enough to avoid misinterpretation.
     · Do not insert the recipient email address until you are ready to send. A good preventative
         measure to avoid the potential embarrassment of prematurely sending emails. Hitting "send"
         without a recipient address will prevent the email from being sent.
     · Your email should have one purpose. If you find yourself covering more than one topic in
         your email, you should consider sending multiple emails so that your reader does not miss
         important information.
     · Be brief.
     · Use a clear format. Include line breaks between sentences or divide your message into brief
         paragraphs for ease of reading.
     · Close with a signature. Identify yourself by creating a signature block that automatically
         contains your name and business contact information. It is becoming increasingly common
         for businesses to add First Nations Land Acknowledgements to their email signatures. For
         example, at Kwantlen, we can use: "At KPU we work, study, and live in a region south of the
         Fraser River which overlaps with the unceded traditional and ancestral lands of the Kwantlen,
         Musqueam, Katzie, Semiahmoo, Tsawwassen, Qayqayt and Kwikwetlem peoples."
     · Reread, revise, and review. Catch and correct spelling and grammar mistakes before you
         press "send." It will take more time and effort to undo the problems caused by a hasty, poorly
         written email than to get it right the first time.
     · Reply promptly. Watch out for an emotional response--never reply in anger--but make a
         habit of replying to all emails within 24 hours, even if only to say that you will provide the
         requested information in 48 or 72 hours.
     · Use "Reply All" sparingly. Do not send your reply to everyone who received the initial email
         unless your message absolutely needs to be read by the entire group.
     · If you include a link, test it to make sure it is complete.

82 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
     · Announce email attachments in your message.
     · Give feedback or follow up. If you don't get a response in 24 hours, email or call. Spam filters

         may have intercepted your message, so your recipient may never have received it.

   Sample Standard Email

      To: Harriet Adamo, Physical Plant Manager, XYZ Corporation
      From: Mel Vargas, Construction Site Manager, Maxim Construction
      Sent: Monday, 10/25/2019 8:14 AM
      Subject: Construction Interruptions
      Harriet,
      I know employees of XYZ Corp. are looking forward to moving into the new ABC Street building in
   January, but recently groups of employees who do not have business here have been walking through the
   building. These visits create a safety hazard, interrupt the construction workers, and could put your
   occupancy date in jeopardy.
      Would you please instruct your staff members who haven't already been moved to ABC Street to stay out
   of the building? If they need to meet here with someone who has already moved, they should conduct their
   business and leave promptly via the nearest staircase.
      We need to avoid further interruptions so our construction workers can get the building ready for
   occupancy on schedule. If you have any questions, please call me.
      Thanks,
      Mel
      Melvin R. Vargas
      Construction Site Manager, Maxim Construction Co.
      1234 Main St, Big City, Canada
      (111) 222-3333 ext. 4444

Work Cited

Guffey, M. (2008). Essentials of business communication (7th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson/Wadsworth.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 83
CHAPTER 24.

MEMOS

   Memoranda (memos, for short) are forms of professional correspondence primarily used to
communicate with others within an organization. Many formatting conventions of a memo should
seem similar to its digital descendant--the email. Like emails, memos are written and distributed to
provide updates, publish announcements, and request specific actions.

   Why write a memo rather than send an email?
   To start with the practical, the fact is that many employees (such as those in industrial and service
sectors) don't have ready access to email. Even those with access may not check email regularly. A
memo may be printed out and posted to areas where employees frequent.
   Another purpose of the memo is that it serves as a snapshot of a moment in an organization's
history. It may be hard to believe but, in the early days of the Green Bay Packers, volunteers were
recruited to sell season tickets. From the 1942 memo from Lee Joannes, we get an idea of what

84 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
incentives were offered to volunteers as well as the organizational vision for the team and the growing
football league. (Courtesy of the Cofrin Library Archives.)

   A memo is therefore also a form of archiving for an organization and may contain short-form
reports, meeting notes, or summaries of longer reports. Policy memos are a specific sub-genre of
memo that communicate changes in organizational structure, protocols, and procedures.
A memo's audience is almost always known and its distribution is strictly limited to within an
organization. Memos may be accessible to the public and should be written as such--no private
information should be included. The tone and style of memo writing are both objective and written
from a first-person plural perspective.

   A CEO, for example, will send memos to employees announcing new products being released.
Human resources might post memos announcing new hires or policy changes that impact the
workplace. While this information might go out as an email as well, the memo should contain more
details and be written in a highly-polished, clear format.

HOW TO WRITE A MEMO

As is found in most forms of professional writing, the memo is a finely-crafted document that
prioritizes clarity and concision. Because memos usually contain policy changes and are used for
recordkeeping, writing them usually demands several rounds of drafting, reviewing by management,
and revising.

   Unless sent on behalf of or from top administrators and managers, memos should be written in the
first-person plural form (we, our, ours) to suggest inclusion and organizational cohesion.
Keeping in mind that the purpose of memos is to provide clear instruction or information, first
consider the fundamental questions that the reader will need answered. According to the School of
Public Policy at the The University of Chicago, there are four questions that should be addressed by
your memo:

   First, describe what is happening. This information should be clearly described in the introductory
paragraph. What changes are occurring? What new tools or procedures will be implemented? Which
policies are changing and what are those changes?
Because changes are usually implemented to address a problem, you should then describe the ideal
state or describe what should be happening. These are the "criteria of success" that measure how an
organization is performing.

   In most cases (especially if transparency is of value), you will then want to also answer, why is this
happening? Describe the motivation for implementing any changes as clearly as possible. Keep in
mind that memos can find their way into the public view so private, proprietary information should
be avoided. Providing contact information at the end of the memo can help administrators address
questions that touch on private matters.

   If the change is significant, memos should also indicate what operations, policies, or procedures are
currently working.
Finally, be sure to address the important question, what's next?

   Review the Anatomy of a Memo handout for additional guidance.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 85
CHAPTER 25.

COVER LETTERS

Note: This chapter is an excerpt from Technical and Professional Writing Genres, by Michael Beilfuss, Staci
Bettes, and Katrina Peterson. Some edits made for consistency.

  In the era of social media, the idea of writing an application letter to introduce
your résumé may seem outdated. However, the application letter still serves
several crucial functions. If the résumé is characterized by breadth (giving a
broad overview of your qualifications), the application letter is characterized by
depth (choosing a few most significant qualifications to cover in detail).

  Written in paragraphs rather than bullet points, this letter is the first writing
sample your employer will see from you. It offers an opportunity to market
your unique qualifications and to show how you will fit with the culture of
the company. An effective application letter will create a picture of you as a
potential employee and inspire a potential employer to learn more about you.

  Keep the following tips in mind as you write your cover letter:

     · Your letter is essentially an argument for why you should be granted an interview. Make sure
         to support the claim that you are qualified for the position with evidence. Don't just tell the
         employer how you are qualified, show them with clear, descriptive examples.

     · Demonstrate your authority by speaking in detail about your qualifications. It is best to
         share a specific process or project you were involved in that demonstrates your skills. For
         example, "As a publication supervisor, I was responsible for print scheduling, assigning
         designs, and facilitating the overall workflow to produce a bi-monthly consumer magazine."

     · Show the reader you have the skills and abilities necessary to do the job. The more detail
         you offer and the more precise your language is, the more the reader can picture you doing
         the job. Do your best to connect your qualifications with the needs of the potential employer.

     · Consider your audience carefully as you craft your letter. What is the job listing asking for?
         What do you know about the values of the hiring individual or organization? Knowing what is
         important to an organization is not only a good way of connecting, it is helpful to determine
         whether or not you will be a good fit.

     · Conduct additional research to help you connect with the company and to choose the
         appropriate tone, level of formality, and level of technicality. Browsing a company's website
         and social media accounts is an excellent way to gain insights into its values.

At some point, you may ask yourself, "Is it worth writing an application letter
knowing it might never be read?" The short answer is yes. Some recruiters
go straight to the résumé and make an initial decision, while others carefully

86 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
weigh the information in the letter. There is no way of knowing which will
be the case, so you are better off putting your best foot forward every time. A
well-written application letter is an opportunity to present yourself well and
influence a recruiter, so always take full advantage of that opportunity. It can
also be viewed as your first conversation with a future employer, so its quality
should be exceptional.

STAND OUT FROM THE COMPETITION

When writing an application letter, remember that you have competition. Your
audience is a professional who screens and hires job applicants--someone who
may look through dozens or even hundreds of other applications on the day
yours is received. The immediate objective of your application letter and
accompanying résumé is to attract this person's attention. The ultimate goal is
to obtain an interview. As you write your application letter, strive to complete
three tasks:

    · Catch the reader's attention favorably,

     · Convince the reader that you are a qualified candidate for the job, and

     · Leave a lasting impression

Many people use the terms application letter and cover letter interchangeably.
It is good to keep in mind, however, that they may refer to different business
writing genres. The letter of application is much like a sales letter in which you
market your skills, abilities, and knowledge. The term cover letter may refer to
a document of transmittal sent with faxes or emails. It identifies an item being
sent, the person to whom it is being sent, and its reason, providing a permanent
record of the transmittal for both the writer and the reader.

DECIPHERING THE JOB DESCRIPTION

Most job descriptions can be copied from the employer's website. The previous section (Finding Job
Openings) shares additional ideas on how to search for job ads. Once you have identified a position
that interests you, copy the job description into a Word document. (If you only have a hard copy of
the ad, it might be worthwhile to type it into a new Word document, so that you can copy pertinent
phrases from the job description into your letter.) You can complete two prewriting steps before
writing to decipher the job description: 1) List each skill and qualification on a separate line and 2)
Group like with like. If communication skills are listed as important, in addition to giving
presentations, list one after the other. An example of a job description and the deciphering process is
given below.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 87
      Sample Job Description

      Entry-Level Sales

      The CML Company, a leading provider of recruiting and staffing services, is currently seeking
   motivated, career-oriented individuals to join our recruiting team. Our recruiters work with our clients
   and inside sales team identifying, screening, interviewing, and presenting qualified candidates for contract
   and permanent positions. CML promotes from within. Entry-level sales staff start as recruiters. Once they
   master that role and have a desire to become a member of our sales team, they can be considered for
   promotion. Qualified candidates for the recruiter position will:

          · Develop recruiting strategies designed to identify qualified candidates through various
              recruiting tools.

          · Evaluate candidates' strengths compared with clients' requirements by evaluating, screening, and
              interviewing the candidate.

          · Negotiate wage rates and other terms and conditions of employment with candidates and gain
              commitment from candidates for current and future job requirements.

          · Complete necessary pre-employment processes, including reference and background checks and
              drug tests.

          · Work with account executives to identify top accounts, client skill sets, and key market
              segments, and to assess clients' staffing requirements.

          · Interact effectively with others to create a productive team environment.
          · Communicate with peers by sharing recruiting best practices and providing accurate, thorough

              documentation on contract employees in our applicant-tracking system.
          · Maintain relationships with industry contacts to provide customer service, gain industry

              knowledge, and get referrals and sales leads.

      Qualified candidates for the recruiter position must also:

          · Have a bachelor's degree or related sales or recruiting experience.
          · Be available to work before and after typical office hours as work may demand.
          · Possess strong written and oral English communication skills.
          · Be familiar with Microsoft Word and MS Outlook (or similar email applications).
          · Have work experience in a service-oriented business.
          · Reflect a desire to learn and advance in a fast-paced sales environment, and be capable of

              regularly using good judgment and discretion to accomplish goals.
          · Be currently authorized to work in the United States for any employer.

As you consider the preceding sample, study each component of the job description and how it
relates to your skills so that you can apply for and gain an interview for the position. Also, simplify
the job ad description as you list and group. Your streamlined (second) list of requirements might

88 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
look something like this:

      Sample Deciphering Process

      Requirements:

          · Bachelor's degree

          · Able to work flexible, long hours

          · Strong written and verbal communication skills

          · Computer literate

          · Desire to learn in a fast-paced sales environment

          · Good judgment

          · Discretion

          · Authorized to work in the U.S.

As you compare your abilities and credentials to your list(s), ask yourself how
closely your qualifications match the items listed. Do your skills match all of
these requirements or the vast majority of them? Highlight the skills that match
and consider where you might reference them directly in your job letter. Your
next step might involve identifying and writing down any requirements that are
NOT stated directly. For example, the job ad seems to imply: that individuals
must be motivated, they must have the ability to master the work, and they must
have a desire to be a part of the sales team in order to be promoted.

  Do not rule yourself out if every requirement does not match. Instead, think
of something somewhat related. For example, if you have never worked in
a fast-paced sales environment, focus on your desire to learn. Highlight the
fact that you have observed fast-paced sales environments and those situations
appeal to you. At the very least, you could use the fact that you have always
been very proactive in completing tasks as efficiently as possible. Or maybe
you have taken a course or two in economics or marketing that might have
provided relevant knowledge. In contrast, if you are a strong match for most
requirements, generate specific, results-oriented examples to demonstrate these
skills.

  Oftentimes, you will not have a clear indication as to which skills are more
important than others in the job ad, so use your best judgment call. Treat
each skill as if it is the most important. For instance, when considering
communication skills, have a specific, results-oriented example of your verbal
and written skills. At some point, however, you will want to select the three
skills you think are most important, match them to your strongest skills, and

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 89
then write your cover letter. These three skills, if positioned properly, will make
the case for why you should be hired.

COVER LETTER FORMAT

The format below is a visual guide provided by the UW-Green Bay Career Planning and
Professional Connections department. Descriptions of each section follow.

90 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 91
FORMAT AND STRUCTURE

Formatting of all business letters--but especially the application letter--must be neat and
professional. It is recommended that you use left alignment for all text, since various software
programs can wreak havoc with indentations and tabs. Common business letter formats include the
block letter, the semi-block letter, the alternative letter, and the simplified letter. Block format,
among the most widely used business letter formats, is recommended for application letters. The
application letter includes five main sections:

     · Heading and greeting/salutation

     · Introductory paragraph

     · Middle paragraphs

     · Closing paragraph

     · Complimentary close

The heading contains the writer's address and the date of the letter. The writer's name is not
included; only a date is needed in headings on letterhead stationery. Next comes the inside address,
which shows the name and address of the recipient of the letter. This information can help prevent
confusion at the recipient's offices. Also, if the recipient has moved, the inside address helps to
determine what to do with the letter. In the inside address, include the appropriate title of respect
of the recipient, and copy the company's name exactly as that company writes it. When you have the
names of individuals, remember to address them appropriately: Mrs., Ms., Mr., Dr., etc. If you are
not sure what is correct for an individual, do some extra online research and/or consider using the
title that the individual prefers. Another standard rule of thumb is to use Ms. if unsure of a woman's
marital status.

  The greeting or salutation directly addresses the recipient of the letter and
is followed by a colon. If you do not know the recipient's gender, you may use
the full name. Again, the best solution is to do some extra research or make a
quick, anonymous phone call to the organization and ask for a name. In some
cases, you may address the salutation to a department name, committee name,
or position name: Dear Personnel Department, Dear Recruitment Committee,
or Dear Hiring Committee.

  In the introductory paragraph, you introduce yourself to the hiring manager
or recruiter. The paragraph should include these general items:

     · Why you are contacting them (to apply for X position--give its specific name).

     · How you heard about the position (for example, give the name of the website where you
         found the ad).

     · The date of the ad if applicable.

     · What the minimum requirements for the job are, and how you meet them (for example, if the
         job requires a degree and three years of experience, you will want to mention right away that
         you meet these requirements).

92 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
· Something specific about the company or the job itself that has made you interested in the
   position (for example, does the company have a good environmental track record? Do they
   mention on their website that they like to promote from within? Have they won awards? Are
   they working on any projects that pique your interests?).

When the Job ad requires...  You might write...
Introductory lab experience
                             During the summer of 2016, I interned for Johnson &
Strong writing skills        Johnson, where I acted as the assistant laboratory supervisor.
                             I was tasked with performing gram stain testing, assessing
                             bacterial antibiotic resistance, and completing routine safety
                             checks.

                             During fall of 2019, I took Technical Writing at OSU, where
                             I created documents in the following professional writing
                             genres: emails, business letters, technical instructions,
                             internal proposals, and external analytical reports.

The middle paragraphs of the cover letter should make the case for why you would be an exceptional
hire. Select two to four strengths necessary to excel and assign each strength to a bulleted section or
brief paragraph. Boldly indicate your strengths and include your best examples of how you excel at
each strength. For a one-page application letter, some candidates have two paragraphs, while others
have three. Oftentimes, one of these paragraphs will focus on education and the ways it has prepared
the candidate for the position, while another discusses work experience and applies skills learned to
the position. Anything listed as a strength in the résumé needs to include visible proof of that strength.
For example, if you mention having strong interpersonal skills, be sure to give a concrete example,
like writing about a course that required group work to finish a large project. Again, be specific. Show
exactly how the event built or showcased the skill you reference.

  The closing paragraph should reiterate any major points or takeaways that
you want readers to remember. It will likely do the following:

    · Restate your interest.

     · Highlight how your strengths mesh well with the required skills.

     · If applicable, inform them when you will contact them within a certain time period.

     · Invite them to contact you (and include contact information, typically your professional email
         address).

     · Refer them to your enclosed résumé.

     · Thank them for their time and consideration.

The final element of the business letter is called the complimentary close. Other common ones are
Sincerely yours, Respectfully, or Thank you. Notice that only the first letter is capitalized, and it is
always followed by a comma. Usually, you type your name four lines below the complimentary close
and--if the letter is a physical copy--sign your full name in between.

Concluding Thoughts

Preparation and practice are critical to every step of the job search process, and the cover letter is no
different. Five actions can help make your cover letter compelling:

                             PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 93
     · Make a list of your top ten strengths.
     · List your top five weaknesses (areas you would like to strengthen).
     · Decipher the job description to identify each separate skill and qualification.
     · Compare the two lists to see if they are in alignment. Also identify the gaps--does the job

         description list something that you haven't done?
     · Highlight your top skills that align with the job description as you will use them in Other

         strengths and skills could include (in alphabetical order).

94 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 26.

PEER REVIEW

INTRODUCTION

Have you ever had a coach, friend, or relative show you a different way of doing or seeing something?
Perhaps your golf swing needed some adjustment or someone pointed out an easter egg you missed
in a movie. If significant enough, perhaps these suggestions not only improved your experience but
changed the way you play golf or watch films.

   When it comes to writing, however, providing and receiving advice can be challenging. But
reviewing writing with a peer can help both appreciate the activity of writing so much more. In this
section, we're going to consider some ways to approach feedback as a way to engage our writing in
more meaningful ways. This starts with changing our perspective about peer review itself and seeing
it as a vital part of the entire writing process!

What Exactly is Peer Review?

Let's start by unpacking what we mean by "peer review." Broadly stated, this is a process in which
work created by an individual or group is taken up by another for the purpose of verification,
validation, and quality control. Peer review is how we ensure that our information is correct. In the
sciences, this process is used to verify research and findings and has been an important part of the
scientific method for over 350 years!

   Other fields have their own peer review standards. The American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants (AICPA), for example, requires its members to adhere to a particular type of peer review
to maintain affiliation with the organization. This proprietary form of peer review is more focused
on a firm's operations and engagements but still uses standards to guide the reviewers' suggestions
(2022).

   For professionals, peer review can ensure that our writing is mechanically sound but also that our
information is correct. Consider that we each have a set of values, goals, experiences, and perspectives
that can motivate and affect our work. Think about how your vocabulary and mastery of grammar
and spelling has improved over time. You have also conducted research and incorporated your
findings into projects. In addition, think about how your experience and education in your field has
provided you with additional tools (such as terminology and methods) that also inform your writing.
All of these qualities are reflected in your writing!

   Now consider your peers. Each has a different set of values and skills as well as backgrounds
and experiences. When it comes to research, they may have encountered different sources. Their
experience and expertise can offer unique perspectives that could improve your work. In the peer
review process, these two perspectives--yours and your peer's--wrestle with the work being
examined. We're not just talking about better spelling but better ideas! A good peer reviewer will also
help clarify your own expertise in areas where you might provide more explanation.

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 95
When Do We Conduct Peer Review?

As a writing student and instructor, my experience with peer review has been the traditional extra
task tacked on after the writing assignment is complete. In school, this can be especially frustrating if
we'd rather not think about the assignment after it's been submitted. Now we have to review someone
else's work? Isn't my instructor supposed to be doing this anyways?

   I argue that peer review is an ongoing part of the writing process--not just an afterthought. One of
the reasons for this is that peer review should be a conversation about the work. It should illuminate
new ideas as well as offer guidance on writing clarity and effectiveness. This is not what typically
happens in the writing classroom: I hand you my essay; you check the essay, make some suggestions
and hand it back to me; I edit my essay according to your suggestions and submit it in time for the
deadline. No conversation. No engagement.

   This is a generalization I offer to present an alternative. What if, instead of an afterthought, we
expanded peer review to make it more helpful?

     · Peer review starts with the writer. In her list of peer review essentials, Suzan Last (2019)
         begins by pointing out that, to be of benefit, the writing must be of the highest quality the
         writer can muster. Too many minor spelling errors will become a distraction from "big
         picture" concerns like a lack of evidence or concepts that need to be expanded upon. More
         importantly, Last suggests that the writer discuss the work with the reviewer first. What are
         the concerns? What specific feedback is being requested? This is very important if the
         reviewer is unfamiliar with the subject matter.

     · Review for ideas, not mechanics. One of the biggest misconceptions about peer review is
         that the reviewer must catch every minor mechanical error such as spelling and grammar. As
         mentioned above, the main goal of peer review is to get someone else's unique perspective.
         While mechanics are important, focusing on concepts and ideas will be invaluable. That is, for
         the first round of review. For now, you want the reviewer to pose questions and expand ideas.
         We'll talk about the review process a bit later.

     · Expect several rounds of peer review. If the first review is focused on concepts and ideas,
         the writer being reviewed should anticipate having to expand and elaborate on ideas. This will
         entail more writing and perhaps more research so plan accordingly. Subsequent reviews will
         take less time (perhaps) but it's important to build time into your writing process to
         accommodate extensive revision.

How to Give Good Peer Review

Your colleague or classmate has given you their writing for review. Now what?
   If your colleague has sent you a digital version, save a copy to your computer and rename the

file to something distinct. This will prevent your reviewed file, when returned to the writer, from
overwriting the original copy. Your word processing software likely has tools for reviewing purposes.
If it's a printed copy, you will want to take notes directly on the copy but also have additional paper
for writing out lengthier comments.

    1. Prepare and Gather Information from the Writer. First, make sure you have the necessary
         information needed to adequately review the work. Who is the audience? What is the
         purpose? Are there any other details that are important to know while reviewing? Has the

96 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
         writer provided you with some specific areas to focus on? If not, be sure to ask! As the
         reviewer, you may also want to be sure you have the time to provide a proper review. The
         writer should also give you enough time.

    2. Set aside time. As discussed, peer review should not be an afterthought and therefore given
         time to be conducted properly. For most academic journals, peer reviews can take months!
         When your colleague is able to take time to review, a reasonable amount of time to review a
         single page would be approximately 15 minutes--10 minutes of reading and 5 or more
         writing comments. Of course, this time will vary depending on the subject matter, the
         reviewer, and the quality of the writing (remember to submit your best draft!)

    3. Conducting the review. You've cleared your calendar for the next 15 minutes and have closed
         your browser (focus!) and so it's time to conduct your review. Before you begin there are a few
         considerations you'll want to keep in mind:

             1. Give the writing a focused first read. Try to withhold comments and suggestions
                  during this first read. Get a sense of what the writer is attempting to accomplish. Is
                  their purpose clear? Is the length appropriate to the type of writing? Is it easy to read?

             2. Take notes. Gather your thoughts so that you can share them with the writer in a clear
                  and effective manner. What words come to mind when reading this work? What is the
                  thesis or purpose of the writing?

             3. Pose questions instead of giving directions. Remember that peer review is a
                  conversation. Linda Nilson (2003) argued that many of the questions we ask writers are
                  not as helpful as they could be (p. 35). Instead, she says, our questions should not ask
                  for judgments nor opinions but instead focus on conceptual, yet specific, details (p. 36).
                  For instance, compare the two questions:

                      1. "Does the essay prove it's point? If not, why not?"
                           vs.

                      2. "What are the writer's justifications for taking the positions that he or she does?"

Note the tone and level of specificity asked. The first question is vague and a bit blunt sounding. The
second question is more targeted, asking for specific details. There's also a lack of interpretation being
asked of the reviewer.

    1. Describe, evaluate, and suggest. Bill Hart-Davidson (2014) offers a simple, three-step model
         for conducting peer review. First, the reviewer should offer a description of what they are
         reading. This perspective of the reviewer may help the writer determine whether or not their
         intended meaning is being effectively communicated. Then, he suggests, the reviewer should
         evaluate the writing against the criteria. If the writer, for instance, is concerned about the
         quality of their evidence, the reviewer can offer some objective standards like citation
         practices. Once the reviewer has evaluated the writing, then they may offer suggestions on
         how to improve the work.

    2. Use a simple rubric to evaluate writing. A rubric can help the reviewer keep track of various
         qualities of the writing. A rubric is a checklist or set of categories and concepts that are most
         important. You have probably seen rubrics used in the assessment of your work. Keeping your

                                                                                                     PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 97
         rubric simple keeps it manageable. See the example at the end of this section.

    3. Don't edit. As Suzan Last recommends, "your job is reviewer, not editor." The reviewer's
         responsibility is to identify areas of improvement not make the corrections. Making changes
         for the writer may seem helpful but it is preventing the writer from making the change which
         will help improve their writing!

    4. Two kinds of comments. In addition to comments and suggestions made in the margins or
         within the text, you should also provide a lengthier comment that offers "big picture"
         suggestions. This would include your first impressions, positive moments, as well as areas
         where you've focused your suggestions.

    5. Identify specific areas when making suggestions. When making comments, be sure those
         comments are addressing specific areas of concern. For example, if a writer consistently
         misspells "accommodate" (as I tend to do), you would highlight one instance and recommend
         they correct each instance.

    6. Use a constructive and positive voice when writing feedback. The reviewer is there to help
         the writer. If you approach your review with a supportive attitude, your comments will reflect
         the conversational quality of peer review. Your tone should also be courteous. Remember that
         we all have writing wrinkles that need to be ironed out--offer feedback in the voice you
         would like used when it's your time to be reviewed!

CONCLUSION: PEER REVIEW AS PROFESSIONALISM

The peer review process is central to many occupations and the development of a productive
workplace. By comparison, providing feedback about a colleague's writing is far less complex than
the peer review processes found in most fields: accountants have stringent protocols as do nurses and
scientists, as well as creative professionals.

   Ultimately, we want our peer review process to highlight the collaboration and congeniality of the
professional environment. The conversation that emerges will not only help the writer develop their
writing but also inform the reviewer's writing through the encounter with a different perspective. In
this way, the peer review process is a way of getting to know your colleagues, facilitate comradery,
and build trust.

   The collaborative nature of peer review not only helps reinforce the relationships with colleagues
but also with clients; peer review is excellent practice for working with clients and can help us
recognize a client's needs when they might not have the ability to effectively communicate those
needs. With practice, even the most challenging of clients may be offered suggestions that can help
mitigate their vision with what is feasible.

RUBRIC EXAMPLE

Rubrics can be as complex or as simple as you like but they should be helpful in structuring your
evaluation. One example is the following, based on two categories, mechanics and genre as well as
two qualities, form and content.

     · Content refers to the more nuanced quality of our writing, this is what we are trying to say

     · Form refers to the structure and design of your writing; this is how we are saying it

98 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
     · Writing mechanics are the rules that help support the effective communication of our
         message

     · The genre is the category of writing used to deliver that message

This creates a rubric that looks like the one below. Some of the items that would fall under each
quadrant are also included. You should add others based on your expertise, experience and the
requests of the reviewer.

           Form                   Content

Mechanics  Grammar, spelling,     Word choice,
           punctuation, sentence  appropriate language,
           structure              tone, clarity

Genre      Conforms to            Formality, clarity of
           professional           purpose
           standards,
           conventions, and
           expectations of genre
           as well as formatting
           and design

WORKS CITED

American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. (2022) "Questions and answers about the AICPA
peer review program." https://us.aicpa.org/content/dam/aicpa/interestareas/peerreview/
resources/faqs/downloadabledocuments/qandaprp-general-info.pdf

   Eli Review. (2014, December 19). Describe-evaluate-suggest: Giving helpful feedback, with Bill
Hart-Davidson [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KzdBRRQhYv4

   Last, S. (2019). Technical Writing Essentials. Press Books. Licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License.

   Nilson, L. B. (2003). Improving student peer feedback. College Teaching, 51(1), 34-38.
https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/27559125.pdf

   "What is peer review?" Elsevier. n.d. Retrieved from: https://www.elsevier.com/reviewers/what-is-
peer-review

                                           PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 99
CHAPTER 27.

OUTREACH: PRESS RELEASES

When we want to get the word out about new products, promote an upcoming event, or share
noteworthy news, the press release is one of the most powerful tools available to an organization.
These forms of professional outreach are event summaries sent to publications and other media
outlets. If the outlet's editor is interested in the event, they will likely respond for more information,
compose a story on your event, and share your news with their audience. Because of the potential
outreach and promotional benefits, the press release must be carefully crafted to appeal to the
publisher as well as the audience of the publication.

   At first glance, the press release is a relatively short and straightforward document. It is worth
reiterating, however, that when we submit a release to a publication, we are requesting that others
share our message. A reviewing editor will determine whether or not to pursue the story based on
how relevant the announcement is to their audience and the professionalism of the release itself. If
picked up as a story, the publication will likely tailor your message to their particular audience, but
you must still provide suitable content.

   But this complicates matters because you're pulling double-duty writing to both the publication
and that publication's audience. Because of this, you can add promotional language to the professional
standards we've discussed so far: this is the essence of marketing. The key is to keep your writing
clear and concise while providing enough detail and content so that the publication can compose
their own story if they choose to. All of this while maintaining professionalism and formality! Public
communicators, marketers, and event planners use press releases for various purposes. One of the
essential functions of press releases is to connect your organization with the public. Press releases are
generally addressed to publication editors or other organizations interested in your release's subject.

   Promoting your event in an objective tone. Regardless of the subject matter, a press release is
typically written to promote a specific event. Unlike other marketing materials that may use more
expressive language, the press release maintains a neutral tone to not seem too biased. In part, editors
prefer an objective voice because this mimics the journalistic approach to writing. On a more practical
level, some publications will copy portions of the release for use in any materials written from the
release. In my experience, some editors also dislike aggressively promotional releases.

   Providing just enough content to pique interest. Keeping in mind that the goal of the press release
is to convince the editor to follow up on the story, a strategy for composing press releases is to provide
just enough information so that the editor wants to find out more. Providing quotations, for example,
is an excellent way to develop a personal connection while controlling the story you want to tell. With
too many quotes or quotes that share too many specifics, the editor or reporter may not have any
reason to follow up! Provide quotes that speak to generalities and the "spirit" of the event, but spare
some details for later.

   Timing is important. Beyond the writing, reviewing, and revising, knowing when to distribute
the press release is also significant. Send the release too early and it may be circulated across media

100 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
channels with time enough for the public to forget. A release that is received too close to the event
will not provide the publication with enough time to follow up and create a story.

FORMATTING

While the "voice" of your press release may take practice, the formatting of this genre is fairly
standardized. These conventions are important because they allow the editor or producer to
efficiently scan your release without having to search for essential details. Be sure to include the
following elements in your press release:

HEADER INFORMATION

There are several crucial components to the press release header:

     · Include your letterhead, logo, or branding at the top of your release to convey authenticity.

     · Release timing. Sometimes referred to as the "release date," this information helps
         communicate what stage the release is at.
               When being circulated internally for review and revision, the release should be labeled
                  DRAFT. Highlighting this in some way can help prevent early distribution.
               When the release is ready for submission and potential publication, label the release as
                  FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE.
               In some cases, it may be worth sending out a pre-emptive release well in advance of the
                  event. For an especially newsworthy announcement, this can help the publisher plan
                  accordingly and gather additional information. In these cases, label the release as FOR
                  FUTURE RELEASE. Author's note: labelling releases this way is not recommended as the
                  release could inadvertently be published earlier than anticipated.

     · A catchy, concise headline should tell the reader the WHAT and WHEN. Headlines should
         stand out from the rest of the release. ALL CAPS and bolded is a common method.

     · Sub-headline. Although not always included, a good sub-headline will provide the reader
         with qualifying information such as the HOW and WHY.

BODY OF PRESS RELEASE

The body of a press release also conforms to a generic
formula. Paragraphs are short and follow a
journalistic structure called the "inverted pyramid"
method. To use this approach, begin your release by
first providing the most important facts that the
reader needs to know. These details are followed by
additional information that is organized from most
to least important.

   Other important elements to include are:

     · Date and Place Line. This is the geographic

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 101
         location and date of the event or announcement in the following order: City, State, Month,
         Day. The location is often written in all caps while the date is not. The entire line should be
         bold to stand out.

               Compelling introduction. Following the "inverted pyramid" formula, introduce your
                  event by sharing important information. Remember that this paragraph should also be
                  compelling without relying on expressive language.

               Body paragraphs. Continue to describe the event, providing interesting information,
                  quotations from individuals involved, and any historical details worth sharing.

               Call to Action. What do you want your audience to do? Reiterate the next steps.

               About/Boilerplate. This concluding paragraph describes the organization and may
                  include a short history and its purpose.

     · End Notification. Indicated by a series of three number signs -###-, this line indicates the end
         of the release. Another less-common way to accomplish this is with -30-.

     · Contact Information. Provide the name, phone number, and email address of the person to
         contact.

Author's note: When working as a public communications officer, I discovered that many press
releases are published in media outlets without any follow-up by editors or reporters. Instead,
the press release is copied word-for-word and edited slightly. Be aware of this possibility when
sending out your releases!

   The inverted pyramid model complements the AIDA method, a marketing formula used to
compose promotional materials. Simply put, the AIDA method is as follows:

     · Attention. Encourage the reader's attention using compelling language such as action verbs
         and clear, concise statements. A headline written and formatted to stand out is a good start. In
         a single line, announce what the event is. Alternatively, you might also identify who is being
         recognized and their accomplishment. In the sub-headline, you can expand on this
         information by describing how or why this event or announcement is significant.

     · Interest. Once the reader has been "hooked" by the headline, begin to generate interest by
         providing specific details that will resonate most with the reader. Using clear, concise
         statements, tell the reader precisely what is being announced. Avoid overly expressive
         language and fluffy language that may seem vague--or worse--inauthentic.

     · Desire/Decision. With all of the relevant information, your release should evoke the desire to
         pursue the story. This should be accomplished in 3-4 short paragraphs in which you provide
         more in-depth information. Using quotes that the publication may use is an excellent strategy.
         Alternatively, the "D" in AIDA can also represent the point at which you prompt your reader
         to decide whether or not to pursue the story in press releases.

     · Action. Regarding press releases, the action we want the reader to take up is to request more
         information to develop the story further. This is accomplished with the section of your press
         release that provides contact information. Provide the name, phone number, and email
         address for a point-of-contact person and invite interviews. In addition, we can indicate what
         materials (images, reports, data, etc.) are available upon request.

102 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
Works Cited

Image credit: "Inverted pyramid in comprehensive form" by Christopher Schwartz is licensed under
CC BY-SA 3.0

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 103
CHAPTER 28.

CREATING YOUR LINKEDIN PROFILE

Your LinkedIn profile represents your online professional persona. Be mindful that your profile is
public and should be revised regularly. Posting to LinkedIn like you would any other social media
platform is also important for maintaining a presence on the platform.

   If you are creating your LinkedIn profile for the first time, you will benefit from LinkedIn's
guidance which will take you through the steps to creating one. If you've already set up a profile,
review the steps below to ensure your LinkedIn presence is as engaging as possible!

   Please be aware that the steps below reflect the process at the time of this writing and will likely change over
time.

    1. Sign Up and Create Your Account: Visit www.linkedin.com and sign in using one of the most
         appropriate options. When selecting New to LinkedIn?, you will be prompted to provide a
         preferred email address and create a secure password. After agreeing to the terms, you'll be
         prompted to provide your first and last name. You'll then be asked to complete a security
         check.

    2. Add Basic Information: LinkedIn will guide you through adding basic information such as
         location, job interests, and the industry you work in. This basic information will help
         LinkedIn provide more relevant job opportunities and connections.

    3. Upload a Professional Profile Picture: A professional profile picture is essential on LinkedIn.
         Ensure the photo is clear, professional, and appropriately represents you and your industry.
         Be sure that the image is large enough: the dimensions of your photo should be at least
         400×400 pixels with a maximum size of 8MB.

    4. Create a Compelling Headline: Your headline should quickly convey who you are and what
         you do. It's one of the first things people see, so make it engaging.

               Keep it Concise: LinkedIn allows you 220 characters for your headline, so it's essential
                  to be concise and clear.

               Define Your Goal: Are you looking for a job? Are you trying to build your professional
                  network? Or are you trying to establish yourself as a thought leader in your industry?
                  Define your goal, as it will guide the tone and content of your headline.

               Use Relevant Keywords: Include relevant keywords to your industry or role. This not
                  only makes your headline more compelling but also improves your visibility in
                  LinkedIn searches. Avoid cliches, jargon, slang, and other figures of speech.

               Be Specific: Your headline should be specific and focused. Instead of "Experienced
                  marketing professional," you could say "Digital Marketing Specialist with expertise in
                  SEO and Content Strategy."

104 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
               Highlight Your Values: What makes you unique? What do you bring to the table?
                  Highlight these points in your headline. For example, "Bilingual Customer Service
                  Specialist improving client relations for global brands."

               Proofread: Make sure your headline is free of spelling or grammatical errors.

    5. Write Your About Section: The About section on LinkedIn, formerly known as
         the Summary, is where you can elaborate on your professional experiences, skills, goals, and
         unique value propositions in more detail. Think of this as an abbreviated cover letter--if most
         of your LinkedIn profile lists your skills, experiences, and qualifications, this is where you
         offer more of your personality! Here are some steps to help you write a compelling "About"
         section:

               Write it in the first person.
               Start with a Strong Opening: The first few lines of your "About" section are crucial.

                  Make them engaging and invite readers to keep scrolling. Introduce yourself, your
                  professional role, and your area of expertise.
               Tell Your Story: In a concise, yet engaging manner, tell your professional story. What
                  have been your key achievements? What are you passionate about? How have you made
                  an impact in your roles?
               Highlight Key Skills and Experiences: Describe your essential skills and how you've
                  applied them in various roles. Don't just list your skills; provide context to illustrate
                  how you've utilized these skills effectively.
               Personalize Your Content: The About section is not just about your professional side.
                  Include a bit about who you are outside of work. You may be passionate about a cause,
                  have a unique hobby, or have traveled extensively. A few personal touches (hobbies,
                  pets, family) can also be good personal additions to help build connections. Avoid
                  sharing anything private--remember that these are public profiles!
               Use Relevant Keywords: Like the headline, incorporate industry-related keywords
                  into your About section. This can help improve the visibility of your profile in
                  LinkedIn search results.
               Include a Call to Action: What would you like readers to do next? Encourage them to
                  get in touch, check out your portfolio, or whatever next step you want them to take.
               Proofread: Make sure your About section is free from grammatical and spelling errors.
                  Read it out loud to ensure it sounds natural and is easy to understand. Very important!

Remember, LinkedIn allows you up to 2,600 characters in the "About" section, so use this space wisely
to create a comprehensive and captivating overview of your professional self. Here's an example:

   Marketing Director with over 10 years of experience developing effective marketing strategies for
multinational FMCG brands. I've led teams to deliver successful campaigns that increased brand awareness by
50% and achieved a 30% increase in sales. I'm skilled in Digital Marketing, Brand Management, and Market
Research. Outside of work, I volunteer for an animal rescue, reinforcing my belief in community service. I'm

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 105
always open to connecting with like-minded professionals and exploring innovative marketing ideas. Feel free to
reach out!

     · Detail Your Experience: List your work history, similar to how you would for a traditional
         resume. Include the company, position title, time period, and description of your
         responsibilities and achievements for each role. Start each responsibility, duty, and project
         with strong action verbs. Starting with the most recent, work your way backward
         chronologically.

     · List Your Skills: You can list up to 50 skills, but the top three are what your network will see
         (and have the opportunity to endorse) without having to click "see more." Be sure to list the
         most relevant and impressive skills first.

     · Add Your Education: Include schools you attended, degrees earned, and fields of study. You
         can also add activities and societies you were part of during those times.

     · Request Recommendations: Recommendations add credibility to your profile. Contact
         colleagues, managers, or professors who can provide a positive and accurate testimonial of
         your work.

     · Customize Your URL: LinkedIn automatically generates a URL for your profile, but you can
         (and should) customize it to include your name. A personalized URL is easier to share and
         looks better on a resume or business card.

     · Join Groups: Groups are a great way to connect with people in your industry or with similar
         interests. It also allows you to engage in discussions and share your expertise.

     · IMPORTANT: Adjust Your Privacy Settings: Depending on your comfort level, change who
         can see your profile, send invitations, etc. Adjust these settings in the "Privacy & Settings"
         section. Like any social media platform, you will likely encounter spam and fake accounts, so
         be aware of any potential scams. You can (and should) ignore any connections that seem
         suspicious.

     · Build Your Network: Connect with colleagues, classmates, and friends. As your network
         grows, LinkedIn will suggest people you may know based on mutual connections and similar
         industries.

Remember to keep your profile updated as you gain new skills and experiences. An up-to-date profile
is more attractive to potential employers and connections.

106 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 29.

BUILDING YOUR LINKEDIN NETWORK

After you've completed your profile, it's time to start connecting with organizations and other
professionals. Building your LinkedIn network requires a strategic and thoughtful approach. Here are
some steps to help you grow your LinkedIn network effectively:

    1. Personalize Connection Requests: Whenever you send a connection request, customize the
         default message. Briefly explain why you'd like to connect, where you met, or what common
         interests you share. People are more likely to accept connection requests that are
         personalized.

    2. Engage with Content: Like, share, and comment on posts from your connections. This will
         make you more visible in your network and show you're engaged in your industry.

    3. Post Regularly: Share articles, blog posts, or updates relevant to your industry. Regular
         posting not only keeps you in the mind of your current connections but also attracts new
         ones.

    4. Join Groups: LinkedIn groups are a great place to connect with professionals who share your
         interests or are in your industry. Participate in discussions, share valuable content, and
         connect with other group members.

    5. Use the "Alumni" Feature: LinkedIn's Alumni feature allows you to connect with individuals
         who attended the same school as you. This can be a great way to expand your network.

    6. Connect with "People You May Know": LinkedIn suggests People You May Know based on
         your existing connections, industries, and shared companies or schools. Review these
         suggestions regularly for potential connections.

    7. Follow Influencers: Following LinkedIn influencers in your industry can increase your
         visibility among like-minded professionals, offer valuable insights, and help grow your
         network.

    8. Ask for Introductions: If you're looking to connect with someone who's a second or third-
         degree connection, ask a mutual connection for an introduction.

    9. Attend or Host LinkedIn Live Sessions: Engaging in LinkedIn Live sessions allows you to
         interact with other attendees and hosts, helping to grow your network organically.

Remember, networking is not just about growing your connections but about building meaningful
relationships. It's essential to stay active, engage with your connections regularly, and offer value
where you can.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 107
                                                              PART V.

                EXTRA: GROUP COMMUNICATION, TEAMWORK,
                                        AND LEADERSHIP

This section is taken from Business Communication for Success (2015), an open

textbook produced by the University of Minnesota Libraries Publishing by Mark Schaub, Jenniffer
Eckert, Anessa Fehsenfeld, Rhonda R. Hoffman, Adam Krusniak, Tami McCoy, Rachel Jean Norman,
and Julian Toscano.

   Business Communication for Success is adapted from a work produced and distributed under a
Creative Commons license (CC BY-NC-SA) in 2010 by a publisher who has requested that they and
the original author not receive attribution. The 2015 adapted edition was produced by the University
of Minnesota Libraries Publishing, and is available online at: http://open.lib.umn.edu/
businesscommunication/.

   This adaptation reformatted the original text, and replaced some images and figures to make the
resulting whole more shareable. The 2015 adaptation has not been significantly altered or updated
from the original 2010 text.

   The extracted chapter used in this resource may be downloaded here as a PDF: Business
Communication for Success, Chapter 19.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 109
110 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 30.

GROUP COMMUNICATION, TEAMWORK, AND LEADERSHIP

Note: this section was originally published in Business Communication for Success.

GROUP COMMUNICATION, TEAMWORK, AND LEADERSHIP

   Teamwork is the ability to work together toward a common vision. The ability to direct individual
   accomplishments toward organizational objectives. It is the fuel that allows common people to attain
   uncommon results.
   -Andrew Carnegie

      Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people can change the world. Indeed, it is the
   only thing that ever has.
   -Margaret Mead

As humans, we are social beings. We naturally form relationships with others. In fact, relationships
are often noted as one of the most important aspects of a person's life, and they exist in many
forms. Interpersonal communication occurs between two people, but group communication may
involve two or more individuals. Groups are a primary context for interaction within the business
community. Groups may have heroes, enemies, and sages alongside new members. Groups overlap
and may share common goals, but they may also engage in conflict. Groups can be supportive or
coercive and can exert powerful influences over individuals.

   Within a group, individuals may behave in distinct ways, use unique or specialized terms, or
display symbols that have meaning to that group. Those same terms or symbols may be confusing,
meaningless, or even unacceptable to another group. An individual may belong to both groups,
adapting his or her communication patterns to meet group normative expectations. Groups are
increasingly important across social media venues, and there are many examples of successful
business ventures on the Web that value and promote group interaction.

   Groups use words to exchange meaning, establish territory, and identify who is a stranger versus
who is a trusted member. Are you familiar with the term "troll"? It is often used to identify someone
who is not a member of an online group or community; does not share the values and beliefs of the
group; and posts a message in an online discussion board to initiate flame wars, cause disruption, or
otherwise challenge the group members. Members often use words to respond to the challenge that
are not otherwise common in the discussions, and the less than flattering descriptions of the troll are
a rallying point.

   Groups have existed throughout human history and continue to follow familiar patterns across
emerging venues as we adapt to technology, computer-mediated interaction, suburban sprawl, and
modern life. We need groups, and groups need us. Our relationship with groups warrants attention
on this interdependence as we come to know our communities, our world, and ourselves.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 111
CHAPTER 31.

GROUP PROBLEM SOLVING

   Learning Objectives

      Identify and describe how to implement seven steps for group problem-solving.

No matter who you are or where you live, problems are an inevitable part of life. This is true for
groups as well as for individuals. Some groups--especially work teams--are formed specifically to
solve problems. Other groups encounter problems for a wide variety of reasons. Within a family
group, a problem might be that a daughter or son wants to get married and the parents do not approve
of the marriage partner. In a work group, a problem might be that some workers are putting in more
effort than others, yet achieving poorer results. Regardless of the problem, having the resources of
a group can be an advantage, as different people can contribute different ideas for how to reach a
satisfactory solution.

   Once a group encounters a problem, the questions that come up range from "Where do we start?"
to "How do we solve it?" While there are many ways to approach a problem, the American educational
philosopher John Dewey's reflective thinking sequence has stood the test of time. This seven-step
process (Adler, R., 1996) has produced positive results and serves as a handy organizational structure.
If you are member of a group that needs to solve a problem and don't know where to start, consider
these seven simple steps:

    1. Define the problem
    2. Analyze the problem
    3. Establish criteria
    4. Consider possible solutions
    5. Decide on a solution
    6. Implement the solution
    7. Follow up on the solution
Let's discuss each step in detail.

112 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
DEFINE THE PROBLEM

If you don't know what the problem is, how do you know you can solve it? Defining the problem
allows the group to set boundaries of what the problem is and what it is not and to begin to formalize
a description or definition of the scope, size, or extent of the challenge the group will address. A
problem that is too broadly defined can overwhelm the group. If the problem is too narrowly defined,
important information will be missed or ignored.

   In the following example, we have a Web-based company called Favorites that needs to increase
its customer base and ultimately sales. A problem-solving group has been formed, and they start by
formulating a working definition of the problem.

   Too broad: "Sales are off, our numbers are down, and we need more customers."
   More precise: "Sales have been slipping incrementally for six of the past nine months and are
significantly lower than a seasonally adjusted comparison to last year. Overall, this loss represents
a 4.5 percent reduction in sales from the same time last year. However, when we break it down by
product category, sales of our nonedible products have seen a modest but steady increase, while sales
of edibles account for the drop off and we need to halt the decline."

ANALYZE THE PROBLEM

Now the group analyzes the problem, trying to gather information and learn more. The problem is
complex and requires more than one area of expertise. Why do nonedible products continue selling
well? What is it about the edibles that is turning customers off? Let's meet our problem solvers at
Favorites.

   Kevin is responsible for customer resource management. He is involved with the customer from
the point of initial contact through purchase and delivery. Most of the interface is automated in the
form of an online "basket model," where photographs and product descriptions are accompanied by
"buy it" buttons. He is available during normal working business hours for live chat and voice chat
if needed, and customers are invited to request additional information. Most Favorites customers
do not access this service, but Kevin is kept quite busy, as he also handles returns and complaints.
Because Kevin believes that superior service retains customers while attracting new ones, he is always
interested in better ways to serve the customer. Looking at edibles and nonedibles, he will study the
cycle of customer service and see if there are any common points--from the main Web page, through
the catalog, to the purchase process, and to returns--at which customers abandon the sale. He has
existing customer feedback loops with end-of-sale surveys, but most customers decline to take the
survey and there is currently no incentive to participate.

   Mariah is responsible for products and purchasing. She wants to offer the best products at the
lowest price, and to offer new products that are unusual, rare, or exotic. She regularly adds new
products to the Favorites catalog and culls underperformers. Right now she has the data on every

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 113
product and its sales history, but it is a challenge to represent it. She will analyze current sales data and
produce a report that specifically identifies how each product--edible and nonedible--is performing.
She wants to highlight "winners" and "losers" but also recognizes that today's "losers" may be the hit
of tomorrow. It is hard to predict constantly changing tastes and preferences, but that is part of her
job. It's not all science, and it's not all art. She has to have an eye for what will catch on tomorrow
while continuing to provide what is hot today.

   Suri is responsible for data management at Favorites. She gathers, analyzes, and presents
information gathered from the supply chain, sales, and marketing. She works with vendors to make
sure products are available when needed, makes sales predictions based on past sales history, and
assesses the effectiveness of marketing campaigns.

   The problem-solving group members already have certain information on hand. They know that
customer retention is one contributing factor. Attracting new customers is a constant goal, but they
are aware of the well-known principle that it takes more effort to attract new customers than to
keep existing ones. Thus, it is important to insure a quality customer service experience for existing
customers and encourage them to refer friends. The group needs to determine how to promote this
favorable customer behavior.

   Another contributing factor seems to be that customers often abandon the shopping cart before
completing a purchase, especially when purchasing edibles. The group members need to learn more
about why this is happening.

ESTABLISH CRITERIA

Establishing the criteria for a solution is the next step. At this point, information is coming in from
diverse perspectives, and each group member has contributed information from their perspective,
even though there may be several points of overlap.

   Kevin: Customers who complete the postsale survey indicate that they want to know (1) what is the
estimated time of delivery, (2) why a specific item was not in stock and when it will be available, and
(3) why their order sometimes arrives with less than a complete order, with some items back-ordered,
without prior notification.

   He notes that a very small percentage of customers complete the postsale survey, and the results
are far from scientific. He also notes that it appears the interface is not capable of cross-checking
inventory to provide immediate information concerning back orders, so that the customer "buys
it" only to learn several days later that it was not in stock. This seems to be especially problematic
for edible products, because people may tend to order them for special occasions like birthdays and
anniversaries. But we don't really know this for sure because of the low participation in the postsale
survey.

   Mariah: There are four edible products that frequently sell out. So far, we haven't been able to
boost the appeal of other edibles so that people would order them as a second choice when these sales

114 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
leaders aren't available. We also have several rare, exotic products that are slow movers. They have
potential, but currently are underperformers.

   Suri: We know from a zip code analysis that most of our customers are from a few specific
geographic areas associated with above-average incomes. We have very few credit cards declined, and
the average sale is over $100. Shipping costs represent on average 8 percent of the total sales cost. We
do not have sufficient information to produce a customer profile. There is no specific point in the
purchase process where basket abandonment tends to happen; it happens fairly uniformly at all steps.

CONSIDER POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS TO THE
PROBLEM

The group has listened to each other and now starts to brainstorm ways to address the challenges they
have addressed while focusing resources on those solutions that are more likely to produce results.

   Kevin: Is it possible for our programmers to create a cross-index feature, linking the product
desired with a report of how many are in stock? I'd like the customer to know right away whether it
is in stock, or how long they may have to wait. As another idea, is it possible to add incentives to the
purchase cycle that won't negatively impact our overall profit? I'm thinking a small volume discount
on multiple items, or perhaps free shipping over a specific dollar amount.

   Mariah: I recommend we hold a focus group where customers can sample our edible products and
tell us what they like best and why. When the best sellers are sold out, could we offer a discount on
related products to provide an instant alternative? We might also cull the underperforming products
with a liquidation sale to generate interest.

   Suri: If we want to know more about our customers, we need to give them an incentive to complete
the postsale survey. How about a 5 percent off coupon code for the next purchase to get them to
return and to help us better identify our customer base? We may also want to build in a customer
referral rewards program, but it all takes better data in to get results out. We should also explore the
supply side of the business by getting a more reliable supply of the leading products and trying to get
discounts that are more advantageous from our suppliers, especially in the edible category.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 115
DECIDE ON A SOLUTION

Kevin, Mariah, and Suri may want to implement all the solution strategies, but they do not have the
resources to do them all. They'll complete a cost-benefit analysis, which ranks each solution according
to its probable impact. The analysis is shown in Table 19.6 "Cost-Benefit Analysis".

                                                   Table 11.6 Cost-Benefit Analysis

Source Proposed Solution            Cost           Benefit Comment

      Integrate the cross-index     High           High  Many of our competitors already have this feature
      feature

Kevin Volume discount               Low            Medium May increase sales slightly

      Free shipping                 Low            Low   This has a downside in making customers more aware of
                                                         shipping costs if their order doesn't qualify for free shipping

      Hold a focus group to taste edible products High Medium Difficult to select participants representative of our customer base

            Search for alternative  Medium Medium We can't know for sure which products customers will like best
Mariah products to high

            performers

      Liquidate                     Low            Low   Might create a "bargain basement" impression inconsistent with
      underperformers                                    our brand

      Incentive for postsale        Low            Medium Make sure the incentive process is easy for the customer
      survey completion

      Incentive for customer        Low            Medium People may feel uncomfortable referring friends if it is seen as putting them in a marketing role
      referrals
Suri
      Find a more reliable supply of top-selling edibles Medium High We already know customers want these products

      Negotiate better discounts from vendors Low  High  If we can do this without alienating our best vendors, it will be a
                                                         win-win

Now that the options have been presented with their costs and benefits, it is easier for the group to
decide which courses of action are likely to yield the best outcomes. The analysis helps the group
members to see beyond the immediate cost of implementing a given solution. For example, Kevin's
suggestion of offering free shipping won't cost Favorites much money, but it also may not pay off in
customer goodwill. And even though Mariah's suggestion of having a focus group might sound like a
good idea, it will be expensive and its benefits are questionable.

   A careful reading of the analysis indicates that Kevin's best suggestion is to integrate the cross-index
feature in the ordering process so that customers can know immediately whether an item is in stock
or on back order. Mariah, meanwhile, suggests that searching for alternative products is probably the
most likely to benefit Favorites, while Suri's two supply-side suggestions are likely to result in positive
outcomes.

116 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
IMPLEMENT THE SOLUTION

Kevin is faced with the challenge of designing the computer interface without incurring unacceptable
costs. He strongly believes that the interface will pay for itself within the first year--or, to put it more
bluntly, that Favorites' declining sales will get worse if the Web site does not have this feature soon.
He asks to meet with top management to get budget approval and secures their agreement, on one
condition: he must negotiate a compensation schedule with the Information Technology consultants
that includes delayed compensation in the form of bonuses after the feature has been up and running
successfully for six months.

   Mariah knows that searching for alternative products is a never-ending process, but it takes time
and the company needs results. She decides to invest time evaluating products that competing
companies currently offer, especially in the edible category, on the theory that customers who find
their desired items sold out on the Favorites Web site may have been buying alternative products
elsewhere instead of choosing an alternative from Favorites's product lines.

   Suri decides to approach the vendors of the four frequently sold-out products and ask point blank,
"What would it take to get you to produce these items more reliably in greater quantities?" By opening
the channel of communication with these vendors, she is able to motivate them to make modifications
that will improve the reliability and quantity. She also approaches the vendors of the less popular
products with a request for better discounts in return for their cooperation in developing and test-
marketing new products.

FOLLOW UP ON THE SOLUTION

Kevin: After several beta tests, the cross-index feature was implemented and has been in place for
thirty days. Now customers see either "in stock" or "available [mo/da/yr]" in the shopping basket. As
expected, Kevin notes a decrease in the number of chat and phone inquiries to the effect of, "Will this
item arrive before my wife's birthday?" However, he notes an increase in inquiries asking, "Why isn't
this item in stock?" It is difficult to tell whether customer satisfaction is higher overall.

   Mariah: In exploring the merchandise available from competing merchants, she got several ideas
for modifying Favorites' product line to offer more flavors and other variations on popular edibles.
Working with vendors, she found that these modifications cost very little. Within the first thirty days
of adding these items to the product line, sales are up. Mariah believes these additions also serve to
enhance the Favorites brand identity, but she has no data to back this up.

   Suri: So far, the vendors supplying the four top-selling edibles have fulfilled their promise of
increasing quantity and reliability. However, three of the four items have still sold out, raising the
question of whether Favorites needs to bring in one or more additional vendors to produce these
items. Of the vendors with which Favorites asked to negotiate better discounts, some refused, and two
of these were "stolen" by a competing merchant so that they no longer sell to Favorites. In addition,

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 117
one of the vendors that agreed to give a better discount was unexpectedly forced to cease operations
for several weeks because of a fire.

   This scenario allows us to see that the problem may have several dimensions as well as solutions,
but resources can be limited and not every solution is successful. Even though the problem is not
immediately resolved, the group problem-solving pattern serves as a useful guide through the
problem-solving process.

   Key Takeaways

      Group problem solving can be an orderly process when it is broken down into seven specific stages.

   Exercises

         1. Think of a problem encountered in the past by a group of which you are a member. How did
              the group solve the problem? How satisfactory was the solution? Discuss your results with your
              classmates.

         2. Consider again the problem you described in Exercise 1. In view of the seven-step
              framework, which steps did the group utilize? Would following the full seven-step framework
              have been helpful? Discuss your opinion with a classmate.

         3. Research one business that you would like to know more about and see if you can learn about
              how they communicate in groups and teams. Compare your results with those of classmates.

         4. Think of a decision you will be making some time in the near future. Apply the cost-benefit
              analysis framework to your decision. Do you find this method helpful? Discuss your results
              with classmates.

118 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 32.

GROUP LIFE CYCLES AND MEMBER ROLES

   Learning Objectives

          · Identify the typical stages in the life cycle of a group.
          · Describe different types of group members and group member roles.

Groups are dynamic systems in constant change. Groups grow together and eventually come apart.
People join groups and others leave. This dynamic changes and transforms the very nature of the
group. Group socialization involves how the group members interact with one another and form
relationships. Just as you were once born and changed your family, they changed you. You came to
know a language and culture, a value system, and set of beliefs that influence you to this day. You came
to be socialized, to experience the process of learning to associate, communicate, or interact within a
group. A group you belong to this year--perhaps a soccer team or the cast of a play--may not be part
of your life next year. And those who are in leadership positions may ascend or descend the leadership
hierarchy as the needs of the group, and other circumstances, change over time.

GROUP LIFE CYCLE PATTERNS

Your life cycle is characterized by several steps, and while it doesn't follow a prescribed path, there
are universal stages we can all recognize. You were born. You didn't choose your birth, your parents,
your language, or your culture, but you came to know them through communication. You came to
know yourself, learned skills, discovered talents, and met other people. You learned, worked, lived,
and loved, and as you aged, minor injuries took longer to heal. You competed in ever-increasing
age groups in your favorite sport, and while your time for each performance may have increased as
you aged, your experience allowed you to excel in other ways. Where you were once a novice, you
have now learned something to share. You lived to see some of your friends pass before you, and the
moment will arrive when you too must confront death.

   In the same way, groups experience similar steps and stages and take on many of the characteristics

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 119
we associate with life (Moreland, R. and Levine, J., 1982). They grow, overcome illness and
dysfunction, and transform across time. No group, just as no individual, lives forever.

   Your first day on the job may be comparable to the first day you went to school. At home, you
may have learned some of the basics, like how to write with a pencil, but knowledge of a skill and
its application are two different things. In school, people spoke and acted in different ways than
at home. Gradually, you came to understand the meaning of recess, the importance of raising your
hand to get the teacher's attention, and how to follow other school rules. At work, you may have had
academic training for your profession, but the knowledge you learned in school only serves as your
foundation--much as your socialization at home served to guide you at school. On the job they use
jargon terms, have schedules that may include coffee breaks (recess), have a supervisor (teacher), and
have rules, explicit and understood. On the first day, it was all new, even if many of the elements were
familiar.

   In order to better understand group development and its life cycle, many researchers have described
the universal stages and phases of groups. While there are modern interpretations of these stages,
most draw from the model proposed by Bruce Tuckman. This model, shown in Table 11.2 "Tuckman's
Linear Model of Group Development", specifies the usual order of the phases of group development,
and allows us to predict several stages we can anticipate as we join a new group.

                         Table 11.2 Tuckman's Linear Model of Group Development

Stages    Activities

Forming Members come together, learn about each other, and determine the purpose of the group.

Storming  Members engage in more direct communication and get to know each other. Conflicts between group
          members will often arise during this stage.

Norming   Members establish spoken or unspoken rules about how they communicate and work. Status, rank, and roles
          in the group are established.

Performing Members fulfill their purpose and reach their goal.

Adjourning Members leave the group.

Tuckman begins with the forming stage as the initiation of group formation. This stage is also called
the orientation stage because individual group members come to know each other. Group members
who are new to each other and can't predict each other's behavior can be expected to experience
the stress of uncertainty. Uncertainty theory states that we choose to know more about others with
whom we have interactions in order to reduce or resolve the anxiety associated with the unknown
(Berger, C. and Calabrese, R., 1975; Berger, C., 1986; Gudykunst, W., 1995). The more we know about
others and become accustomed to how they communicate, the better we can predict how they will
interact with us in future contexts. If you learn that Monday mornings are never a good time for your
supervisor, you quickly learn to schedule meetings later in the week. Individuals are initially tentative
and display caution as they begin to learn about the group and its members.

   If you don't know someone very well, it is easy to offend. Each group member brings to the group
a set of experiences, combined with education and a self-concept. You won't be able to read this
information on a name tag, but instead you will only come to know it through time and interaction.
Since the possibility of overlapping and competing viewpoints and perspectives exists, the group will
experience a storming stage, a time of struggles as the members themselves sort out their differences.
There may be more than one way to solve the problem or task at hand, and some group members
may prefer one strategy over another. Some members of the group may be more senior to the

120 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
organization than you, and other members may treat them differently. Some group members may be
as new as you are and just as uncertain about everyone's talents, skills, roles, and self-perceptions.
The wise business communicator will anticipate the storming stage and help facilitate opportunities
for the members to resolve uncertainty before the work commences. There may be challenges for
leadership, and conflicting viewpoints. The sociology professor sees the world differently than the
physics professor. The sales agent sees things differently than someone from accounting. A manager
who understands and anticipates this normal challenge in the group's life cycle can help the group
become more productive.

   A clear definition of the purpose and mission of the group can help the members focus their
energies. Interaction prior to the first meeting can help reduce uncertainty. Coffee and calories can
help bring a group together. Providing the group with what they need and opportunities to know each
other prior to their task can increase efficiency.

   Groups that make a successful transition from the storming stage will next experience the norming
stage, where the group establishes norms, or informal rules, for behavior and interaction. Who speaks
first? Who takes notes? Who is creative, who is visual, and who is detail-oriented? Sometimes our job
titles and functions speak for themselves, but human beings are complex. We are not simply a list of
job functions, and in the dynamic marketplace of today's business environment you will often find
that people have talents and skills well beyond their "official" role or task. Drawing on these strengths
can make the group more effective.

   The norming stage is marked by less division and more collaboration. The level of anxiety
associated with interaction is generally reduced, making for a more positive work climate that
promotes listening. When people feel less threatened and their needs are met, they are more likely
to focus their complete attention on the purpose of the group. If they are still concerned with who
does what, and whether they will speak in error, the interaction framework will stay in the storming
stage. Tensions are reduced when the normative expectations are known, and the degree to which
a manager can describe these at the outset can reduce the amount of time the group remains in
uncertainty. Group members generally express more satisfaction with clear expectations and are
more inclined to participate.

   Ultimately, the purpose of a work group is performance, and the preceding stages lead us to
the performing stage, in which the group accomplishes its mandate, fulfills its purpose, and reaches
its goals. To facilitate performance, group members can't skip the initiation of getting to know each
other or the sorting out of roles and norms, but they can try to focus on performance with clear
expectations from the moment the group is formed. Productivity is often how we measure success
in business and industry, and the group has to produce. Outcome assessments may have been built
into the system from the beginning to serve as a benchmark for success. Wise managers know how
to celebrate success, as it brings more success, social cohesion, group participation, and a sense of job
satisfaction. Incremental gains toward a benchmark may also be cause for celebration and support,
and failure to reach a goal should be regarded as an opportunity for clarification.

   It is generally wiser to focus on the performance of the group rather than individual contributions.
Managers and group members will want to offer assistance to underperformers as well as
congratulate members for their contributions. If the goal is to create a community where competition
pushes each member to perform, individual highlights may serve your needs, but if you want a group
to solve a problem or address a challenge as a group, you have to promote group cohesion. Members

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 121
need to feel a sense of belonging, and praise (or the lack thereof) can be a sword with two edges: one
stimulates and motivates while the other demoralizes and divides.

   Groups should be designed to produce and perform in ways and at levels that individuals cannot,
or else you should consider compartmentalizing the tasks. The performing stage is where the
productivity occurs, and it is necessary to make sure the group has what it needs to perform. Missing
pieces, parts, or information can stall the group, and reset the cycle to storming all over again.
Loss of performance is inefficiency, which carries a cost. Managers will be measured by the group's
productivity and performance. Make sure the performing stage is one that is productive and healthy
for its members.

   Imagine that you are the manager of a group that has produced an award-winning design for
an ecologically innovative four-seat car. Their success is your success. Their celebrations are yours
even if the success is not focused on you. A manager manages the process while group members
perform. If you were a member of the group that helped design the belt line, you made a fundamental
contribution to the style of the car. Individual consumers may never consider the line from the front
fender, across the doors, to the rear taillight as they make a purchase decision, but they will recognize
beauty. You will know that you could not have achieved that fundamental part of car design without
help from the engineers in the group, and if the number-crunching accountants had not seen the
efficiency of the production process that produced it, it may never have survived the transition from
prototype to production. The group came together and accomplished its goals with amazing results.

   Now, as typically happens, all groups will eventually have to move on to new assignments. In
the adjourning stage, members leave the group. The group may cease to exist or it may be transformed
with new members and a new set of goals. Your contributions in the past may have caught the
attention of the management, and you may be assigned to redesign the flagship vehicle, the halo car of
your marque or brand. It's quite a professional honor, and it's yours because of your successful work
in a group. Others will be reassigned to tasks that require their talents and skills, and you may or may
not collaborate with them in the future.

   You may miss the interactions with the members, even the more cantankerous ones, and will
experience both relief and a sense of loss. Like life, the group process is normal, and mixed emotions
are to be expected. A wise manager anticipates this stage and facilitates the separation with skill and
ease. We often close this process with a ritual marking its passing, though the ritual may be as formal
as an award or as informal as a "thank you" or a verbal acknowledgement of a job well done over
coffee and calories.

   On a more sober note, it is important not to forget that groups can reach the adjourning stage
without having achieved success. Some businesses go bankrupt, some departments are closed, and
some individuals lose their positions after a group fails to perform. Adjournment can come suddenly
and unexpectedly, or gradually and piece by piece. Either way, a skilled business communicator will
be prepared and recognize it as part of the classic group life cycle.

122 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
LIFE CYCLE OF MEMBER ROLES

Just as groups go through a life cycle when they form and eventually adjourn, so the group members
fulfill different roles during this life cycle. These roles, proposed by Richard Moreland and John
Levine, are summarized in Table 11.3 "Life Cycle of Member Roles".

                Table 11.3 Life Cycle of Member Roles

1. Potential Member Curiosity and interest

2. New Member   Joined the group but still an outsider and unknown

3. Full Member  Knows the "rules" and is looked to for leadership

4. Divergent Member Focuses on differences

5. Marginal member No longer involved

6. Ex-Member    No longer considered a member

Suppose you are about to graduate from school and you are in the midst of an employment search.
You've gathered extensive information on a couple of local businesses and are aware that they will
be participating in the university job fair. You've explored their websites, talked to people currently
employed at each company, and learned what you could from the public information available. At this
stage, you are considered a potential member. You may have an electrical, chemical, or mechanical
engineering degree soon, but you are not a member of an engineering team.

   You show up at the job fair in professional attire and completely prepared. The representatives of
each company are respectful, cordial, and give you contact information. One of them even calls a
member of the organization on the spot and arranges an interview for you next week. You are excited
at the prospect and want to learn more. You are still a potential member.

   The interview goes well the following week. The day after the meeting, you receive a call for a
follow-up interview that leads to a committee interview. A few weeks later, the company calls you
with a job offer. However, in the meantime, you have also been interviewing with other potential
employers, and you are waiting to hear back from two of them. You are still a potential member.

   After careful consideration, you decide to take the job offer and start the next week. The projects
look interesting, you'll be gaining valuable experience, and the commute to work is reasonable. Your
first day on the job is positive, and they've assigned you a mentor. The conversations are positive, but
you feel lost at times, as if they are speaking a language you can't quite grasp. As a new group member,
your level of acceptance will increase as you begin learning the group's rules, spoken and unspoken
(Fisher, B. A., 1970). You will gradually move from the potential member role to the role of new group
member as you learn to fit into the group.
Over time and projects, you gradually increase your responsibilities. You are no longer looked at as
the new person, and you can follow almost every conversation. You can't quite say, "I remember when"
because your tenure hasn't been that long, but you are a known quantity and know your way around.
You are a full member of the group. Full members enjoy knowing the rules and customs, and can even
create new rules. New group members look to full members for leadership and guidance. Full group
members can control the agenda and have considerable influence on the agenda and activities.

   Full members of a group, however, can and do come into conflict. When you were a new member,
you may have remained silent when you felt you had something to say, but now you state your case.
There is more than one way to get the job done. You may suggest new ways that emphasize efficiency

                                                       PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 123
over existing methods. Coworkers who have been working in the department for several years may
be unwilling to adapt and change, resulting in tension. Expressing different views can cause conflict
and may even interfere with communication.

   When this type of tension arises, divergent group members pull back, contribute less, and start to
see themselves as separate from the group. Divergent group members make less eye contact, seek out
each other's opinion less frequently, and listen defensively. In the beginning of the process, you felt a
sense of belonging, but now you don't. Marginal group members start to look outside the group for
their interpersonal needs.

   After several months of trying to cope with these adjustments, you decide that you never really
investigated the other two companies; that your job search process was incomplete. Perhaps you
should take a second look at the options. You will report to work on Monday, but will start the process
of becoming an ex-member, one who no longer belongs. You may experience a sense of relief upon
making this decision, given that you haven't felt like you belonged to the group for awhile. When you
line up your next job and submit your resignation, you make it official.

   This process has no set timetable. Some people overcome differences and stay in the group for
years; others get promoted and leave the group only when they get transferred to regional
headquarters. As a skilled business communicator, you will recognize the signs of divergence, just as
you have anticipated the storming stage, and do your best to facilitate success.

POSITIVE AND NEGATIVE MEMBER ROLES

If someone in your group always makes everyone laugh, that can be a distinct asset when the news is
less than positive. At times when you have to get work done, however, the class clown may become
a distraction. Notions of positive and negative will often depend on the context when discussing
groups. Table 11.4 "Positive Roles" (Beene, K. and Sheats, P., 1948; McLean, S., 2005) and Table 11.5
"Negative Roles" (Beene, K. and Sheats, P., 1948; McLean, S., 2005) list both positive and negative roles
people sometimes play in a group setting (Beene, K. and Sheats, P., 1948; McLean, S., 2005).

                         Table 11.4 Positive Roles

Initiator-Coordinator Suggests new ideas or new ways of looking at the problem

Elaborator        Builds on ideas and provides examples

Coordinator       Brings ideas, information, and suggestions together

Evaluator-Critic  Evaluates ideas and provides constructive criticism

Recorder          Records ideas, examples, suggestions, and critiques

124 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
                    Table 11.5 Negative Roles

Dominator           Dominates discussion, not allowing others to take their turn

Recognition Seeker  Relates discussion to their accomplishments; seeks attention

Special-Interest Pleader Relates discussion to special interest or personal agenda

Blocker             Blocks attempts at consensus consistently

Joker or Clown      Seeks attention through humor and distracts group members

Now that we've examined a classical view of positive and negative group member roles, let's examine
another perspective. While some personality traits and behaviors may negatively influence groups,
some are positive or negative depending on the context.

   Just as the class clown can have a positive effect in lifting spirits or a negative effect in distracting
members, a dominator may be exactly what is needed for quick action. An emergency physician
doesn't have time to ask all the group members in the emergency unit how they feel about a course
of action; instead, a self-directed approach based on training and experience may be necessary. In
contrast, the pastor of a church may have ample opportunity to ask members of the congregation their
opinions about a change in the format of Sunday services; in this situation, the role of coordinator or
elaborator is more appropriate than that of dominator.

   The group is together because they have a purpose or goal, and normally, they are capable of more
than any one individual member could be on their own, so it would be inefficient to hinder that
progress. But a blocker, who cuts off collaboration, does just that. If a group member interrupts
another and presents a viewpoint or information that suggests a different course of action, the point
may be well taken and serve the collaborative process. But if that same group member repeatedly
engages in blocking behavior, then the behavior becomes a problem. A skilled business communicator
will learn to recognize the difference, even when positive and negative aren't completely clear.

Key Takeaways

Groups and their individual members come together and grow apart in predictable patterns.

Exercises

     1. Is it possible for an outsider (a nongroup member) to help a group move from the storming
          stage to the norming stage? Explain your answer and present it to the class.

     2. Think of a group of which you are a member and identify some roles played by group
          members, including yourself. Have your roles, and those of others, changed over time? Are
          some roles more positive than others? Discuss your answers with your classmates.

     3. In the course where you are using this book, think of yourself and your classmates as a group.
          At what stage of group formation are you currently? What stage will you be at when the school
          year ends?

                                                                                              PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 125
         4. Think of a group you no longer belong to. At what point did you become an ex-member?
              Were you ever a marginal group member or a full member? Write a two- to three-paragraph
              description of the group, how and why you became a member, and how and why you left. Share
              your description with a classmate.

126 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 33.

WHAT IS A GROUP?

   Learning Objectives

         1. Define groups and teams.
         2. Discuss how primary and secondary groups meet our interpersonal needs.
         3. Discuss how groups tend to limit their own size and create group norms.

Let's get into a time machine and travel way, way back to join early humans in prehistoric times. Their
needs are like ours today: they cannot exist or thrive without air, food, and water--and a sense of
belonging. How did they meet these needs? Through cooperation and competition. If food scarcity
was an issue, who got more and who got less? This serves as our first introduction to roles, status and
power, and hierarchy within a group. When food scarcity becomes an issue, who gets to keep their
spoon? In some Latin American cultures, having a job or earning a living is referred to by the slang
term cuchara, which literally means "spoon" and figuratively implies food, safety, and security.

   Now let's return to the present and enter a modern office. Cubicles define territories, and corner
offices denote status. In times of economic recession or slumping sales for the company, there is a
greater need for cooperation, and there is competition for scarce resources. The loss of a "spoon"--or
of one's cubicle--may now come in the form of a pink slip, but it is no less devastating.

   We form self-identities through our communication with others, and much of that interaction
occurs in a group context. A group may be defined as three or more individuals who affiliate, interact,
or cooperate in a familial, social, or work context. Group communication may be defined as the
exchange of information with those who are alike culturally, linguistically, and/or geographically.
Group members may be known by their symbols, such as patches and insignia on a military uniform.
They may be known by their use of specialized language or jargon; for example, someone in
information technology may use the term "server" in reference to the Internet, whereas someone
in the food service industry may use "server" to refer to the worker who takes customer orders
in a restaurant. Group members may also be known by their proximity, as in gated communities.
Regardless of how the group defines itself, and regardless of the extent to which its borders are porous
or permeable, a group recognizes itself as a group. Humans naturally make groups a part of their
context or environment.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 127
TYPES OF GROUPS IN THE WORKPLACE

As a skilled business communicator, learning more about groups, group dynamics, management, and
leadership will serve you well. Mergers, forced sales, downsizing, and entering new markets all call
upon individuals within a business or organization to become members of groups. In the second
of the "Introductory Exercises" for this chapter, you were asked to list the professional (i.e., work-
related) groups you interact with in order of frequency. What did your list include? Perhaps you
noted your immediate coworkers, your supervisor and other leaders in your work situation, members
of other departments with whom you communicate, and the colleagues who are also your personal
friends during off-work times. Groups may be defined by function. They can also be defined, from a
developmental viewpoint, by the relationships within them. Groups can also be discussed in terms of
their relationship to the individual and the degree to which they meet interpersonal needs.

   Some groups may be assembled at work to solve problems, and once the challenge has been
resolved, they dissolve into previous or yet to be determined groups. Functional groups like this may
be immediately familiar to you. You take a class in sociology from a professor of sociology, who is a
member of the discipline of sociology. To be a member of a discipline is to be a disciple, and adhere
to a common framework for viewing the world. Disciplines involve a common set of theories that
explain the world around us, terms to explain those theories, and have grown to reflect the advance of
human knowledge. Compared to your sociology instructor, your physics instructor may see the world
from a completely different perspective. Still, both may be members of divisions or schools, dedicated
to teaching or research, and come together under the large group heading we know as the university.

   In business, we may have marketing experts who are members of the marketing department, who
perceive their tasks differently from a member of the sales staff or someone in accounting. You
may work in the mailroom, and the mailroom staff is a group in itself, both distinct from and
interconnected with the larger organization.

   Relationships are part of any group, and can be described in terms of status, power, and control, as
well as role, function, or viewpoint. Within a family, for example, the ties that bind you together may
be common experiences, collaborative efforts, and even pain and suffering. The birth process may
forge a relationship between mother and daughter, but it also may not. An adoption may transform
a family. Relationships are formed through communication interaction across time, and often share a
common history, values, and beliefs about the world around us.

   In business, an idea may bring professionals together and they may even refer to the new product
or service as their "baby," speaking in reverent tones about a project they have taken from the drawing
board and "birthed" into the real world. As in family communication, work groups or teams may
have challenges, rivalries, and even "birthing pains" as a product is developed, adjusted, adapted, and
transformed. Struggles are a part of relationships, both in families and business, and form a common
history of shared challenges overcome through effort and hard work.

   Through conversations and a shared sense that you and your coworkers belong together, you meet
many of your basic human needs, such as the need to feel included, the need for affection, and the need
for control (Schutz, W., 1966). In a work context, "affection" may sound odd, but we all experience
affection at work in the form of friendly comments like "good morning," "have a nice weekend," and
"good job!" Our professional lives also fulfill more than just our basic needs (i.e., air, food, and water,
as well as safety). While your work group may be gathered together with common goals, such as to

128 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
deliver the mail in a timely fashion to the corresponding departments and individuals, your daily
interactions may well go beyond this functional perspective.

   In the same way, your family may provide a place for you at the table and meet your basic needs, but
they also may not meet other needs. If you grow to understand yourself and your place in a way that
challenges group norms, you will be able to choose which parts of your life to share and to withhold
in different groups, and to choose where to seek acceptance, affection, and control.

PRIMARY AND SECONDARY GROUPS

There are fundamentally two types of groups that can be observed in many contexts, from church to
school, family to work. These two types are primary and secondary groups. The hierarchy denotes
the degree to which the groups meet your interpersonal needs. Primary groups meet most, if not all,
of one's needs. Groups that meet some, but not all, needs are called secondary groups. Secondary
groups often include work groups, where the goal is to complete a task or solve a problem. If you are
a member of the sales department, your purpose is to sell.

   In terms of problem solving, work groups can accomplish more than individuals can. People, each
of whom have specialized skills, talents, experience, or education come together in new combinations
with new challenges, find new perspectives to create unique approaches that they themselves would
not have formulated alone.

   Secondary groups may meet your need for professional acceptance and celebrate your success, but
they may not meet your need for understanding and sharing on a personal level. Family members may
understand you in ways that your coworkers cannot, and vice versa.

IF TWO'S COMPANY AND THREE'S A CROWD,
WHAT IS A GROUP?

This old cliché refers to the human tendency to form pairs. Pairing is the most basic form of
relationship formation; it applies to childhood best friends, college roommates, romantic couples,
business partners, and many other dyads (two-person relationships). A group, by definition, includes
at least three people. We can categorize groups in terms of their size and complexity.

   When we discuss demographic groups as part of a market study, we may focus on large numbers of

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 129
individuals that share common characteristics. If you are the producer of an ecologically innovative
car such as the Smart For Two, and know your customers have an average of four members in their
family, you may discuss developing a new model with additional seats. While the target audience is
a group, car customers don't relate to each other as a unified whole. Even if they form car clubs and
have regional gatherings, a newsletter, and competitions at their local race tracks each year, they still
subdivide the overall community of car owners into smaller groups.

   The larger the group grows, the more likely it is to subdivide. Analysis of these smaller, or
microgroups, is increasingly a point of study as the Internet allows individuals to join people of
similar mind or habit to share virtually anything across time and distance. A microgroup is a small,
independent group that has a link, affiliation, or association with a larger group. With each additional
group member the number of possible interactions increases (Harris, T., and Sherblom, J., 1999;
McLean, S., 2003).

   Small groups normally contain between three and eight people. One person may involve
intrapersonal communication, while two may constitute interpersonal communication, and both
may be present within a group communication context. You may think to yourself before making a
speech or writing your next post, and you may turn to your neighbor or coworker and have a side
conversation, but a group relationship normally involves three to eight people, and the potential for
distraction is great.

   In Table 11.1 "Possible Interaction in Groups", you can quickly see how the number of possible
interactions grows according to how many people are in the group. At some point, we all find the
possible and actual interactions overwhelming and subdivide into smaller groups. For example, you
may have hundreds of friends on Facebook or another social network, but how many of them do you
regularly communicate with? You may be tempted to provide a number greater than eight, but if you
exclude the "all to one" messages, such as a general tweet to everyone (but no one person in particular),
you'll find the group norms will appear.

Table 11.1 Possible Interaction in Groups

Number of Group Members  234 5 6 7 8

Number of Possible Interactions 2 9 28 75 186 441 1,056

Group norms are customs, standards, and behavioral expectations that emerge as a group forms. If
you post an update every day on your Facebook page and your friends stop by to post on your wall
and comment, not posting for a week will violate a group norm. They will wonder if you are sick
or in the hospital where you have no access to a computer to keep them updated. If, however, you
only post once a week, the group will come to naturally expect your customary post. Norms involve
expectations that are self and group imposed and that often arise as groups form and develop.

   If there are more than eight members, it becomes a challenge to have equal participation, where
everyone has a chance to speak, listen, and respond. Some will dominate, others will recede, and
smaller groups will form. Finding a natural balance within a group can also be a challenge. Small
groups need to have enough members to generate a rich and stimulating exchange of ideas,
information, and interaction, but not so many people that what each brings cannot be shared (Galanes,
G., Adams, K., and Brilhart, J., 2000).

130 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
Key Takeaways

   Forming groups fulfills many human needs, such as the need for affiliation, affection, and control;
individuals also need to cooperate in groups to fulfill basic survival needs.

Exercises

      1. Think of the online groups you participate in. Forums may have hundreds or thousands of
           members, and you may have hundreds of friends on Facebook or other social networks, but
           how many do you regularly communicate with? Exclude the "all-to-one" messages, such as a
           general tweet to everyone (but no one person in particular). Do you find that you gravitate
           toward the group norm of eight or fewer group members? Discuss your answer with your
           classmates.

      2. What are some of the primary groups in your life? How do they compare with the secondary
           groups in your life? Write a two- to three-paragraph description of these groups and compare it
           with a classmate's description.

      3. What group is most important to people? Create a survey with at least two questions, identify
           a target sample size, and conduct your survey. Report how you completed the activity and your
           findings. Compare the results with those of your classmates.

      4. Are there times when it is better to work alone rather than in a group? Why or why not?
           Discuss your opinion with a classmate.

                                                                                               PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 131
CHAPTER 34.

TEAMWORK AND LEADERSHIP

   Learning Objectives

         1. Define teamwork and explain how to overcome various challenges to group success.
         2. Describe the process of leader development.
         3. Describe several different leadership styles and their likely influence on followers.

Two important aspects of group communication--especially in the business environment--are
teamwork and leadership. You will work in a team and at some point may be called on to lead. You
may emerge to that role as the group recognizes your specific skill set in relation to the task, or you
may be appointed to a position of responsibility for yourself and others. Your communication skills
will be your foundation for success as a member and as a leader. Listen and seek to understand both
the task and your group members as you become involved with the new effort. Have confidence in
yourself and inspire the trust of others. Know that leading and following are both integral aspects of
effective teamwork.

TEAMWORK

Teamwork is a compound word, combining team and work. Teams are a form of group normally
dedicated to production or problem solving. That leaves us with the work. This is where our previous
example on problem solving can serve us well. Each member of the team has skills, talents, experience,
and education. Each is expected to contribute. Work is the activity, and while it may be fun or
engaging, it also requires effort and commitment, as there is a schedule for production with individual
and group responsibilities. Each member must fulfill his or her own obligations for the team to
succeed, and the team, like a chain, is only as strong as its weakest member. In this context we don't
measure strength or weakness at the gym, but in terms of productivity.

   Teams can often achieve higher levels of performance than individuals because of the combined

132 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
energies and talents of the members. Collaboration can produce motivation and creativity that may
not be present in single-contractor projects. Individuals also have a sense of belonging to the group,
and the range of views and diversity can energize the process, helping address creative blocks and
stalemates. By involving members of the team in decision-making, and calling upon each member's
area of contribution, teams can produce positive results.

   Teamwork is not without its challenges. The work itself may prove a challenge as members juggle
competing assignments and personal commitments. The work may also be compromised if team
members are expected to conform and pressured to go along with a procedure, plan, or product
that they themselves have not developed. Groupthink, or the tendency to accept the group's ideas
and actions in spite of individual concerns, can also compromise the process and reduce efficiency.
Personalities and competition can play a role in a team's failure to produce.

   We can recognize that people want to belong to a successful team, and celebrating incremental gains
can focus the attention on the project and its goals. Members will be more willing to express thoughts
and opinions, and follow through with actions, when they perceive that they are an important part
of the team. By failing to include all the team members, valuable insights may be lost in the rush to
judgment or production. Making time for planning, and giving each member time to study, reflect,
and contribute can allow them to gain valuable insights from each other, and may make them more
likely to contribute information that challenges the status quo. Unconventional or "devil's advocate"
thinking may prove insightful and serve to challenge the process in a positive way, improving the
production of the team. Respect for divergent views can encourage open discussion.

   John Thill and Courtland Bovee provide a valuable list to consider when setting up a team, which
we have adapted here for our discussion:

     · Select team members wisely

     · Select a responsible leader

     · Promote cooperation

     · Clarify goals

     · Elicit commitment

     · Clarify responsibilities

     · Instill prompt action

     · Apply technology

     · Ensure technological compatibility

     · Provide prompt feedback

Group dynamics involve the interactions and processes of a team and influence the degree to which
members feel a part of the goal and mission. A team with a strong identity can prove to be a powerful
force, but it requires time and commitment. A team that exerts too much control over individual
members can run the risk or reducing creative interactions and encourage tunnel vision. A team
that exerts too little control, with attention to process and areas of specific responsibility, may not
be productive. The balance between motivation and encouragement, and control and influence, is
challenging as team members represent diverse viewpoints and approaches to the problem. A skilled
business communicator creates a positive team by first selecting members based on their areas of

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 133
skill and expertise, but attention to their style of communication is also warranted. Individuals that
typically work alone or tend to be introverted may need additional encouragement to participate.
Extroverts may need to be encouraged to listen to others and not dominate the conversation.
Teamwork involves teams and work, and group dynamics play an integral role in their function and
production.

LEADERSHIP

Whether or not there is a "natural leader," born with a combination of talents and traits that enable
a person to lead others, has been a subject of debate across time. In a modern context, we have come
to recognize that leadership comes in many forms and representations. Once it was thought that
someone with presence of mind, innate intelligence, and an engaging personality was destined for
leadership, but modern research and experience shows us otherwise. Just as a successful heart surgeon
has a series of skill sets, so does a dynamic leader. A television producer must both direct and provide
space for talent to create, balancing control with confidence and trust. This awareness of various
leadership styles serves our discussion as groups and teams often have leaders, and they may not
always be the person who holds the title, status, or role.

   Leaders take on the role because they are appointed, elected, or emerge into the role. The group
members play an important role in this process. An appointed leader is designated by an authority
to serve in that capacity, irrespective of the thoughts or wishes of the group. They may serve as the
leader and accomplish all the designated tasks, but if the group does not accept their role as leader, it
can prove to be a challenge. As Bruce Tuckman notes, "storming" occurs as group members come to
know each other and communicate more freely, and an appointed leader who lacks the endorsement
of the group may experience challenges to his or her authority.

   A democratic leader is elected or chosen by the group, but may also face serious challenges. If
individual group members or constituent groups feel neglected or ignored, they may assert that the
democratic leader does not represent their interests. The democratic leader involves the group in
the decision-making process, and insures group ownership of the resulting decisions and actions
as a result. Open and free discussions are representative of this process, and the democratic leader
acknowledges this diversity of opinion.

   An emergent leader contrasts the first two paths to the role by growing into the role, often out of
necessity. The appointed leader may know little about the topic or content, and group members will
naturally look to the senior member with the most experience for leadership. If the democratic leader
fails to bring the group together, or does not represent the whole group, subgroups may form, each
with an informal leader serving as spokesperson.

134 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
TYPES OF LEADERS

We can see types of leaders in action and draw on common experience for examples. The heart
surgeon does not involve everyone democratically, is typically appointed to the role through earned
degrees and experience, and resembles a military sergeant more than a politician. The autocratic
leader is self-directed and often establishes norms and conduct for the group. In some settings we can
see that this is quite advantageous, such as open-heart surgery or during a military exercise, but it
does not apply equally to all leadership opportunities.

   Contrasting the autocrat is the laissez-faire, or "live and let live" leader. In a professional setting,
such as a university, professors may bristle at the thought of an autocratic leader telling them what
to do. They have earned their role through time, effort, and experience and know their job. A wise
laissez-faire leader recognizes this aspect of working with professionals and may choose to focus
efforts on providing the professors with the tools they need to make a positive impact. Imagine that
you are in the role of a television director and you have a vision or idea of what the successful pilot
program should look like. The script is set, the lighting correct, and the cameras are in the correct
position. You may tell people what to do and where to stand, but you remember that your job is to
facilitate the overall process. You work with talent, and creative people are interesting on camera.
If you micromanage your actors, they may perform in ways that are not creative and that will not
draw audiences. If you let them run wild through improvisation, the program may not go well at all.
Balancing the need for control with the need for space is the challenge of the laissez-faire leader.

   Not all leaders are autocrats or laissez-faire leaders. Thomas Harris and John Sherblom specifically
note three leadership styles that characterize the modern business or organization, and reflect our
modern economy. We are not born leaders but may become them if the context or environment
requires our skill set. A leader-as-technician role often occurs when we have skills that others do not.
If you can fix the copy machine at the office, your leadership and ability to get it running again are
prized and sought-after skills. You may instruct others on how to load the paper or how to change
the toner, and even though your pay grade may not reflect this leadership role, you are looked to
by the group as a leader within that context. Technical skills, from Internet technology to facilities
maintenance, may experience moments where their particular area of knowledge is required to solve
a problem. Their leadership will be in demand.

   The leader-as-conductor involves a central role of bringing people together for a common goal. In
the common analogy, a conductor leads an orchestra and integrates the specialized skills and sounds
of the various components the musical group comprises. In the same way, a leader who conducts may
set a vision, create benchmarks, and collaborate with a group as they interpret a set script. Whether
it is a beautiful movement in music or a group of teams that comes together to address a common
challenge, the leader-as-conductor keeps the time and tempo of the group.

   Coaches are often discussed in business-related books as models of leadership for good reason.
A leader-as-coach combines many of the talents and skills we've discussed here, serving as a teacher,
motivator, and keeper of the goals of the group. A coach may be autocratic at times, give pointed
direction without input from the group, and stand on the sidelines while the players do what they've
been trained to do and make the points. The coach may look out for the group and defend it against
bad calls, and may motivate players with words of encouragement. We can recognize some of the
behaviors of coaches, but what specific traits have a positive influence on the group? Thomas Peters
and Nancy Austin identify five important traits that produce results:

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 135
    1. Orientation and education
    2. Nurturing and encouragement
    3. Assessment and correction
    4. Listening and counseling
    5. Establishing group emphasis
Coaches are teachers, motivators, and keepers of the goals of the group. There are times when
members of the team forget that there is no "I" in the word "team." At such times, coaches serve to
redirect the attention and energy of the individuals to the overall goals of the group. They conduct
the group with a sense of timing and tempo, and at times, they relax and let the members demonstrate
their talents. Through their listening skills and counseling, they come to know each member as an
individual, but keep the team focus for all to see. They set an example. Coaches, however, are human
and by definition are not perfect. They can and do prefer some players over others and can display less
than professional sideline behavior when they don't agree with the referee, but the style of leadership
is worthy of your consideration in its multidisciplinary approach. Coaches use more than one style of
leadership and adapt to the context and environment. A skilled business communicator will recognize
that this approach has its merits.

   Key Takeaways

      Teamwork allows individuals to share their talents and energy to accomplish goals. An effective leader
   facilitates this teamwork process.

   Exercises

         1. Do you prefer working in a group or team environment, or working individually? What are
              the advantages and disadvantages of each? Discuss your thoughts with classmates.

         2. Imagine that you could choose anyone you wanted to be on a team with you. Who would you
              choose, and why? Write a two- to three-paragraph description and share it with a classmate.

         3. Think of a leader you admire and respect. How did this individual become a leader--for
              example, by appointment, democratic selection, or emergence? How would you characterize
              this leader's style--is the leader autocratic or laissez-faire, a technician, or a coach?

136 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
CHAPTER 35.

BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL MEETINGS

   Learning Objectives

         1. Understand how to prepare for and conduct business meetings.
         2. Understand how to use technology to aid in group communications.
         3. Understand the basic principles of organizational communication.

Business and professional meetings are a part of the communication climate of any business. Some
view meetings as boring, pointless, and futile exercises, while others see them as opportunities to
exchange information and produce results. A combination of preparation and execution makes all
the difference. Remember, too, that meetings do not have to take place in a physical space where
the participants meet face to face. Instead, a number of technological tools make it possible to hold
virtual meetings in which the participants are half a world away from one another. Virtual meetings
are formally arranged gatherings where participants, located in distinct geographic locations, come
together via the Internet.

PREPARATION

A meeting, like a problem-solving group, needs a clear purpose statement. The specific goal for the
specific meeting will clearly relate to the overall goal of the group or committee. Determining your
purpose is central to an effective meeting and getting together just to get together is called a party, not
a meeting. Do not schedule a meeting just because you met at the same time last month or because it
is a standing committee. Members will resent the intrusion into their schedules and quickly perceive
the lack of purpose.

   Similarly, if the need for a meeting arises, do not rush into it without planning. A poorly planned
meeting announced at the last minute is sure to be less than effective. People may be unable to change
their schedules, may fail to attend, or may impede the progress and discussion of the group because

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 137
of their absence. Those who attend may feel hindered because they needed more time to prepare and
present comprehensive results to the group or committee.

   If a meeting is necessary, and a clear purpose can be articulated, then you'll need to decide how
and where to meet. Distance is no longer an obstacle to participation, as we will see later in this
section when we explore some of the technologies for virtual meetings. However, there are many
advantages to meeting in person. People communicate not just with words but also with their body
language--facial expressions, hand gestures, head nodding or head shaking, and posture. These
subtleties of communication can be key to determining how group members really feel about an issue
or question. Meeting in real time can be important, too, as all group members have the benefit of
receiving new information at the same time. For purposes of our present discussion, we will focus on
meetings taking place face to face in real time.

   If you have a purpose statement for the meeting, then it also follows that you should be able to
create an agenda, or a list of topics to be discussed. You may need to solicit information from members
to formulate an agenda, and this premeeting contact can serve to encourage active participation. The
agenda will have a time, date, place, and method of interaction noted, as well as a list of participants.
It will also have a statement of purpose, a list of points to be considered, and a brief summary of
relevant information that relates to each point. Somewhere on the agenda the start and end times
need to be clearly indicated, and it is always a good idea to leave time at the end for questions and
additional points that individual members may want to share. If the meeting has an emotional point
or theme, or the news is negative, plan for additional time for discussion, clarification, and recycling
of conversations as the participants process the information.

   If you are planning an intense work session, you need to consider the number of possible
interactions among the participants and limit them. Smaller groups are generally more productive. If
you are gathering to present information or to motivate the sales staff, a large audience, where little
interaction is expected, is appropriate. Each member has a role, and attention to how and why they
are interacting will produce the best results. Review the stages of group formation in view of the idea
that a meeting is a short-term group. You can anticipate a "forming" stage, and if roles are not clear,
there may be a bit of "storming" before the group establishes norms and becomes productive. Adding
additional participants for no clear reason will only make the process more complex and may produce
negative results.

   Inviting the participants via e-mail has become increasingly common across business and industry.
Software programs like Microsoft Outlook allow you to initiate a meeting request and receive an
"accept" or "decline" response that makes the invitation process organized and straightforward.
Reliance on a software program, however, may not be enough to encourage and ensure participation.
A reminder on the individual's computer may go off fifteen minutes prior to the meeting, but if they
are away from their computer or if Outlook is not running, the reminder will go unseen and unheard.
A reminder e-mail on the day of the meeting, often early in the morning, can serve as a personal effort
to highlight the activities of the day.

   If you are the person responsible for the room reservation, confirm the reservation a week before
the meeting and again the day before the meeting. Redundancy in the confirmation process can help
eliminate double-booking a room, where two meetings are scheduled at the same time. If technology
is required at the meeting, such as a microphone, conference telephone, or laptop and projector, make
sure you confirm their reservation at the same time as you confirm the meeting room reservation.
Always personally inspect the room and test these systems prior to the meeting. There is nothing

138 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
more embarrassing than introducing a high-profile speaker, such as the company president, and then
finding that the PowerPoint projector is not working properly.

CONDUCTING THE MEETING

The world is a stage and a meeting is a performance, the same as an interview or speech presentation.
Each member has a part to perform and they should each be aware of their roles and responsibilities
prior to the meeting. Everyone is a member of the group, ranging from new members to full members.
If you can reduce or eliminate the storming stage, all the better. A clearly defined agenda can be a
productive tool for this effort.

   People may know each other by role or title, but may not be familiar with each other. Brief
introductions can serve to establish identity, credibility, and help the group transition to performance.
The purpose of the meeting should be clearly stated, and if there are rules or guidelines that require a
specific protocol, they should be introduced.

   Mary Ellen Guffey provides a useful participant checklist that is adapted here for our use:

     · Arrive on time and stay until the meeting adjourns (unless there are prior arrangements)
     · Leave the meeting only for established breaks or emergencies
     · Be prepared and have everything you need on hand
     · Turn off cell phones and personal digital assistants
     · Follow the established protocol for turn taking
     · Respect time limits
     · Demonstrate professionalism in your verbal and nonverbal interactions
     · Communicate interest and stay engaged in the discussion
     · Avoid tangents and side discussions
     · Respect space and don't place your notebook or papers all around you
     · Clean up after yourself
     · Engage in polite conversation after the conclusion

If you are cast in the role of meeting leader, you may need to facilitate the discussion and address
conflict. The agenda serves as your guide and you may need to redirect the discussion to the topic, but
always demonstrate respect for each and every member. You may also need to intervene if a point has
reached a stalemate in terms of conflict (this text offers specific guidelines for managing interpersonal
conflict that apply here).

   There has been quite a discussion on the role of seating arrangements in meeting within the field

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 139
of business communication. Generally, a table that is square, rectangular, or U-shaped has a fixed
point at which the attention is directed, often referred to as the head of the table. This space is
often associated with power, status, and hierarchy and may play an important role in the flow of
interactions across the meeting. If information is to be distributed and presented from administration
to managers, for example, a table with a clear focal point for the head or CEO may be indicated.
Tables that are round, or tables arranged in a circular pattern, allow for a more egalitarian model
of interaction, reducing the hierarchical aspects while reinforcing the clear line of sight among all
participants. If a meeting requires intense interaction and collaboration, generally a round table or a
circular pattern is indicated.

   Some meetings do not call for a table, but rather rows of seats all facing toward the speaker;
you probably recognize this arrangement from many class lectures you have attended. For relatively
formal meetings in which information is being delivered to a large number of listeners and little
interaction is desired, seating in rows is an efficient use of space.

   Transitions are often the hardest part of any meeting. Facilitating the transition from one topic to
the next may require you to create links between each point. You can specifically note the next point
on the agenda and verbally introduce the next speaker or person responsible for the content area.
Once the meeting has accomplished its goals in the established time frame, it is time to facilitate the
transition to a conclusion. You may conclude by summarizing what has been discussed or decided,
and what actions the group members are to take as a result of the meeting. If there is a clear purpose
for holding a subsequent meeting, discuss the time and date, and specifically note assignments for
next time.

MINUTES

Feedback is an important part of any communication interaction. Minutes are a written document
that serves to record the interaction and can provide an opportunity for clarification. Minutes often
appear as the agenda with notes in relation to actions taken during the meeting or specific indications
of who is responsible for what before the next meeting. In many organizations, minutes of the
meeting are tentative, like a rough draft, until they are approved by the members of the group or
committee. Normally minutes are sent within a week of the meeting if it is a monthly event, and
more quickly if the need to meet more frequently has been determined. If your organization does
not call for minutes, you can still benefit by reviewing your notes after a meeting and comparing
them with those of others to make sure you understood what was discussed and did not miss--or
misinterpret--any key information.

USING TECHNOLOGY TO FACILITATE MEETINGS

Given the widespread availability and increasingly low cost of electronic communication,
technologies that once served to bring people together across continents and time zones are now

140 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
also serving people in the same geographic area. Rather than traveling (by plane, car, or even elevator
within the same building) to a central point for a face-to-face interaction, busy and cost-conscious
professionals often choose to see and hear each other via one of many different electronic interface
technologies. It is important to be aware of the dimensions of nonverbal communication that are lost
in a virtual meeting compared to an in-person meeting. Nevertheless, these technologies are a boon to
today's business organizations, and knowing how to use them is a key skill for all job seekers. We will
discuss the technologies by category, beginning with audio-only, then audio-visual, and finally social
media.

AUDIO-ONLY INTERACTIONS

The simplest form of audio-only interaction is, of course, a telephone call. Chances are that you
have been using the phone all your life, yet did you know that some executives hire professional
voice coaches to help them increase their effectiveness in phone communication? When you stop to
think about it, we use a great many audio-only modes of communication, ranging from phone calls
and voice-activated telephone menus to radio interviews, public address systems, dictation recording
systems, and computer voice recognition technology. The importance of audio communication in the
business world has increased with the availability of conference calls, Web conferences, and voice over
Internet protocol (VoIP) communications.

   Your voice has qualities that cannot be communicated in written form, and you can use these
qualities to your advantage as you interact with colleagues. If you are sending a general informative
message to all employees, an e-mail may serve you well, but if you are congratulating one employee
on receiving an industry award, your voice as the channel carries your enthusiasm.

   Take care to pay attention to your pronunciation of words, stating them correctly in normal ways,
and avoiding words that you are not comfortable with as you may mispronounce them.
Mispronunciation can have a negative impact on your reputation or perceived credibility. Instead of
using complicated words that may cause you to stumble, choose a simple phrase if you can, or learn
to pronounce the word correctly before you use it in a formal interactive setting.

   Your voice quality, volume, and pitch also influence how your spoken words are
interpreted. Quality often refers to the emotional tone of your voice, from happy and enthusiastic to
serious or even sad. In most business situations, it is appropriate to speak with some level of formality,
yet avoid sounding stilted or arrogant. Your volume (the loudness of your voice) should be normal,
but do make sure your listeners can hear you. In some situations, you may be using a directional
microphone that only amplifies your voice signal if you speak directly into it.

   If your audience includes English learners, remember that speaking louder (i.e., shouting) does not
help them to understand you any better than speaking in a normal tone. Your word choices will make
a much more significant impact when communicating across cultures; strive to use direct sentences
and avoid figures of speech that do not translate literally.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 141
   Pitch refers to the frequency, high or low, of your voice. A pleasant, natural voice will have some
variation in pitch. A speaker with a flat pitch, or a monotone (one-tone) voice, is often interpreted as
being bored and often bores his or her listeners.

   If you are leaving a voicemail, state all the relevant information in concise, clear terms, making
sure to speak slowly; don't forget to include your contact information, even if you think the person
already knows your phone number. Imagine you were writing down your phone number as you recite
it and you will be better able to record it at a "listener-friendly" speed. Don't leave a long, rambling
voicemail message. You may later wish you had said less, and the more content you provide the more
you increase the possibility for misunderstandings without your being present for clarification.

AUDIO-VISUAL INTERACTIONS

Rather than call each other, we often call and interact in both audio and visual ways via the Internet.
There are several ways to interface via audio and video, and new technologies in this area are being
invented all the time. For example, VoIP software allows the participants to see and hear each other
across time and distance with one-on-one calls and video conferencing. The audio portion of the call
comes through a headset, and the callers see each other on their computer monitors, as if they were
being broadcast on television. This form of audio-visual communication is quickly becoming a low-
or no-cost business tool for interaction.

   If you are going to interact via audio and visual signals, make sure you are prepared. Appropriate
dress, setting, and attitude are all required. The integration of a visual signal to the traditional phone
call means that nonverbal gestures can now be observed in real time and can both aid and detract
from the message.

   If you are unfamiliar with the technology, practice with it before your actual business interaction.
Try out the features with a friend and know where to find and access the information. If the call
doesn't go as planned, or the signal isn't what you expected or experienced in the past, keep a good
attitude and try again.

SOCIAL MEDIA

Online communities, forums, blogs, tweets, cloud computing, and avatar-activated environments are

142 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
some of the continually developing means of social media being harnessed by the business world. The
Internet is increasingly promoting tools and platforms for people to interact. From bulletin boards
that resemble the FreeNet posts of years past, to interactive environments like Second Life, people are
increasingly representing and interpreting themselves online.

   Humans seek interaction, and this has led to new ways to market, advertise, and interact; however,
caution is warranted when engaging in social media online. When you use these media, remember a
few simple cautions:

    1. Not everything is at it appears. The individuals on the forum may not all be who they
         represent themselves to be.

    2. The words you write and the images you send, regardless of how much you trust the recipient,
         may become public and can remain online forever.

    3. Always consider what you access and what you post, and how it represents you and your
         employer, even if you think others cannot know where you work or who you are.

    4. Be aware that Internet service providers (ISPs) are required by law to archive information
         concerning the use and traffic of information that can become available under subpoena.

Forums are often theme-based websites that gather a community of individuals dedicated to a
common interest. From owner-enthusiast websites that celebrate the new Mini Cooper, where
owners discuss modifications and sell parts to each other, to forums that emphasize a viewpoint, such
as the Life After the Oil Crash (LATOC) discussion board, affectionately called doomers, people come
together to compare notes around areas of interest.

   Professional networking sites such as LinkedIn allow people to link to, and interact with, others
who work in their industry or related ones. More general social media sites include MySpace and
Facebook, which also present threaded discussions and dynamic interfaces with groups that may or
may not be limited to those that user intends. Interactive writing platforms such as blogs, wikis, and
cloud computing involve having common documents stored on the Internet which can be accessed
from multiple sites at once, further facilitating the interaction. Blogs are Web pages with periodic
posts that may or may not feature feedback responses from readers. Wikis are collaborations on
Web content that are created and edited by users. Cloud computing involves secure access of files
from anywhere as information is stored remotely. Somewhere between a social networking site,
where people gather virtually to interact, and a computer game lies the genre of avatar-activated
virtual worlds such as Second Life. In these environments, users can meet others and make friends,
participate in activities, and create and trade virtual property and services.

   Business and industry organizations may also incorporate posts and threaded discussions, but
often under a password-protected design on a company's intranet or other limited-access platform.
Employees may use their business-provided computer equipment to access sites that are not business
related (if not specifically blocked), but all information associated with a each business's computer is
subject to inspection, archival, and supervision.

   Every computer is assigned an Internet Protocol or IP address. The IP address can be specifically
traced back to the original user, or at least to the computer itself and to who is responsible for its use.
From an e-mail via one of the free sites (e.g., Juno, Google's Gmail, or Yahoo! Mail) to cloud computing
and wikis, your movements across the Web leave clear "footprints."

   Whether you maintain a personal Web page, a blog, or engage with peers and colleagues via Twitter,

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 143
take care when considering what personal information to make public. Privacy is an increasing
issue online and your safety is a priority. Always represent yourself and your organization with
professionalism, knowing that what you search for and how you use your business computer can and
often is subject to inspection.

ORGANIZATIONAL COMMUNICATION

Businesses and companies are often described in terms we normally associate with family, from
relationships between siblings, to dominant-subordinate roles between parents and children, and the
role of praise and correction. Organizational communication, or the study of the communication
context, environment, and interaction within an organization, was once the domain of speech
communication departments. Modern business schools now view the study of organizational
communication as an integral part of the curriculum, noting the interdependent relationships of
productivity, climate, and interaction between individuals within the organization (internal) and
related to the organization (external), such as suppliers or customers.

   Organizations have communication needs and challenges just like a family, a group, or a
community. We can examine the study of communication within an organization, noting common
interactive practices like performance reviews, newsletters, supervisor and direction, and the flow
of information throughout the organization. We can also study the practices of the organization as
they relate to other organizations and the media, as in public relations, crisis communication plans,
and interorganizational interaction. Research into these areas often emphasizes the outcome, in terms
of increased productivity and more effective strategic communication systems (Tucker, M., Meyer,
G., and Westman, J., 1986). Change management, knowledge management, organizational culture,
leaderships, and strategic planning often include elements of organizational communication, and
again examine communication from the perspective of efficiency and effectiveness.

   As a skilled business writer or communicator, you can see that the study of organizational
communication can serve to inform you on the lessons learned by other companies, which are often
represented in research publications, to improve the processes in place within your organization. For
example, crisis management once was a knee-jerk reaction to a situation, one that caused businesses
and companies to experience chaos and information management in unanticipated ways, leading
to mistakes and damaging reputations. Crisis communication plans are now a common feature in
business, outlining roles and responsibilities, as well as central communication coordination and how
to interact with media. Supervisors and employees then have a guide to serve everyone, much like a
common playbook in organized sports like football, where everyone knows everyone else's position
on the field once an emergency occurs.

144 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
   Key Takeaways

      Meetings require planning, choice of appropriate technology, and understanding of organizational
   communication.

   Exercises

         1. Take notes in one of your classes as if they were the official minutes of a meeting. Does the
              class "meeting" have a purpose? What preparations were made and what technology was used?
              Is there a follow-up or a plan for the next class meeting? Compare your notes with another
              student to see if you understood all the information conveyed in the class.

         2. Collaborate with one or more classmates and contribute to a computing cloud or a wiki.
              What was the activity like? Did you learn new information that you would not have learned by
              studying individually?

         3. Make an audio recording of your voice and listen to it. Are there aspects of your voice quality,
              pronunciation, or delivery style that you would like to improve? Practice daily and make more
              recordings until you notice improvement.

REFERENCES
Guffey, M. (2007). Essentials of business communication (7th ed.). Mason, OH: Thomson/Wadsworth.

   Tucker, M., Meyer, G., & Westman, J. (1986). Thinking through communication: An introduction to the
study of human communication. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 145
146 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
GLOSSARY

audience
      In a business writing context, audience refers to the intended recipient or recipients of a piece
      of communication. Understanding your audience is crucial for crafting effective messages that
      achieve their desired purpose.

correspondence
      This genre of writing refers to the exchange of written or typed information to conduct business
      activities. Essentially, all the official written communication occurs within a company or between
      different companies.

disinformation
      False or misleading information deliberately created and spread to deceive or manipulate an
      audience. Example: A company might release false statistics about a competitor's product to harm
      their reputation.

fake news
      Fabricated or intentionally misleading information presented as legitimate news, often to
      influence public opinion or generate attention.

genre conventions
      Genre conventions are the typical characteristics, features, and expectations associated with a
      specific type of writing.
         Example: A business letter typically includes a formal salutation (e.g., "Dear Mr. Smith"), a
      clear and concise message, and a professional closing (e.g., "Sincerely"). These elements are genre
      conventions for business letters.
         (see also "sub-genres"

memoranda (memos)
      Memoranda (or memos) are brief, informal written documents used for internal communication
      within an organization.
         Example: A memo could be used to announce a change in office policy, remind employees of
      an upcoming meeting, or provide a quick update on a project.

paraphrasing
      The act of restating someone else's ideas or information in your own words while retaining the
      original meaning. The reference should still be listed and cited appropriately.
      Example:
         Original Quote:
      "Leadership is not about being in charge. It is about taking care of those in your charge" (Sinek,
      2014, p. 7).

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 147
         Paraphrase:
      According to Sinek (2014), leadership involves prioritizing the well-being of those you are
      responsible for rather than simply exerting authority.

         Reference:
      Sinek, S. (2014). Leaders eat last: Why some teams pull together and others don't. Penguin.
stakes
      The potential gains or losses associated with a particular decision or course of action. In business,
      stakes often include financial gains or losses but can also include reputation, market share,
      customer satisfaction, and other factors.
sub-genres
      Sub-genres are more specific categories within a larger genre, each with its own distinct
      conventions.

         Example: While business writing is a genre, sub-genres within it include emails, proposals,
      reports, and memos. Each has its own specific conventions, such as the informal style often used
      in emails compared to the more formal tone of a business proposal.

148 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
REFERENCES

Baker, S. (2019). Professional and Technical Writing. OER Commons. Retrieved September 08, 2020,
from https://www.oercommons.org/authoring/54645-professional-and-technical-writing.

   Barnett, S. (2023, January 30). ChatGPT is making universities rethink plagiarism. Wired.
https://www.wired.com/story/chatgpt-college-university-plagiarism/

   Beilfuss, Michael, et al. (2019) Technical and Professional Writing Genres. OSU
Library. https://open.library.okstate.edu/technicalandprofessionalwriting/

   Bizzell, P., Herzberg, B., & Reames, R. (2020). The rhetorical tradition: Readings from classical times
to the present. Macmillan Higher Education.

   Bridgstock, R. (2019). Employability and career development learning through social media:
Exploring the potential of LinkedIn. In Challenging future practice possibilities (pp. 143-152). Brill.

   Bursztyn, L., Rao, A., Roth, C. P., & Yanagizawa-Drott, D. H. (2020). Misinformation during a pandemic
(No. w27417). National Bureau of Economic Research. Accessed 8 Jan. 2024 at https://www.nber.org/
papers/w27417

   Campbell, K.S. (Oct. 23, 2014). "Email and your reputation." Pros Write. Retrieved from:
https://proswrite.com/2014/10/23/email-and-your-
reputation/#:~:text=Email%20is%20an%20extension%20of%20you%2C%20part%20of,the%20profes
sional%20%E2%80%9Cyou.%E2%80%9D%20Managing%20this%20carefully%20is%20important.

   Clayton, E. W. (2004). The Audience for Aristotle's Rhetoric. Rhetorica, 22(2), 183-203. Retrieved
January 11, 2022, from The Audience for Aristotle's <em>Rhetoric</em> (jstor.org)

   Cook, J., Ecker, U., & Lewandowsky, S. (2015). Misinformation and how to correct it. Emerging
trends in the social and behavioral sciences: An interdisciplinary, searchable, and linkable resource, 1-17.
Accessed 8 Jan 2024 at chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/https://cssn.org/
wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Misinformation-and-how-to-correct-it-John-Cook.pdf

   Droz, P. W., & Jacobs, L. S. (2019). Genre chameleon: Email, professional writing curriculum, and
workplace writing expectations. Technical Communication, 66(1), 68-92.

   Folkenflik, D. (2020) "You literally cannot believe the facts Tucker Carlson tells you. So say Fox's
lawyers." NPR.com. 29 Sept. 2020. Accessed 8 Jan. 2024 at https://www.npr.org/2020/09/29/
917747123/you-literally-cant-believe-the-facts-tucker-carlson-tells-you-so-say-fox-s-lawye

   Fowler, M. (n.d.) "A website of building software effectively." https://martinfowler.com/. Accessed
30 March 2020.

   Gibbs, S. & Castillo, A. (2021). Digital citizenship: Misinformation & data commodification in
the twenty-first century. Open Education Alberta. Accessed 8 Jan. 2024 at
https://openeducationalberta.ca/digitalcitizenship/front-matter/digital-citizenship-
misinformation-data-commodification-in-the-twenty-first-century/

   Gullifer, J., & Tyson, G. A. (2010). Exploring university students' perceptions of plagiarism: A
focus group study. Studies in Higher Education, 35(4), 463-481. Accessed 14 Aug 2023 at
https://researchoutput.csu.edu.au/ws/portalfiles/portal/8722982/10665manuscript.pdf

   Johnson, S. (2014). How we got to now. Riverhead Books.

                                                                                                   PROFESSIONAL WRITING AND COMMUNICATIONS FOR BUSINESS 149
Kutlu, B., Rabea, A., & Udeozor, C. R. (2018). LINKEDIN for Recruitment: An Examination of

Recruiters Use of "Apply" and "Easy Apply" Features.

Lee, L. (2024, January 4). How plagiarism by Claudine Gay, Harvard's former president, compares to that

of Neri Oxman, an academic and Bill Ackman's wife. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/

claudine-gay-neri-oxman-ackman-wife-plagiarism-dissertation-harvard-mit-2024-1

McJohnston, H. (1919). Business Correspondence (Vol. 12). Alexander Hamilton Institute. Retrieved

from https://www.google.com/books/edition/Business_Correspondence/

mBtKAQAAMAAJ?hl=en&gbpv=1

"MLA History." Modern Language Association. Accessed 14 Aug. 202 at https://www.mla.org/

About-Us/About-the-MLA/MLA-Archives/Time-Lines/MLA-History

Newport, C. (Feb. 26, 2021). E-mail is making us miserable. New Yorker. Retrieved

from https://www.newyorker.com/tech/annals-of-technology/e-mail-is-making-us-

miserable (Links to an external site.)

Osei-Hwere, E. and Patrick Osei-Hwere (n.d.). Media Communication, Convergence, and Literacy.

"How the Printing Press Helped is Shaping the Future." Pressbooks.

Park, D. B. (1982). The Meanings of "Audience." College English, 44(3), 247-257. Retrieved from

https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/377012.pdf

"Plagiarism." University of Wisconsin-Green Bay Cofrin Library, Mar. 3, 2023. Accessed 14 Aug.

2023 at https://libguides.uwgb.edu/plagiarism

Rich, B. R. (1995). Clarence Leonard (Kelly) Johnson: 1910-1990. Biographical Memoirs v.67.

National Academic Press, p 221-241.

Rooks, S. (2019). "The KISS Principle--My Way." Grammar Goddess Communication. 30 April

2019. https://grammargoddess.com/the-kiss-principle-my-way/ Accessed 30 March 2020.

Schecter, S. (2022). Professional Writing Today. British Columbia/Yukon Pressbooks.

https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/communicating/

Tribble, C (2007). Managing relationships in professional writing. Corpora in the Foreign Language

Classroom: Selected Papers from the Sixth International Conference on Teaching and Language

Corpora (TaLC 6). University of Granada, Spain, 4-7 July 2004, BRILL, 2007. ProQuest Ebook

Central. Retrieved from: https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/uwgb/detail.action?docID=556828 (Links

to an external site.).

Wallraff, B. (July 29, 2015). Improve your writing to improve your credibility. Harvard Business

Review. Retrieved        from https://hbr.org/2015/07/improve-your-writing-to-improve-your-

credibility?utm_content=buffere8c42&utm_medium=social&utm_source=

twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer

150 KRISTOPHER PURZYCKI
