Rhetorical Strategies for Workplace
             Communication
RHETORICAL STRATEGIES FOR
WORKPLACE COMMUNICATION

Professional and Technical Writing

KAT GRAY

University of Arkansas Libraries
Fayetteville, Arkansas
Rhetorical Strategies for Workplace Communication Copyright © 2025 by Kat M. Gray is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Acknowledgements                                                                  ix

Kat Gray

Introduction: Professional and Technical Writing (ENGL 30503) at UArk             1

Kat Gray

Part I. Part 1: Introduction to Professional and Technical Writing

Chapter 1: Introducing Technical Writing                                          7

Dawn Atkinson; Sarah Raymond; and Kat Gray

Chapter 2: Ethics in Technical Writing                                            20

Gia Alexander; Kathy Anders; Michael Beilfuss; Michele DeSilva; Kat Gray; Nicole

Hagstrom-Schmidt; Annemarie Hamlin; Suzan Last; Matt McKinney; Kalani
Pattison; Chris Rubio; and Eleanor Sumpter-Latham

Chapter 3: Setting Your Course Goals                                              38

Kat Gray and Dawn Atkinson

Chapter 4: Tracking Your Course Goals                                             47

Kat Gray
Part II. Part 2: Developing Your Professional Persona

Project 2: Career Documents                                       55

Kat Gray

Chapter 5: Applying to Jobs                                       60

Katrina Peterson and Kat Gray

Chapter 6: Tailoring Job Materials                                91

Kat Gray

Part III. Part 3: Researching Problems and Proposing Solutions

UARK Cares Foundation Community Improvement Grant                 107

Kat Gray

Project 3: Problem Primer                                         110

Kat Gray

Chapter 7: Explore Potential Problems                             114

Kat Gray; Tricia Hylton; and Robin L. Potter

Chapter 8: Research a Technical Writing Problem                   123

Kat Gray; Michael Beilfuss; Suzan Last; and Will Fleming

Chapter 9: Design and Run a Pilot Study                           140

Kat Gray; Suzan Last; Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt; and Matt McKinney

Chapter 10: Synthesize and Report Research                        159

Kat Gray; Will Fleming; and Katrina Peterson
Project 4: Collaborative Grant Proposal                                       179

Kat Gray

Chapter 11: Create a Grant Proposal                                           183

Kat Gray; Allison Gross; Annemarie Hamlin; Billy Merck; Chris Rubio; Michele
DeSilva; and Suzan Last

Chapter 12: Remix Research for a Public Audience                              206

Kat Gray; Ann Fillmore; and Melanie Gagich

Chapter 13: Write a Transmittal Letter                                        229

Kat Gray; Dawn Atkinson; David McMurrey; Annemarie Hamlin; Chris Rubio;

Michele DeSilva; Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt; Matt McKinney; and Kalani Pattison

Part IV. Part 4: Reflecting on Your Work

Project 5: Course Reflection Memo                                             241

Chapter 14: Reflective Writing for Technical Communication                    244

Kat Gray and Dawn Atkinson
                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS | IX

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

   Kat Gray

This book accompanies a larger revision of the technical writing curriculum at the University of Arkansas,
which started in Spring 2024. The original revisions launched in Fall 2025, then I spent a year gathering
feedback on the curriculum and textbook. In Summer 2025, I revised and streamlined the curriculum with Dr.
Maggie Fernandes, and then streamlined the textbook in service of that new curriculum.

Though the assembly of this book has been in large part a conversation between me and the writers of other
OER technical writing textbooks, it has by no means been a solitary project. I would like to acknowledge the
following people for their help on this project:

  · Christine Rickabaugh, Open Education Librarian, University of Arkansas. I especially appreciate
      Christine's help thinking about this project at the very beginning - she gave me a very clear overview of
      the process and helped set me on the way. Her help has also been invaluable in navigating the Pressbooks
      interface and making sure collaborators get credited.

  · Dr. Maggie Fernandes, Assistant Professor, University of Arkansas. Maggie has been an amazing
      collaborator for the most recent round of curriculum revisions, which this textbook reflects. Together,
      we streamlined the original Fall 2024 revisions into a curriculum that, we hope, allows students to learn
      and experience technical communication work more deeply.

  · Dr. Megan McIntyre and Professor LewEllyn Hallett, in the Program in Rhetoric and
      Composition, University of Arkansas. Their support, advice, and input on the course revisions have
      helped me undertake this rather large project with confidence.

  · Professional and Technical Writing (ENGL 30503) teachers during fall 2024 and spring 2025, who
      piloted the first version of this course and gave invaluable feedback for further revisions: Elizabeth
      Bonkoski, Mitchell Carabio, Maggie Fernandes, Laura Gray, Ali Hintz, Michel LaCrue, Raina
      Lyons, Shiloh Peters, Abigail Ross, Ahsan Tohel, Taylor Weeks, and Evan Wordlaw.

  · TAs and Instructors who helped create the pilot curriculum in spring semester 2024: Shelley
      Aschliman, Aura Comer, Mohi Uddin, and Evan Wordlaw.
X | ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                            INTRODUCTION: PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING (ENGL 30503) AT UARK | 1

INTRODUCTION: PROFESSIONAL AND
TECHNICAL WRITING (ENGL 30503) AT
UARK

   Kat Gray

Welcome to Professional and Technical Writing (ENGL 30503) at the University of Arkansas!

Professional and Technical Writing is an undergraduate-level course intended to prepare students for the
writing they are likely to do in the future, especially writing they are likely to do in the workplace. In English
30503, students extend their prior knowledge of rhetorical situations, genre conventions, research, document
design, and writing processes to practice common workplace writing genres like correspondence, proposals,
and reports.

Ultimately, the goal of the course is not that students leave with knowledge of every technical genre they might
possibly write. Rather, the course helps students to:

 1. Evaluate the rhetorical situation (audience, purpose, and context) of any piece of workplace writing;
 2. Practice technical writing genre conventions;
 3. Learn what questions to ask when writing in and for different organizations;
 4. Learn and practice research skills for technical writing, including finding and evaluating sources, using

      source information in documents, and citing sources appropriately;
 5. Learn and practice document design skills and principles to create clear and useful technical writing;
 6. Develop a professional "brand" or professional persona for workplace writing situations.

Through the major projects in the course, students will set goals for themselves, research and create technical
writing documents, and assess their progress towards their goals.

Book Outline

This textbook is organized into parts, centered around the work you will do for major projects in the course.
Within each part, you'll find chapters that are intended to help you work through the process of creating each
technical document required of you. Below, you'll find a brief summary of the book's contents.
2 | INTRODUCTION: PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING (ENGL 30503) AT UARK

Part 1: Introduction to Professional and Technical Writing

In Part 1, you will learn about professional and technical writing - what it is, who uses it and why, and how
it is constructed. Chapter 1: Introducing Technical Writing defines the field of technical writing within
writing studies and discusses the typical conventions of technical writing. Chapter 2: Ethics in Technical
Writing discusses why ethics are critical for technical writing projects and how to think about making ethical
communication decisions. Chapter 3: Setting Your Course Goals discusses why goal-setting is important
for this course, and how you'll use your course goals memo to help you do so. Chapter 4: Tracking Your
Course Goals talks about how you can track the goals you set as you progress through ENGL 30503.

Part 2: Developing Your Professional Persona

In Part 2, you will learn about how to develop your professional persona through career application
documents. In this project, you will practice technical writing and design skills to create a résumé and cover
letter that respond directly to a real job ad in your career field. Chapter 5: Applying to Jobs discusses the
job application process and how to construct the documents that respond to job ads. Chapter 6: Tailoring
Job Materials discusses how to tailor those materials for your specific audience, so that you can increase your
chances for success on the job market.

Part 3: Researching Problems and Proposing Solutions

Part 3 covers information for Project 3: Problem Primer and Project 4: Collaborative Grant Proposal. You
will write these documents in response to the UArk Cares Foundation Community Improvement Grant
Request for Proposals.

Chapter 7: Explore Potential Problems teaches you how to define a problem to explore with a technical
writing solution, as well as how to create a community profile detailing information about your stakeholders.
Chapter 8: Research a Technical Writing Problem includes information about secondary research
methods, information literacy, and how to create a pitch for your project. Chapter 9: Design and Run a
Pilot Study discusses the research methods you will use to create a primary research study for your problem
primer. Chapter 10: Synthesize and Report Research takes you through synthesis skills and describes how
to write a report.

Chapter 11: Create a Grant Proposal discusses the details of proposals as a technical writing genre as well
as how to write collaboratively. Chapter 12: Remix Research for a Public Audience will teach you about
using multimodal design to communicate with community stakeholders. Chapter 13: Write a Transmittal
Letter teaches you about how to create a transmittal letter to frame your fourth project.
                                           INTRODUCTION: PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING (ENGL 30503) AT UARK | 3

Part 4: Reflecting on Your Work

Part 4 details the final project for the course: the Course Reflection Memo. In Chapter 14: Reflective
Writing for Technical Communication, you'll learn about what reflective writing is, how it helps technical
writers, and exercises to develop your skills.
4 | INTRODUCTION: PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING (ENGL 30503) AT UARK
                                                             PART 1: INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING | 5

PART I

PART 1: INTRODUCTION TO
PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL
WRITING

Part 1: Introduction to Professional and Technical Writing offers four chapters to introduce you to the topics
you will cover this semester in Professional and Technical Writing (ENGL 30503). You'll learn about what
technical writing is, and how technical writers think about and incorporate ethical actions into their work.
Additionally, you'll learn about setting goals for the semester, tracking those goals over the next weeks, and
practicing your first technical writing genre in Project 1: the Course Goals Memo.

Part 1 contains the following:

  · Chapter 1: Introducing Technical Writing: In this chapter, you will learn about the characteristics
      and conventions of technical writing and practice identifying the rhetorical elements of sample technical
      writing documents.

  · Chapter 2: Ethics in Technical Writing: This chapter expands on the importance of ethics for
      technical writing. You will learn about seven ethical principles to follow, common ethical issues in
      technical writing, and steps for writing ethically.

  · Chapter 3: Setting Your Course Goals: This chapter describes the process of setting course goals,
      provides the assignment sheet for Project 1 (Course Goals Memo), and explains the memo genre and its
      formatting conventions.

  · Chapter 4: Tracking Your Course Goals: In this chapter, you will read about how to keep track of
      your progress towards the course goals you've set for the semester. You will learn about two documents
      that will help you in this process: the work log and the writing journal.
6 | PART 1: INTRODUCTION TO PROFESSIONAL AND TECHNICAL WRITING
                                                                                        EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 7

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCING TECHNICAL
WRITING

   Dawn Atkinson; Sarah Raymond; and Kat Gray

Introduction

Technical writing, according to this book's definition, is writing that aims to help individuals perform workplace
tasks, carry out operations, understand concepts or research, solve problems, operate technology, or communicate in
professional situations. Although you may not be fully familiar with the characteristics of technical writing, you
have likely experienced technical writing at one time or another in your daily life as a student, employee, or
consumer. You may have encountered technical writing in textbooks, operations manuals, company policies,
or illustrations in magazine articles. To extend our definition of technical writing, textbook author Last (2019,
p. 6) explains that this form of non-fiction writing communicates information for practical and specific purposes,
takes document design into account, and is usually intended for particular readers.

First, this chapter explores the characteristics of technical writing, so that you can understand the differences
between technical writing and other types of writing you have done. Then, the chapter explores the
conventions of technical writing in general, an understanding which will serve you well as you begin to think
about creating your first assignment for the course: the course goals memo. Finally, the chapter includes two
practice activities to familiarize you with technical writing. These activities ask you to think especially about
how audience relates to technical writing projects and what workplace ethics has to do with the work of a
technical communicator.

Characteristics of Technical Writing

When we employ technical writing, we strive to keep readers in mind and tailor our communication for a
particular purpose. The audience for a piece of technical writing is the individuals who will read the text.
Since technical writing may be used in multimedia documents, such as presentations, videos, and podcasts, an
audience might also include listeners, viewers, and users. The purpose for a piece of technical writing signifies
the reason it has been produced. In general, the purpose for a piece of communication is either to entertain,
sell, inform, or persuade; however, documents may also address more than one of these purposes. Technical
writing, in comparison, may be produced with more specific purposes in mind, such as to provide or ask for
8 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

information, record details, or convince readers of something (Last, 2019, p. 18). Again, technical documents
may also reflect more than one of these purposes.

Seven attributes help to define technical writing and ensure that it adequately addresses audience and purpose.
Specifically, technical writing is clear, coherent, concise, concrete, correct, complete, and courteous. The
following definitions of these characteristics are adapted from Last (2019, pp. 43-44).

Clear writing communicates a writer's ideas and purpose in a straightforward manner. It targets a particular
audience by being precise and moderating technical words, obscure phrases, and jargon - specialized language
or terminology used in a particular field of study or workplace environment. It also foregrounds important
information for the benefit of readers and conveys one main idea per paragraph.

Coherent writing builds links between ideas so readers can easily follow them. One idea should lead logically
into the next via use of transitional words and phrases, intentional repetition, sentences with clear subjects,
specific and informative titles and headings, parallel lists, and consistent document design. When writing is
coherent, readers can easily track thoughts and lines of reasoning; incoherent writing, in comparison, is choppy
and hard to follow since its ideas appear to be disconnected or incomplete.

Concise writing is efficient: it delivers its message clearly without using extraneous words that slow readers.
To produce concise writing, avoid unnecessary padding in sentences, awkward phrasing, overuse of be verbs
(is, are, was, were, am, be, being, been), long preposition strings, vague language, unnecessary repetition, and
redundancy. In addition, use active verbs whenever possible, and take the time to select a single, expressive word
rather than using a long or clichéd phrase. Think of your word count like a budget; be frugal by making sure
every word you choose works hard to communicate meaning.

Concrete writing uses specific, exact language so readers can easily understand points. If you have to explain
an abstract concept, use familiar examples, everyday comparisons, and precise language. In addition, use
measurable or specific descriptors whenever possible instead of words that encompass a range of
interpretations (e.g., big, little, very, extremely, and great).

Correct writing uses conventional English punctuation, capitalization, and sentence structures; provides
accurate information that is communicated in an ethical way; and employs the right document type for the
task.

Complete writing includes all requested information and answers all relevant questions. Carefully read and
follow specifications to ensure your documents are complete.

Courteous writing employs an intuitive design that is easy to scan; uses respectful language; addresses readers
appropriately; and avoids potentially offensive terms and tone.
                                                                                        EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 9

Writing that is clear, coherent, concise, concrete, correct, complete, and courteous establishes credibility with
readers, demonstrates dedication and care, and communicates messages convincingly.

Conventions of Technical Writing

Documents typically follow conventions: expectations about key features that affect how documents are
organized, designed, and written. Conventions help readers recognize and categorize documents into genres, or
types of writing; conventions also help writers to produce texts in line with accepted standards.

Certain conventions typify technical writing as a means for communicating information clearly and effectively
to people who need it. Table 1.1 provides an overview of these conventions.

Considerations               Table 1.1: Conventions of Technical Writing
Purpose
                Conventions
Audience
Writing Style   Communicates technical and specialized information in a clear, accessible, and usable manner
                to people who need it to perform workplace tasks, carry out a series of operations, understand
Tone            concepts, solve problems, operate technology, or communicate in a professional manner.
Structure
Format/Design   Addresses various audiences: e.g., employees, managers, executives, stakeholders, clients, the
Other Features  general public, funding bodies, students, and entities with legal authority.

                Uses concise, clear, plain, and direct language that is formal or moderately formal; may include
                specialized terminology; typically incorporates short sentences written in the active voice; and
                makes purpose immediately clear.

                Maintains a tone that is courteous, constructive, and professional.

                Uses concise paragraphs, clear transitions, and structural cues (e.g. informative headings and
                titles) to organize and forecast content for readers.

                Includes electronic, visual, and printed documents of different lengths (e.g. long reports and
                short emails, letters, and memos); incorporates headings, lists, figures, and tables.

                Focuses on data-driven ideas and evidence.

The conventions outlined in Table 1.1 help make technical writing easy-to-navigate and reader focused.

Practice Activities

The two activities in this section introduce you to characteristics of technical writing and ask you to practice
thinking in ways that technical writers think. In the first activity, you will interact with several examples of
technical writing and think about the audience for each one. In the second activity, you will read an article
about integrity in the workplace, and think through your own experiences with the terms integrity and ethics.
10 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

Activity A: Identify the Audiences for Pieces of Technical
Writing

Read the excerpt from the article "Remote Reefs and Seamounts are the Last Refuges for Marine Predators
across the Indo-Pacific," (Letessier et al., 2019, "Abstract").

     Article Excerpt

     Since the 1950s, industrial fisheries have expanded globally, as fishing vessels are required to travel
     further afield for fishing opportunities. Technological advancements and fishery subsidies have
     granted ever-increasing access to populations of sharks, tunas, billfishes, and other predators.
     Wilderness refuges, defined here as areas beyond the detectable range of human influence, are
     therefore increasingly rare. In order to achieve marine resources sustainability, large no-take marine
     protected areas (MPAs) with pelagic components are being implemented. However, such
     conservation efforts require knowledge of the critical habitats for predators, both across shallow
     reefs and the deeper ocean. Here, we fill this gap in knowledge across the Indo-Pacific by using
     1,041 midwater baited videos to survey sharks and other pelagic predators such as rainbow runner
     (Elagatis bipinnulata), mahi-mahi (Coryphaena hippurus), and black marlin (Istiompax indica). We
     modeled three key predator community attributes: vertebrate species richness, mean maximum
     body size, and shark abundance as a function of geomorphology, environmental conditions, and
     human pressures. All attributes were primarily driven by geomorphology (35%-62% variance
     explained) and environmental conditions (14%-49%). While human pressures had no influence on
     species richness, both body size and shark abundance responded strongly to distance to human
     markets (12%-20%). Refuges were identified at more than 1,250 km from human markets for body
     size and for shark abundance. These refuges were identified as remote and shallow seabed
     features, such as seamounts, submerged banks, and reefs. Worryingly, [hotspots] of large
     individuals and of shark abundance are presently under-represented within no-take MPAs that aim
     to effectively protect marine predators, such as the British Indian Ocean Territory. Population
     recovery of predators is unlikely to occur without strategic placement and effective enforcement of
     large no-take MPAs in both coastal and remote locations.

What can you tell about the intended audience for the text?
                                                                                        EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 11

Read another example of technical writing - a set of instructions for a Creative Commons matching game,
adapted from Northwest Vista College Library (Figure 2).

     Example Set of Instructions
12 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

Figure 2: "Creative Commons Matching Game" by AmandaMG is licensed under CC BY 4.0. Information
and images about the licenses are from Creative Commons.
What can you tell about the intended audience for this document?
                                                                                       EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 13

Now read a third example of technical writing in Figure 3. Infographics combine text, visuals, and numbers to
communicate dense information in quick and easy-to-read formats.

     Infographic Example

Figure 3: "Threats to Coral Reefs." (2018). NOAA.gov.

What can you tell about the intended audience for this document?
14 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

How do the audiences for the three examples you looked at differ? How might these differences have shape the
documents' development? Please be prepared to discuss your ideas in class.

Activity B: Consider the Implications of Integrity in the
Workplace

Correct technical communication is truthful in its message and is communicated ethically. To explore what
these concepts mean from various perspectives, read the following piece, composed by Sarah Raymond,
Director of Career Services at Montana Technological University. In 2020, Ms. Raymond conducted a series
of informational interviews with employers to discover what integrity means to them. After you have read the
text, work with classmates to address the questions that follow. Be prepared to discuss your team's responses in
class.

       What do you do when no one is watching?
       Although integrity, by definition, is "the quality of being honest and having strong moral
       principles" (Lexico, 2020, definition one), it is one of those abstract personal traits that can be
       difficult to pin down. Regardless, most people know what it is when they see it. You have
       probably witnessed times when people have disregarded integrity and may or may not have
       been caught. It can be devastating to watch when someone does get exposed, either as a result
       of a serious infraction or several small infractions that have previously been overlooked. In
       either case, the repercussions can be great.
       Integrity is certainly important in academics, as academia is a training ground for the workplace.
       During her interview, Koren Vining, Vice President and Branch Manager at Cetera Investors,
       concurred with this view: "College gives you time to practice integrity and hone those skills,
       [and]...if you screw up, it isn't life altering." Mistakes can, in fact, help people learn. Vining said
       she hopes her children learn from their mistakes before they enter employment--before their
       actions can really hurt their lives. To be sure, lapses in judgement, integrity, and ethical decision
       making can lead to substantial costs in the workplace (for example, your job, your money, your
       time, other people's time, and other people's money).
                                                                              EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 15

Companies recognize integrity in their employees and tend to promote those who work hard,
do a good job, and have impeccable behavior. What leaders do and how they behave matters
because people are always watching. Quality leadership correlates with a high degree of
integrity (as well as transparency, accountability, responsibility, self-awareness, and other
traits). Vining explained,

        There comes a time when you are ready to take the next step; by having worked the
        right way, you have put in the effort, you have practiced the skills for future success. If
        you have been accidentally successful, there will come a time when it will crash.

Working in an investment firm, Vining has unfortunately seen this destructive situation happen
to former employees. In a highly regulated business, someone is always watching.

As a testament to her integrity as a leader, Vining has shared pieces of her management style
and has been open with members of her work team. This transparency allows her team
members to be successful on their own terms. To encourage their success and self-sufficiency,
Vining shares the following guidance with her team members:

        Do your work. If you need a boss, someone to stand over you, this isn't going to be a
        successful working relationship. However, if you need some structure and a coach, you
        can dictate your own success. Are you working on your own plan, or are you working on
        a plan that belongs to someone else?

Vining clearly values her employees' beliefs in their ability to be successful and is transparent in
her expectations.

Since 2020, many people have experienced remote work for a sustained period of time. Maybe
you have even experienced a remote classroom that was not what you had planned when you
registered for the term. In this type of situation, discipline and focus will serve you well as
opposed to trying to avoid hard work by taking short cuts. In relation to this point, Vining
asked, "How do you want people to think about you?" In other words, what do they say about
you when you are not there? Your personal brand and what you stand for matter in the
workplace.

Putting in extra effort and time on tasks can cause stress, but Vining shared an alternate view:
"Unless you are really a crappy person, there is stress involved with taking the short-cut too."
In other words, taking short cuts to circumvent hard work is stressful because of the fear of
getting caught.

Vining offered sage advice as a 19-year recruiting veteran: "Cultivate personal integrity. You will
be more apt to have more success." At the companies she has worked, she has been fortunate
16 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

       to witness corporate America elevate people who have integrity. And, conversely, she has seen
       those who do not demonstrate integrity suffer. "Eventually it comes out, it may be post-
       mortem and that is certainly not how you want to be remembered." When you are responsible
       for someone else's resources (money, time, property) in a job, people expect you to value that
       position. Employers trust you to make the next right decision.

       According to Glen Fowler, the former President of Mountain Pacific Association of Colleges and
       Employers (MPACE) and the National Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE), the
       adjectives integrity and credibility are synonymous. "Everything you say, if you are credible, I
       believe you without question. It is a distraction if you have to spend time and second guess
       people." Credibility is something that most employers are able to identify early in someone's
       career. Similarly, lack of credibility on the job--for example, when steering a team or when
       reporting back on its work--can be career limiting. "Credibility is about your personal reputation.
       Once it is marred, it is all over," according to Fowler. "People underestimate how small the world
       is. Leadership or decision makers know each other and if not, they will reach out to someone."
       Again, integrity is central to effective workplace performance.

       Fowler echoed that academia is the time to develop and hone behavioral integrity. "This is how
       you are going to conduct yourself in the future." During his professional career, while
       onboarding staff and hiring scores of people, he observed that individuals entering his industry
       were Type A personalities. "These [were] people who [were] used to having all the answers.
       We had to break them of that mentality, break the conditioning they had developed. We had to
       give them the license to say `I don't know.'" Fowler stressed, "You are better off saying that you
       don't know. You are hired for your expertise, but if you start your response with a conditional
       statement, `I think,' people don't hear that qualification." Fowler also emphasized, "A sign of
       maturity is to admit you don't have all the answers," and quickly added, "But you can get them!"

       Another subtlety of integrity and a way in which people can get into trouble, according to
       Fowler, "Is not just what you share, but what you didn't share even when you knew it would
       help and yet still withheld it." People may not openly communicate for a variety of reasons,
       none of which may be malicious or self-serving. Maybe they do not communicate because they
       want to avoid confrontation or uncomfortable situations. Or, they may tell themselves it is not
       their place to be forthright. Regardless, "A junior-level person can question or stand up to a
       senior person, based upon perceived facts and still be respected," according to Fowler. "To
       become a true leader, it is important to be engaged with your career and know yourself." In
       other words, recognize and own the values that underlay your actions and behaviors.

       Employers use job interviews to assess a number of things: for example, skills, past
                                                                              EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 17

performance, technical expertise, and level of workplace integrity. Some recruiters use
behavioral or situational questions to help them better understand how job applicants would
handle real-life problems or common situations. Here are a few interview questions for you to
consider. How would you answer them during an employment interview?

     · Tell me about a time you were new to a company or work group. What steps did you
        take to build trust with co-workers and/or staff?

     · Give an example of a time when you over-committed yourself. How did you handle it?
     · Describe a situation when you worked with someone you did not like or respect. How

        did you cope with the relationship?
     · Tell me about a time when your values were in conflict with your employment

        organization's values. What did you do?
    · Describe what the terms integrity and ethics mean to you. Tell me about a time when

        your integrity or ethics were challenged. What did you do?

Employers likely will not tell you outright when you are being asked questions about ethics or
integrity. They may be more subtle and lay out situations to uncover your core values. Fowler
shared, "Employers ask questions in...clever ways. They...[will] tee up a scenario that is specific
to their industry. It gets at the heart of your personal judgement, conflict resolution, or
teamwork." How will you respond? Will you make the next right decision? Are you a match for
the team they already have in place?

As an employee, you will be evaluated on the quality of work you produce. That is another way
your employer will measure your credibility. Are you performing the responsibilities of your post
with integrity? Your employer will trust that you are going to do your work correctly, produce
credible deliverables, and communicate effectively throughout projects. Your employer, in short,
will rely on you to do what you say you will do in order to uphold the organization's reputation
and your own.

Integrity is clearly more than just the definition of honesty and moral uprightness. Ultimately, all
you have is your word. The ability to follow through on your promises contributes to your
professional reputation, and relationships and interactions with others count for a great deal. If
people are not able to trust or rely on you in the workplace, you will miss opportunities for
personal and professional success. Barb Crump, Director of Human Resources at Northern
Montana Hospital, deals with people every day in her role. She values fairness in the workplace,
and people come to her because they rely on her expertise and trust her willingness to guide
them correctly. Crump shared, "Recently there was a post on Facebook that sums up what we
18 | EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS

       are discussing: `I no longer listen to what people say. I watch what they do. Behavior doesn't
       lie.'"

       What are your responses to these items?

            1. A new employee received training from someone else in the office. The person
                responsible for the training withheld information that was critical to completing a
                particular task. The new employee struggled to complete the task, and the trainer
                eventually shared the proper information.

                      How might the new employee feel?
                      Why would the person conducting the training withhold information?
                      What was wasted during the process: time, money, opportunities for collaboration

                        and peer-to-peer learning, mental energy, or something else?
                      What might happen to team morale? What might happen to the overall morale in

                        the office?
                      What did the company lose?

           2. An employer contacted a university's career services office to inquire about an intern's
                transcript. The employer had worked with this office for some time to offer internship
                opportunities to students. The intern was required to provide the transcript as a
                condition of employment, but the employer had concerns about the document since its
                format did not resemble transcripts that had been provided in the past.

                      What do you think might have happened with the transcript?
                      What was damaged in this situation?
                      How should the employer respond?
                      How should the career services office respond?
                      How should the university respond?

           3. Imagine you had the opportunity to interview for a dream job in your field and were
                provided the list of interview questions in advance. How would you respond to these
                questions?

                      Tell me about a time you were new to a group. What steps did you take to build
                        trust with its members?

                      Give an example of a time when you over-committed yourself. How did you handle
                                                                                       EXPLORING TECHNICAL WRITING FUNDAMENTALS | 19

                        it?
                      Describe a situation when you worked with someone you did not like or respect.

                        How did you cope with the relationship?
                      Tell me about a time when you encountered a conflict with someone, either at

                        work or in school. What communication strategies did you use to resolve it?
                     Describe what the terms integrity and ethics mean to you. Tell me about a time

                        when your integrity or ethics were challenged. What did you do?

Conclusion

In this first chapter, you've gotten accustomed to the characteristics of technical writing and thought through
how these characteristics influence the genre conventions of the documents technical writers produce. Next,
you'll explore ethics in technical writing in more depth.

References

Last, Suzan (2019). Technical writing essentials: introduction to professional communication in the technical
   fields. License: CC-BY-SA-3.0. Retrieved from https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/technicalwriting/.

Letessier, T.B., Mouillot, D., Bouchet, P.J., Vigliola, L., Fernandes, M.C., Thompson, C., Boussarie, G.,
   Turner, J., Juhel, J.B., Maire, E., Caley, M.J., Koldewey, H.J., Friedlander, A., Sala, E., & Meeuwig, J.J.
   (2019). Remote reefs and seamounts are the last refuges for marine predators across the Indo-Pacific. PLoS
   Biology, 17(8). Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pbio.3000366.

Lexico. (2020). Integrity. In Lexico. Retrieved June 3, 2020, from https://www.lexico.com/en/definition/
   integrity.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. (2018). Threats to coral reefs: Overfishing [Infographic].
https://www.noaa.gov/multimedia/infographic/infographic-how-does-overfishing-threaten-coral-reefs.
Northwest Vista College Library. (n.d.). Creative Commons matching game. License: CC-BY 4.0.
https://nvcguides.libguides.com/ccmatchinggame.
  20 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

 CHAPTER 2: ETHICS IN TECHNICAL
 WRITING

    Gia Alexander; Kathy Anders; Michael Beilfuss; Michele DeSilva; Kat Gray;
    Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt; Annemarie Hamlin; Suzan Last; Matt McKinney;
    Kalani Pattison; Chris Rubio; and Eleanor Sumpter-Latham

 Introduction

  Before you start learning how to create technical writing projects, it is vital to discuss one of the overriding
  concerns of the discipline: ethics. To begin, let's set down a definition of the term. Dictionary.com defines
  ethics as "a system of moral principles." However, as subsequent definitions show, it's more complicated than
  this. Ethics are "the rules of conduct recognized in respect to a particular class of human actions or a particular
  group, culture, etc" (2025). In other words, ethics are specific rules of conduct that govern specific groups of
  people; in this case, we are discussing the rules of conduct that govern the work of technical communicators.
  As you will see, these rules are very important to most technical communicators - in fact, most organizations
  and companies have their own codes of conduct for professional communication.
  To understand why ethics are important, let's consider one of the most well-known real-life examples of
  technical communication failures: the Challenger space shuttle disaster of 1986.

       Case Study: The Space Shuttle Challenger Disaster (1986)1

       In January 1986, NASA prepared the space shuttle Challenger for its 10th spaceflight, a mission that
       would, among other things, send the first civilian to space: teacher Christa McAuliffe, the first

1. Adapted from "1.4: Ethics Example: Shuttle Challenger," by Tamara Powell ( and "Communication Failures Contributing to the Challenger
  Accident: An Example for Technical Communicators," by D.A. Winsor (1988).
                                                                                                                      ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 21

participant in Ronald Reagan's Teacher in Space Project (Uri, 2024). Tragically, 73 seconds into its
flight, Challenger exploded, killing all seven crew members. Many Americans, including many
schoolchildren, watched the disaster unfold on live television broadcast. The event had such an
effect that even now, people remember where they were when it happened. And, of course, NASA,
the President, and the public wanted answers to several important questions: What went wrong?
Could it have been prevented? Would it happen again?

Ultimately, the disaster came down to an "O-ring problem," primarily "the failure of a rubber seal in
the solid rocket booster" (Winsor, p. 336). As it turns out, engineers noticed the problem in 1984
and 1985, as evidenced by a series of memos written by MIT engineers Roger Boisjoly and Brian
Russell. Boisjoly clearly expressed his fears about the effects of the O-ring failure, writing in July of
1985 that "if we do not take immediate action... to solve the problem... then we stand in jeopardy of
losing a flight along with all the launch pad facilities" (Winsor, p. 341). On August 9, 1985, Russell
backed his colleague's understanding: "If the primary seal were to fail from... 330-660 milliseconds
the chance of the second seal holding is small. This is a direct result of the O-ring's slow response
compared to the metal case segments as the joint rotates" (Winsor, p. 343). In other words, up to
two years before the Challenger tragedy, MIT engineers knew what would probably happen if the
O-ring issues weren't addressed.

So what happened? Why did the shuttle launch anyway?

To understand NASA's lack of response, it's important to understand the full content of Brian
Russell's response to Roger Boisjoly. As Tamara Powell writes,

      Russell's memo does not provide any interpretation of the situation, and as such, `did not
      communicate its intent [as] is shown by the fact that the people who read it were uncertain about
      what it meant' (Winsor, p. 343). The important information in the Russell memo, which was quoted
      above, was buried deep in the letter after such reassurances as `MIT has no reason to suspect that
      the primary seal would ever fail after pressure equilibrium is reached' (Winsor, p. 343).

In other words, Brian Russell downplayed the seriousness of potential O-ring failures. Russell
acknowledged clearly the risks of primary O-ring failure: the secondary O-ring would not hold.
However, when he told his supervisors that MIT had "no reason to suspect" that the primary seal
would fail, he projected a confidence that the worst would not happen if the shuttle launched
without replacing the O-rings. He, along with others who suggested the shuttle should launch
anyway, was wrong - and, as Roger Boisjoly predicted, NASA lost a flight and its entire crew.

Dorothy Winsor studied the disaster from a technical communication perspective and argued that
there were two main reasons for the miscommunications in this instance.

First, managers and engineers "view[ed] the same facts from different perspectives"; in turn, this
  22 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

       created a problem in terms of "achieving shared interpretations" between the people who could
       have made decisions to fix the problem (p. 341). In other words, if a writer and audience do not
       interpret the information in a document in the same way, the writer's message can be diluted, or
       even hidden, from the people she hopes to reach.
       The second reason for the communication breakdown involved "the general difficulty of either
       sending or receiving bad news, particularly when it must be passed to superiors or outsiders" (p.
       341). That is, MIT researchers had to communicate with their bosses, as well as their partners at
       NASA and at Morton Thiokol International (MTI), the contractor that built the solid rocket boosters.
       Unfortunately, technical communications research, as Winsor wrote, shows that bad news "is often
       not passed upwards in organizations" and "even when bad news is sent, people are less likely to
       believe it than good news" (p. 341).
       In other words, these memo writers faced an incredibly challenging scenario. They needed to
       deliver bad news to their bosses and other important stakeholders, and several chose to conceal
       that bad news in assurances that the worst probably wouldn't happen. While there's no guarantee
       that better technical communication would have prevented the disaster, a clearer message in those
       memos would have alerted every reader to the seriousness of the O-ring problem. Clearer
       communication could very well have saved lives that day.

  Not all technical writing situations have the kind of stakes that Challenger did, but the tragedy is an important
  reminder that technical communications affect - and can therefore harm - real people, living creatures, and
  the environment we share. To be ethical technical communicators, then, is to be aware of these possible harms
  and to set out a clear set of values and behaviors that can guide us as we work. The remainder of this chapter
  will explore seven principles for ethical technical and professional communication, discuss common ethical
  mistakes in technical writing, and discuss the steps you should take to write ethically.

 Principles of Ethics in Technical and Professional
 Communication2

  Technical communication occurs within a wide variety of professional sectors, including medicine, law, civil
  service, industry, and academia. In all of these sectors, communicators encounter ethical issues and dilemmas.

2. Adapted from "Workplace and Professional Ethics in Technical Communication," by Matt McKinney, Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, Michele
  DeSilva, and Gia Alexander
                                                                                                                            ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 23

When you join an organization, institution, or professional community, you should familiarize yourself with
their code(s) of conduct for technical and professional communication. Learning the expectations for your
position will help you establish habits that reinforce your ethical communication skills.

In addition to specific codes of conduct, there are also some universal principles that technical and professional
communicators can rely on to ensure that they apply their skills and present ideas ethically. The list below,
based on resources from the Society of Technical Communication (STC, 1998) offers seven principles for
practicing ethical communication:

1. Legality. We are responsible for knowing laws and regulations relevant to our profession. This means being
responsible for laws at all scales, from local to international, and following those laws in good faith. Further, we
keep the terms of our contracts, and we make sure those terms square with our ethical and legal responsibilities
as technical communicators.

     Case Study Example

     In 2014, it was discovered that Volkswagen had been violating U.S. emissions laws with their diesel
     cars for years. The company's engineers did this by installing "defeat device" software that
     activated emission-control devices only when two wheels were running, rather than four--a sign
     that the car was being tested in a lab. As a result, the lab reports detailing the cars' emission levels
     contained deliberately falsified results. Because Volkswagen's corporate leadership violated U.S.
     law--and pressured their engineers to do so on their behalf--the company's reputation suffered a
     huge blow (Santos and Lynch, 2020). More importantly, they caused significant harm to the planet
     by marketing cars that contributed excessively to air pollution.

2. Honesty. We communicate honestly, both orally and in writing and seek to promote clarity when our
meaning might be misconstrued by our audience. We "dedicate ourselves to conciseness, clarity, coherence,
and creativity, striving to meet the needs of those who use our products and services" (STC, 1998). We obtain
permission to use others' work and attribute the authorship of materials to anyone who makes a contribution
to the project. We advertise our services truthfully. We accurately report expenses and personal time taken and
explicitly acknowledge colleagues' and coworkers' contributions to team projects and presentations.
24 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

     Case Study Example

     In 2015, former chemistry professor Brian McNaughton of Colorado State University committed
     forgery. Feeling that he was underpaid, he wrote a fake offer letter from the University of
     Minnesota's interim dean to seem like a more desirable scholar. Based on this forged document,
     CSU made him a counteroffer that included a raise and increased access to lab equipment and other
     university resources. McNaughton was caught two years later and charged with a felony (Stripling
     and Zahneis, 2018). Not only did McNaughton ruin his own reputation by forging the letter, he
     effectively stole money and resources from a state-funded institution (i.e., taxpayers). He also
     appropriated and misrepresented the professional ethos of the dean from U. Minnesota to deceive
     his employer.

3. Confidentiality. We respect the privacy of clients, colleagues, classmates, students, employees, employers,
and organizations. We share private information with prior consent or when legally obliged. We obtain releases
from clients and employers before using work that might contain sensitive information in portfolios or demos.

Examples of Respecting Privacy:

  · Psychiatrists not discussing their patients' medical histories with anyone other than the patient (unless
      that patient may harm themselves or other people).

  · Professors not posting identifying or pejorative information about students on social media.
  · Professors asking students if they can share their work with future classes.
  · Employees password-protecting their computers to keep confidential documents secured.
  · Whistleblowers alerting federal regulatory agencies about crime on the job.

4. Quality. We present our best work to clients and employers. We are transparent and realistic about our
abilities. We negotiate realistic expectations regarding project scope, schedule, budget, and deliverables
upfront, during project planning stages. We then strive to fulfill these obligations, maintaining clear
communication with clients and employers about our project and seeking feedback at appropriate points
during the process.
                    ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 25

Case Study Example

     Since March 2020, when the COVID-19 pandemic broke out in the United States, Dr. Anthony Fauci
     has made a conscientious effort to qualify all of his public statements and predictions about when a
     potential vaccine for the virus would be made available. During that first month, he estimated that
     it would take "a year to a year and a half" for a vaccine to be developed. Although Dr. Fauci is
     aware that the American public and government want a vaccine as soon as possible, he is also the
     director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). Further still, as a
     globally renowned medical professional, he is well acquainted with the steps that a vaccine trial
     process entails before one is safe for public distribution. Consequently, his institutional role and
     knowledge ethically obligate him to specify any factors or variables that are essential to a quality
     vaccine (Souchery, 2020).

5. Fairness. We respect cultural and experiential differences within our organization, and between our
organization and clients, development teams, and audiences. We work in alignment with the public good. We
avoid conflicts of interest or disclose them immediately when engaging in professional activities.

Examples of Practicing Fairness

  · Crafting employee-training materials on different forms of bias.
  · Writing and distributing job ads in a way that emphasizes hiring a wide variety of people with a wide

      variety of different experiences.
  · Monitoring the health of a company's workplace culture by creating an internal committee or hiring a

      consultant.
  · An architect designs a building that is wheelchair-accessible and uses sustainable materials.
  · A professor consults with community leaders before assigning a community-based learning project, so

      that the project is helpful to the community while also teaching students course concepts.
  · Coworkers reporting their office romance to human resources (many organizations have a policy that

      requires such reporting).
  · A company recruiter recusing themselves from interviewing a close friend or relative.

6. Professionalism. We seek opportunities to refine our technical communication skills and ask for
performance assessments and feedback on our work. We give others empathy, respect, and constructive
26 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

criticism when we communicate or collaborate. We perform each technical communication task we undertake
with integrity and seek to help others in our profession or organization.

Examples of Professionalism

  · Establishing clear values and guidelines for technical communication in your organization.
  · Reinforcing those guidelines and values for colleagues and subordinates through your own

      communication.
  · Participating in (or organizing) professional workshops, seminars, and/or conferences on improving

      technical communication skills.

7. Security. We are aware of the security protocols (mandated by law or company policy) that govern releasing
information or using company technologies. We recognize and practice data security: using secure passwords,
two-factor authentication, or encryption to protect sensitive data. We report phishing attempts, suspicious
links, spyware, malware, and other risks.

Examples of Practicing Security

  · Logging out of your computer before you leave your workstation.
  · Shredding confidential documents instead of putting them in the trash.
  · Reporting a phishing email to your employer's IT team.

How Bias Influences Unethical Communication

Many ethics violations in technical writing are (probably) unintentional, but they are still ethics violations.
That means a technical writer must consciously identify their biases and check to see if a bias has influenced any
presentation: whether in charts and graphs, or in discussions of the evidence, or in source use or in placement
of information.

For example, scholarly research is theoretically intended to fulfill one of two purposes. Some scholarly research
attempts to gather evidence to evaluate whether a new idea is valid and contributes to the field. Other research
reviews or attempts to replicate previous work to cement its validity.

One example of a groundbreaking study is James Watson and Francis Crick's 1953 paper "Molecular Structure
of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid." Watson and Crick expanded on the work of
other researchers concerning DNA as the vehicle for genetic code. In response to another model for DNA
(a triple-helix) proposed by scientists Linus Pauling and Robert Corey, Watson and Crick proposed the
double-helix model to convey how DNA transmits genes across organisms. Their paper was reviewed by other
                                                                                                                              ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 27

  scientists in their field in order to be published in the scientific journal Nature, and after decades of subsequent
  research their double-helix model is still favored by the majority of contemporary scientists.

  As with all human endeavors, however, research is susceptible to bias and error. For example, a recent study
  on the interrelationship between gender, mentor relationships, and career success in academia received intense
  scrutiny for its flawed design. Published in the academic journal Nature Communications, the study claims
  that researchers earlier in their careers (particularly women) tend to produce less significant research the
  more female mentors they have; therefore, early career researchers should seek out male mentors instead (al
  Shebli, Makovi, and Rahwan, "RETRACTED ARTICLE," 2020). Many other scientists critical of the study,
  however, pointed out that the study did not provide a concrete, functional definition of mentorship or senior
  standing, did not account for institutional bias in favor of men as a factor, and made the false assumption that
  more citations equals more career success (Wessel, 2020). Subsequent to this criticism, the journal chose to
  retract the article, nullifying the validity of the communication (al Shebli, Makovi, and Rahwan, "Retraction
  Note," 2020).

  In practice, most folks are primarily looking for support: "Hey, I have this great new idea that will solve
  world hunger, cure cancer, and make mascara really waterproof. Now I just need some evidence to prove I
  am right!" However, if you can easily find 94 high-quality sources that confirm you are correct, you might
  want to consider whether your idea is worth developing. Often in technical writing, the underlying principle
  is already well-documented (maybe even common knowledge for your audience), and you should instead use
  that underlying principle to propose a specific application.

  Using a large section of your document to prove an already established principle implies that you are saying
  something new about the principle--which is not true. A brief mention ("Research conducted at major
  research universities over the last ten years (see literature review, Smith and Tang, 2010) establishes that...")
  accurately reflects the status of the principle; then you would go on to apply that principle to your specific task
  or proposal.

 Typical Ethics Issues in Technical Writing3

  There are a few ethical issues that may arise when a writer is researching a topic for the business or technical
  world. Technical writing is complex and asks a lot from a writer in terms of research and presenting
  information accurately to an audience. A given audience may not (and in fact likely does not) have the same

3. Adapted from "Typical Ethics Issues in Technical Writing," by Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Kathy Anders, Suzan Last, Annemarie Hamlin,
  Chris Rubio, Michele DeSilva, Eleanor Sumpter-Latham, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt
28 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

understanding of the topic as the writer of the document. It's the writer's job to figure out how to accurately
convey hours of research and design to the audience in a way that is both clear and ethical. Being aware of the
following common ethical issues will help you to create technical writing that balances these needs.

Research that Does Not Support the Project Idea

In a technical document that contains research, you might discover conflicting data that does not support the
project's goal. For example, your small company has problems with employee morale. Research shows that
bringing in an outside expert, someone who is unfamiliar with the company and the stakeholders, has the
potential to enact the greatest change. You discover, however, that bringing in such an expert is cost prohibitive.
Should you leave this information out of your report, thereby encouraging your employer to pursue an action
that is really not feasible? Conversely, should you include the information at the risk of not being able to offer
the strongest solution?

Suppressing Relevant Information

Suppressing relevant information can include a variety of factors, including the statistical significance of data
or the researchers' stake in the findings. For example, a study in 2015 found that driving while dehydrated is
about as dangerous as driving while under the influence of alcohol. While this was widely reported in popular
news sources, these sources failed to highlight some of the most important aspects of the study. To begin with,
the study was conducted using just 12 people, and only 11 of them reported data. Furthermore, the study
was conducted by an organization called the European Hydration Institute, which in turn is a think-tank
subsidiary of the Coca-Cola corporation. In other words, not only was the sample size far too small to make
this claim, but the data collection was designed and implemented by a corporation with a stake in the findings,
since they profit off the sale of hydration products (Reed, 2016; Oliver, 2016). This case illustrates the ethical
dubiousness of suppressing important contextual information for the sake of a sensational headline.

Not Verifying Sources Properly

Whenever you incorporate others' ideas into your documents, especially quotations, make sure that you are
attributing them to the correct source. Mark Twain, supposedly quoting British Prime Minister Benjamin
Disraeli, famously said, "There are three kinds of lies: lies, damned lies, and statistics" (Lainson, 2002). On
the other hand, H.G. Wells has been (mis)quoted as stating, "statistical thinking will one day be as necessary
for efficient citizenship as the ability to read and write" (Wilkes, 1951). When using quotes, even ones from
famous figures, it is important to verify the source of the quote. Such quotes often seem true, because the ideas
they present are powerful and appealing. However, it is important to verify the original source both because
                                                                                                                              ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 29

  you need to make sure that your quote is, in fact, correct, and that it is not being taken out of context from the
  original source.

 Presenting Visual Information Ethically

  Visuals can be useful for communicating data and information efficiently for a reader. They provide data
  in a concentrated form, often illustrating key facts, statistics, or information from the text of the report.
  However, when writers present information visually, they have to be careful not to misrepresent or misreport
  the complete picture. Many of the visual design guidelines we'll offer in the textbook are meant to help ensure
  that you present your data ethically, primarily by not misleading readers and by ensuring access for as many
  readers as possible.
  Figure 3.14 below shows information in a pie chart from two different perspectives. The data in each is
  identical, but the pie chart on the left presents information in a misleading way. What do you notice about
  how that information is conveyed to the reader?

  Figure 3.1. Misleading and regular pie charts. In the misleading pie chart, item C appears to be at least as
  large as item A, whereas in actuality, it is less than half as large.

  Imagine that these pie charts represented donations received by four candidates for city council. The candidate
  represented by the gray slice labeled "Item C" might think that she had received more donations than the

4. Derived from Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, and Michele DeSilva, "Misleading and Regular Pie Charts," in "Typical Ethics Issues in Technical
  Writing," licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, in Gross, Allison, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris
  Rubio, Jodi Naas, Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva, Technical Writing, (Open Oregon Educational Materials, n.d.),
  https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/technicalwriting/. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
  International License.
  30 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

  candidate represented in the blue "Item A" slice. In fact, if we look at the same data in the 2D chart, we can see
  that Item C represents fewer than half of the donations compared to those for Item A. Thus, a simple change
  in perspective can change the impact of an image.
  Similarly, take a look at the bar graphs in Figure 3.25 below. What do you notice about their presentation?

  Figure 3.2. Truncated and regular bar graphs. Note that both of these graphs display identical data;
  however, in the truncated bar graph on the left, the data appear to show significant differences, whereas in
  the regular bar graph on the right, these differences are hardly visible.

  If the bar graph above were to represent sales figures for a company, the representation on the left would look
  like good news: dramatically increased sales over a five-year period. However, a closer look at the numbers
  reveals that the graph shows only a narrow range of numbers in a limited perspective (9100 to 9800). The bar
  graph on the right, on the other hand, shows the complete picture by presenting numbers from 0-1200 on the
  vertical axis, and we see that the sales figures have in fact been relatively stable for the past five years.
  Presenting data in graphical form can be especially challenging. As you prepare your graphics, keep in mind the
  importance of providing appropriate context and perspective.

5. Derived from Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, and Michele DeSilva, "Truncated and Regular Bar Graphs" in "Typical Ethics Issues in Technical
  Writing," licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, in Gross, Allison, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris
  Rubio, Jodi Naas, Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva, Technical Writing, (Open Oregon Educational Materials, n.d.),
  https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/technicalwriting/. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-Noncommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
  International License.
                                                          ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 31

Limited Source Information in Research

Thorough research requires you to incorporate and synthesize information from a variety of reliable sources.
Your document should demonstrate that you have examined the topic from as many angles as possible. Thus,
your sources should include scholarly and professional research from a variety of appropriate databases and
journals, as opposed to just one author or website. Using a range of sources helps you avoid potential bias that
can occur from relying on only a few experts. For example, if you were writing a report on the real estate market
in Northwest Arkansas, you would not collect data from only one broker's office. While this office might have
access to broader data on the real estate market, as a writer you run the risk of looking biased if you only choose
materials from one source. Collecting information from multiple brokers would demonstrate thorough and
unbiased research.

Steps for Writing Ethically6

In any profession you pursue, you are likely to be asked to create documents, whether alone or collaboratively,
with your coworkers. These documents will be read by people within your organization, but also people
outside of it: clients, government agencies, and possibly even the general public. These audiences will have
different points of view, different levels of expertise, and different experiences, cultures, and opinions. Further,
although technical writing documents are meant to be persuasive (consider, for example, a job application, a
proposal, or a grant application), persuasion should not sideline ethics.

That means there are a lot of factors to consider when it comes to writing ethically! Since a clear, complete
message is so vital to technical communication, it's smart to have a plan - or in this case, a set of actions you
can take to make sure that you are working ethically from the beginning to the end of your project. No matter
what type of environment you face when you are asked to create a document, the actions below will guide you
towards ethical communication.

Commit to Doing Your Research

Research is key to ethical technical writing - and research in the field takes a wide variety of forms, as you'll
discover when you work on your projects this semester. You will research your subject deeply, just as you would
for academic writing. But all writing is a negotiation between you, your subject, and your potential and actual

6. Adapted from "Chapter 4: Ethics," by Michael Beilfuss
32 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

audiences. Because of the typical subjects and purposes of technical writing, research on your audience and
their needs is an integral part of the technical writing process.

For example, if you are creating a set of instructions (a very common technical writing task), you have a lot of
research to do in order to ensure the project's success. In our example, the instructions tell customers how to
put together a flat-pack bookcase. This audience is wide - you work for a relatively large company, and a wide
variety of people might want an inexpensive, easy-to-assemble bookcase. People of a wide variety of ages and
skill levels might attempt this project. You also need to know the actual process for assembling the bookcase so
you can write clearly about it. That means you will need to talk to at least one person on the design team, so
you can understand how they intend the pieces to be put together. At this point, you are able to start drafting.

However, your research doesn't end there. Once you have a complete draft of your instructions, you will need
to move on to a phase of technical writing called usability testing. In this step, you test your document with
an audience as close to your real audience as possible. In this case, you want to know whether an audience
can use your instructions to successfully assemble the bookcase. If they can, then you can start revising and
proofreading your document. If they can't, then you will have to rethink, then revise your instructions, and
then test them again, until your test users can successfully complete the task.

To do ethical research in technical writing, then, you need to commit to the idea that research is recursive. That
is, research occurs in cycles. You may have enough information to draft instructions, but until you have the
draft, you can't research whether your instructions work with your test audience. Once you have the results
of your usability tests, you should then use that information to revise and improve your instructions. All
information you distribute to an audience should be based on careful research and diligently tested.

Center Your Constituents' Best Interests

Technical communication documents are often straightforward: they are concise (as short as they can be
while still communicating a complete message), practical, and clear. In spite of these characteristics, however,
technical writing is still rhetorical. That is, technical writing documents seek to persade their audiences about
something. Sometimes, persuasion comes with a high failure cost; if a company's proposal is not chosen, the
company will lose money, perhaps quite a lot of it. It can be tempting to only communicate the most persuasive
points of a document, leaving out information that will complicate your argument or render it less effective.

However, persuasion is not the only aim of most documents, and focusing solely on persuasion is not in our
audience's best interests. Let's consider a car's user manual. Focused only on persuasion, the information inside
would slant towards persuading the reader that they've bought a great car, or that maintenance is simple,
even when it's not. Focused on the audience's best interests, the manual will include specific steps for every
maintenance process, no matter how complicated; it will also include safety information for each of the steps,
                                                                                                                            ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 33

so that car owners can make educated decisions about which maintenance tasks they attempt themselves, and
which they leave to a professional.

When you consider an audience's best interests, you practice communicating ethically with your
constituents. Constituents are, broadly, not only the people who will read your document (your audience), but
also anyone who will be affected by the actions you propose. That is, a proposal to expand the school lunch
programs in Washington County may only be read by school board members, but it also obviously affects
children who attend public schools and their parents. To be an ethical technical communicator, you must
consider all of these people as you write.

When you center your constituents, you commit to doing the research that gives you a full picture of your
writing situation. Further, you commit not only to identifying your constituents, but learning more about
them, and speaking with them to understand how your documents will affect their experiences of the world.
You prioritize understanding how your work might do harm, and working to avert that harm if possible. If
your work cannot avert all possible harms, then you owe your constituents an understanding of those harms,
so that they can make an educated decision about what to do with your information.

Represent Information Honestly

Related to doing complete, thoughtful research and centering your constituents' needs is the commitment to
representing information honestly in your work. Regardless of your purpose for writing, you should never
create content that can cause readers to believe something that is not true. You should not present information
you know is false, and most of us understand why doing so would create problems. However, such ethical
choices can also be more subtle and more complex, so it is important to have a clear understanding of the ways
in which we owe our audiences accurate information.

We can see this clearly in the first case study in this chapter, the Challenger disaster. Brian Russell's memo
did not attempt to conceal the potentially catastrophic consequences of O-ring failure in the shuttle's solid
booster. However, the order in which he presented his materials mattered - this acknowledgement followed
paragraphs in which Russell downplayed the likelihood of this outcome. Had Russell changed his
communication technique and centered the possibility that the failure could destroy the shuttle and kill the
crew, as did Roger Boisjoly, this message would have been re-emphasized to managers. We can't say whether
supervisors higher up the chain would have made a different decision with this information clearly stated,
but this situation clearly emphasizes why representing information honestly is a key technical communication
principle. The Challenger tragedy shows clearly that the the way we present information matters, sometimes
with a consequence of human lives.

Most cases aren't so clear-cut. For example, when writing a proposal, it might be tempting to report only
34 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

research that favors your opinion or the objectives of your organization. When writing a progress report about
a project, it might be tempting to leave out how you are behind the timeline or over-budget. When creating
an infographic, it may be tempting to oversimplify the topic to keep the audience's attention or cater to their
prior beliefs. On the job, technical writers can experience pressures that make it tempting to take shortcuts and
stretch the truth.

To enact this principle, you should think carefully about how to include research in your documents, and
explain that research using clear, concise language suited to the needs of your audience. Use your quotation,
paraphrase, and summary skills to explain important background information relevant to your project, and
always cite your sources, no matter what type of document you are creating. Additionally, you should be
cautious about using figures, charts, and tables - make sure they visually represent quantities with accuracy
and honesty. Always report your progress on a project and your use of project funds accurately.

Be Aware of Your Biases

We all have various biases which affect the ways we communicate and interpret information. In fact, it would
be difficult for humans to avoid bias: we all come from specific cultures, countries, and experiences, and those
things color the way that we perceive the world around us. We use what we already know to predict how the
world will work in other situations. We interpret situations based on personal experience, and we use that
framework until it doesn't explain what we're encountering. It's important to understand that we do this
almost automatically - humans are excellent at pattern recognition, and because we can't have every possible
experience, assumptions sometimes do serve us well, since they help us to adapt to new situations. If you travel
to Australia and encounter an unfamiliar snake, for example, your prior encounters with snakes in Arkansas
(let's say a water moccasin), might lead you to be very cautious and to keep a distance between you and the
animal. This is a case in which a "bias" against snakes causes you to alter your behavior as a way to prevent harm
to yourself.

However, biases can be (and often are) harmful. A harmful bias might lead you to believe, for example, that
a candidate is incapable of doing a job because of her ethnicity, country of origin, or religious preferences.
Harmful biases might affect processes like hiring, promotion, or being chosen to work on particular projects.
This is one way that unethical technical communication can affect and harm real people - that's why it's
important that we try to understand our own biases.

Most important to understand is that most bias is subconscious, or implicit. That means that we are often not
aware of the bias we display in our writing; it's helpful to have a peer, coworker, or supervisor who is willing to
give your feedback on your documents. Another set of eyes (or several sets) can help you to make sure you have
not included any discriminatory assumptions. This is also an area in which research is crucial - knowing your
audiences and their needs will help you to write towards them more ethically.
                                                                                                                            ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 35

The not-for-profit organization Project Implicit has been researching subconscious biases for years and has
developed several free online tests. The tests can help you understand your proclivities and subconscious biases.
Knowing your biases may help you begin to overcome them.

Solicit and Utilize Feedback Regularly

Finally, to be an ethical technical writer, you must both solicit and utilize feedback throughout your project.
As you've learned from prior writing courses, feedback is critical to the writing process: it is an opportunity
to test your content in front of a real audience in order to understand whether your document communicates
your message clearly. Feedback can tell you whether your main idea is clear, whether your organization makes
sense, and whether you have adequate support for your claims.

Because technical writing is intimately tied to the physical world in which we live, technical writers must think
about their audiences in particular ways. Specifically, it's important to know that your message is clear and that
your users know how to use this information for their purposes. This is information you can only know if
you ask, so technical writing workflows include usability testing, which you read about earlier. After technical
writers conduct usability tests, they use this information to revise and edit the documents they are creating
according to the test audience's responses.

To collect this type of feedback, technical writers must plan ahead. That is, usability testing becomes part
of the planning process for technical writing projects. When such projects happen within a company, the
organization will often pay for testers to read or test documents. Technical writers usually design usability tests
beforehand. If a company needs to know whether a set of instructions work, they'll ask users to put together
a bookcase, or set up a cell phone. You can also ask for less formal feedback - for example, you might ask your
boss whether a progress report sounds right before you submit it, or you might ask your coworker to proofread
your email to your boss.

Before you ask for feedback, take time to think about what you most need to know. Are you most concerned
about whether your main idea is clear? Do you need information about how well your organization helps the
reader navigate a document? Do you need advice about how to make your graphics more effective? Write down
3-4 main questions you have about your document so that your test audience can give you feedback in the areas
where you most need it.

Since ethical technical writing responds to users, you also need a plan for implementing the feedback you
receive. Try thinking of your feedback as rhetorical data - data which gives you information on where your
document meets its aims and doesn't, ways your document connects with your audience and misses the mark.
With this data, you can make informed decisions about how to adapt your work, balancing the needs of your
users with the aims of your document.
36 | ETHICS IN TECH WRITING

Conclusion

As this chapter indicates, ethical behavior is paramount in technical communication. In no other discipline
of writing is it more obvious that writing has effects on the physical world and the people and organisms that
live in it. Because our writing can have wide effects on the world, we must strive to understand our rhetorical
situation, research our topic sufficiently, and then respond to the information we receive with thoughtful
efforts to communicate clearly with our audience. The principles in this chapter will help you think about how
to write ethically in any rhetorical situation, whether in future college courses or in your future workplace.

References

Al Shebli, Bedoor, Kinga Makovi, and Talal Rahwan. (2020). "Retraction Note: The Association Between
Early Career Informal Mentorship in Academic Collaborations and Junior Author Performance." Nature
Communications vol. 11, no. 6446. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://www.nature.com/articles/
s41467-020-20617-y.

Al Shebli, Bedoor, Kinga Makovi, and Talal Rahwan. (2020). "RETRACTED ARTICLE: The Association
Between Early Career Informal Mentorship in Academic Collaborations and Junior Author Performance."
Nature Communications vol. 11, no. 5855. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-19723-8.

"Ethics." (n.d.). Dictionary.Com. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://www.dictionary.com/browse/ethics.

LastWeekTonight. (2016). "Scientific Studies: Last Week Tonight with John Oliver (HBO)." YouTube.
Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Rnq1NpHdmw.

Powell, Tamara. (2020). 1.4 Ethics Example: Shuttle Challenger. In Technical Writing at LBCC. Retrieved
19 July 2025, from https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/lbcctechwriting/chapter/1-4-ethics-example-space-
shuttle-challenger/.

"Ethical Principles." (1998). Society for Technical Communication. Retrieved August 3, 2020, from
https://www.stc.org/about-stc/ethical-principles/.

Reed, Ryan. (2016). "Watch John Oliver Call Out Bogus Scientific Studies." Rolling Stone. Retrieved 19
July 2025, from https://www.rollingstone.com/tv/tv-news/watch-john-oliver-call-out-bogus-scientific-
studies-60448/.

Santos, Carlos and Luann J. Lynch. (2020). "VW Emissions and the 3 Factors That Drive Ethical Breakdown."
                                                                                                                            ETHICS IN TECH WRITING | 37

Darden Ideas to Action. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://ideas.darden.virginia.edu/vw-emissions-and-
the-3-factors-that-drive-ethical-breakdown.

Souchery, Stephanie. (2020). "Fauci: Vaccine at Least Year Away, as COVID-19 Death Toll Rises to 9 in
Seattle." CIDRAP News. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2020/
03/fauci-vaccine-least-year-away-covid-19-death-toll-rises-9-seattle.

Stripling, Jack and Meghan Zahneis. (2018). The Big Lie. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved 19 July
2025, from https://www.chronicle.com/article/the-big-lie/.

Twain, Mark. (2002) Mark Twain's Autobiography, Volume 1, editor Don Lainson. Project Gutenberg
Australia.

Uri, John. (2024). 40 Years Ago: President Reagan Announces Teacher in Space Project. NASA.gov. Retrieved
19 July 2025, from https://www.nasa.gov/history/40-years-ago-president-reagan-announces-teacher-in-space-
project/.

Wessel, Lindzi. (2020). "After Scalding Critique of Study of Genders and Mentorship, Journal Says It Is
Reviewing the Work." Science. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1126/science.abf8164.

Wilkes, Samuel S. (1951). "Undergraduate Statistical Education." Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 46, no. 253. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://doi.org/ 10.1080/
01621459.1951.10500763.

Winsor, D. A. (1988). Communication Failures Contributing to the Challenger Accident: An Example for
Technical Communicators. IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication, vol. 31, no. 3: pp. 101-107.
Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/85/2020/06/Winsor-
Communication-Failures-Shuttle-Challenger.pdf.
38 | CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS

CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE
GOALS

   Kat Gray and Dawn Atkinson

Introduction

This short chapter is intended to help you write your first project for the course: the Course Goals Memo.
This is a highly personalized document - you will use time in the first unit of the course to think about
course goals that will be most helpful to you, and then communicate those goals with your instructor both for
accountability purposes and so your instructor can tailor your individual project feedback. The information
below guides you through the process of setting course goals and creating your first technical writing
document.

Setting Personal Course Goals

At the beginning of class, our primary objectives are to learn about the structure and format of the class
(through your syllabus, schedule, grading contract, and other class materials) and to learn more about
professional and technical writing as an "area," or subdiscipline, of writing studies. Once you have an idea of
what professional and technical writing is and how it can be used, you'll have a clearer idea about what you can
use your time in the course to accomplish.

During Weeks 1-2, you will complete your first project: the Course Goals Memo. In this project, you'll think
through your major and career goals and compare those to the course objectives for English 30503. Then, you'll
select a few goals for yourself - ones you can accomplish during the time we have together. Once you've chosen
your goals, you will write them down in memo format. This chapter also provides guidance and step-by-step
instructions for writing memos.
                                                                                                    CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 39

 Project 1: Course Goals Memo1

  The purpose of this assignment is to set personal goals for your semester in Professional and Technical Writing
  and to practice a common technical writing genre, the memo. To do this, you will use course documents (like
  the syllabus, grading contract, and textbook) to brainstorm about what you want to accomplish this semester
  and how you might do it. You will introduce yourself and your reasons for taking ENGL 30503, set 3-4 goals
  for yourself, and briefly discuss your plan for meeting each goal.

  Completion Requirement: Your Course Goals Memo should be 500-750 words.

 Project Steps

  In Week 1, you'll complete an orientation to the course and to technical communication. This information
  will help you to understand the course's learning objectives and to think about how technical communication
  skills will fit into your future education or career goals. During Week 2, you will learn about ethics in technical
  communication, which will provide further information about what technical communication is and what it
  helps us to do.

  You should take some time to brainstorm about what you want to accomplish during the course, now that you
  know more about the subject.

  Questions for Drafting:

     · After reading the goals and objectives listed in the course syllabus, which ones most closely match your
        personal goals for the semester?

     · What do you know about how your major or chosen career path uses writing? How could you use this
        class to focus on those skills?

     · What are your weaknesses as a writer? Where do you struggle? How could you use this class to improve
        your skills?

     · What specific actions will you take to accomplish each goal?
     · What could your instructor or peers do to help you accomplish your goals? For instance, what type of

        feedback is most helpful to you? Where in the writing process do you struggle the most?

1. Please note: The assignment sheet appearing in this textbook is a template; your instructor will have more specific instructions for you in some areas
  (which are highlighted below in green). Please defer to your instructor's assignment sheet for all course assignments.
  40 | CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS

  Think beyond grammar! Most of us have grammar and mechanical skills we could improve, but professional
  and technical writing encompasses many more skills! Do you need to learn more about how to use a text
  or image editor to do document design? Are you a wordy writer who could use practice with concise, plain
  language? Do you have trouble getting started when you're writing? Do you struggle to know when you're
  done with a writing project?
  After you've done some brainstorming, decide which 3-4 goals are most important and accomplishable to you.
  These are the goals you will write about in your Course Goals Memo.
  The next step is to write your course goals in memo format. You can find more information about memos as
  well as models and templates in your textbook. This information is located in Chapter 3: Setting Your Course
  Goals.

 Due Dates

        Project Due Dates
   Project Stage Due
   Final Draft [WEEK 2]

 Final Submission Checklist

  [Give instructions to students on how to format their assignments here.]
  Course Goals Memo

     · I have introduced myself and explained my reasons for taking ENGL 30503.
     · I have stated 3-4 goals I hope to accomplish this semester and listed practical steps I will take to work

        towards them.
     · I have used memo formatting.

 Memo Genre Conventions2

  Memos are used for communication within organizations (like companies) to establish a written record of

2. Adapted from "Writing Print Correspondence" by Dawn Atkinson
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 41

correspondence. They may be distributed in the bodies of emails, in email attachments, or in paper form and
can convey a certain level of authority and formality when used to deliver routine messages; progress, incident,
and other short reports; employee safety policies; company statements; brief internal proposals; and other types
of in-house information. They can also be posted in workplaces to keep employees who do not have ready
access to email up to date on matters of interest.

Memo Organization

Everyday memos follow an introduction, body, and conclusion organizational format. An introduction
indicates the subject of a document and helps guide readers through the document. It should establish context
for the rest of the piece, in other words. The body section of a memo delivers the details of the communication,
with each body paragraph focusing on one main point that is articulated in a topic sentence. The conclusion
unifies the document by emphasizing its central message and reiterating key ideas. Example 1, below, follows
this introduction, body, and conclusion structure.

     Example 1: Memo with Introduction-Body-Conclusion Format

Memorandum

To:    Fang Hu, Director of Human Resources

From:  Nicola Maryport, Dean of the Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences

Date:  April 20, 2020

Subject: Workload Division Plan for Emma Kontag

Since her hire, Emma Kontag, full-time administrative associate, has been housed in the Faculty of
Humanities and Social Sciences, helping to support departments within that academic unit. Due to
campus restructuring, she will now also assist the Pharmacy Department with its administrative
tasks. To help ensure she is able to complete her duties for each area of responsibility, this
document sets out a workload division plan for Ms. Kontag, which will take effect during the Fall
2020 semester. It identifies approximately how much time she will dedicate to her areas of
responsibility each day and her new office location.

Ms. Kontag's new schedule will see her working 30 hours a week for the Faculty of Humanities and
Social Sciences and 10 hours a week for the Pharmacy Department. The day-to-day specifics of this
plan are meant to be flexible to accommodate fluctuating times for meetings and other duties that
42 | CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS

     arise and evolve; however, the arrangement establishes a consistent blueprint by which Ms. Kontag
     can schedule her workdays.
     To help ensure the new work plan is feasible, Ms. Kontag's office will be relocated from Legacy Hall
     room 200 to Philanthropy Hall room 114. This new office site is centrally located in building space
     shared by both Humanities and Social Sciences faculty and Pharmacy faculty, meaning that Ms.
     Kontag will not need to travel far to deliver mail, gather signatures, attend meetings, and attend to
     other responsibilities. It is a spacious and well-lit office and one that I hope will suit her needs.
     To summarize, effective Fall 2020, Emma Kontag will work 30 hours a week for the Faculty of
     Humanities and Social Sciences and 10 hours a week for the Pharmacy Department. Her office will
     be in Philanthropy Hall room 114, a convenient location that will help to make the new workload
     division plan possible.

This sample memo's organizational structure and specific and informative subject line help to clearly reveal its
message to readers.

Like letters and emails, memos may deliver both routine messages and those that have the potential to evoke
more emotive responses on the part of recipients. When writing correspondence, it is thus crucial to consider
audience reactions and how you can convey important information in a forthright but polite manner.

To this end, you may decide to use a direct organizational approach, which delivers the main message of
a document right away, to call readers' attention to matters of importance. When using this pattern, a writer
begins with the main point of the document, follows with an explanation of details, and ends with a goodwill
closing that aims to build a positive relationship with readers. Example 2 shows an example of the direct
organizational approach at work in a memo.

     Example 2: Memo with Direct Organizational Approach

Memo   All Employees
To:    Travis Summerfield, Physical Facilities Director
From:
                                                         CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 43

Date:     April 1, 2020
Subject:  Boiler Shutdown at Best University

Physical Facilities staff will be shutting down Best University's main boiler on April 5, meaning
many campus restrooms and laboratories will be without hot water for one week.

To conduct maintenance tasks and repair any boiler issues, Physical Facilities schedules a week-
long boiler shutdown once each year. Although this shutdown may be an inconvenience, it enables
essential work to occur and helps to keep the boiler operating effectively the rest of the year.

The Physical Facilities Department apologizes for any difficulties caused by the boiler shutdown.

As Example 2 illustrates, the direct organizational approach delivers important news right away.

In contrast, the indirect organizational approach reveals the core message of a piece of correspondence
gradually as the document progresses and can be used to convey particularly sensitive news. A document
using the indirect organizational approach begins with context setting, provides an explanation that leads
into the main point, and ends with a goodwill closing. The example memo in Example 3 follows an indirect
organizational approach.

Example 3: Memo with Indirect Organizational Approach

Memorandum

To:       All Employees
From:     Peggy Kickinghorsewoman, Store Manager
Date:     June 20, 2020
Subject:  Changes Inspired by Self-Service Efficiencies

Butter's Grocery truly appreciates all the employees at its Oak County location who have helped to
make the store among the most profitable in its southeast region of operations. By wholeheartedly
embracing the self-service check-out machines installed in the store, you have helped to turn
around a once-struggling grocery outlet.

While the self-service check-out machines installed in the store have improved efficiency in store
44 | CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS

     operations, they have also resulted in redundancies in customer service provision. In particular, they
     have resulted in the need for fewer cashiers.
     As a commercial operation, Butter's Grocery considers profits when making important decisions;
     however, it also recognizes that dedicated staff members are at the heart of its success. For these
     reasons, Butter's will offer retraining for cashiers who wish to move into its other departments of
     operation. Severance packages will also be available to those cashiers who wish to leave Butter's
     Grocery to pursue other employment opportunities.
     The Butter's Grocery management team encourages all employees to bring their questions to the
     staff meeting tomorrow when the changes described in this memo will be discussed in further
     detail.

Though the message in Example 3 would likely evoke an emotional response from employees, the indirect
organizational approach is intended to soften the blow for readers.

Although the points about memo organization discussed thus far may apply to correspondence written in
many western countries, take into consideration that different cultures have differing expectations regarding
the way information is presented in memos, letters, and emails. For instance, the direct organizational approach
may be construed as impolite in some Asian countries where a more nuanced style of communication is favored
for messages. As with all technical writing, keep readers at the forefront of your mind when preparing
correspondence to help navigate decisions about document organization and content, and when in doubt
about what audiences expect, research your target readership. Know who the readers are so you can tailor
your message in order to create purpose-driven content to which they will favorably respond.

Memo Formatting

Formatting conventions often help to define genres, and memos are no different in this regard. The following
steps describe how to format a standard memo.

 1. Place the word Memo or Memorandum (sans italics) at the top of the page, centered or flush left.
 2. Insert one blank line of white space.
 3. Insert a To: line (sans italics and flush left), and list recipients alphabetically by last name or in

      descending order of organizational rank.
 4. Insert a From: line (sans italics and flush left) to indicate who is sending the memo.
 5. Insert a Date: line (sans italics and flush left), and list the full date (e.g., May 15, 2020, or 15 May 2020,

      but not May 15th, 2020) rather than the numeric date abbreviation for clarity.
                                                                                                 CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 45

 6. Insert a specific Subject: line (sans italics and flush left) to clearly identify the memo's topic. The subject
      line for a memo, letter, or email functions as its title, and readers should know what the correspondence
      is about just by looking at the subject line.

 7. Align the information after the colons in the memo header using the keyboard tab key. This formatting
      detail takes into account the design principle of alignment, which specifies that like items should be
      lined up with one another to establish visual consistency and to help readers see them easily.

 8. Insert one blank line of white space after the memo header.
 9. Type the memo paragraphs, each separated with one full line of white space.

In addition to the design points specified in the steps, memos are block formatted, meaning they are
single spaced, left aligned, and feature a blank line of white space after each paragraph rather than indented
paragraphs. Writers generally use one-inch margins when producing memos and may also include informative
headings to give the documents visual structure, especially if the memo is long. Follow the design standards
outlined here to ensure readers immediately identify your document as a memo.

Formatting features, such as bold text and lists, can cue readers' attention to important information when used
sparingly in memos. Notice, for instance, how Example 4, adapted from the Writing and Communication
Centre, University of Waterloo (n.d.), employs a list to highlight questions for memo readers.

     Example 4: Memo with Bulleted List Format

Memorandum

To:       All Staff
From:     Mandy Penney
Date:     June 1, 2020
Subject:  Input on a Casual Dress Policy

The human resources office is considering implementing a casual dress policy in the workplace.
Please provide feedback on the questions below as management considers changing its current
policy.

Staff members have commented that they would feel more comfortable and productive at work if
they were able to dress casually. However, our company has not agreed what constitutes
acceptable casual attire in the workplace. Here are some questions to consider.
46 | CHAPTER 3: SETTING YOUR COURSE GOALS

     · What can be considered casual dress in a professional work environment?
     · Should our policy restrict the open display of body art, such as tattoos or piercings?
     · What procedures should we implement if clothing is deemed offensive?
     · Should we institute a casual dress policy?
     Please forward your responses to me by June 25 so company managers can discuss your input
     during their July 1 meeting.
     Thank you for providing feedback on the casual dress policy. Please email me at
     mpenney@XYZ.com if you have any questions or concerns about the policy.

Lists, such as the one in the example above, can be used in both memos and letters to direct readers to key pieces
of information.

Conclusion

Taking the time to set goals for yourself at the beginning of the semester is a way to set yourself up for success
in Professional and Technical Writing. This assignment also emphasizes the importance of reflective writing
and metacognition for technical communication. That is, as with all other types of writing, technical writing
is more successful when we take the time to reflect on our tasks after we do them, to understand our process,
what went well, and what we can do better next time. For more information on reflection in technical writing,
you can read Chapter 14: Reflective Writing for Technical Communication.

References

Writing and Communication Centre. (n.d.). Writing Professional Emails in the Workplace. University of
Waterloo. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://uwaterloo.ca/writing-and-communication-centre/writing-
professional-emails-workplace.
                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 47

CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE
GOALS

   Kat Gray

Introduction

You are asked to set goals at the beginning of the course - these goals will then guide your participation in
course projects. For example, if one of your goals is to learn how to write a business letter, then you'll identify
opportunities to practice those skills in the class, and devote extra time to the parts of projects that ask you to
practice professional correspondence. If one of your goals is to learn document design skills, you'll take time in
each project to focus on how your documents use design to organize information. Setting goals helps you to
take responsibility for what you want to learn, and what will be most useful for you to learn.

However, setting a goal is not the only step required to achieve it. You'll need to take steps actively towards
your goals in each of the tasks you do to complete course projects. If you want to learn document design skills,
you will practice and try out new things in your projects, but you'll also want to ask questions about document
design during peer review and conferences with your instructor. You'll want to use what you know to help you
create revision plans and write the revision notes that should accompany each project.

If it sounds like there's a lot of work involved in researching, planning, and executing successful technical
writing projects, you're getting the idea! This is why technical writers often create what's called a workflow for
technical writing projects. Workflows are flexible frameworks that allow you to create any types of technical
communication required. For example, Alejandro Piad Morffis (2024) created the CODER framework that
allows a technical writer to: Collect information and ideas; Outline a structured, well-organized document;
Draft your document by expanding on your most important ideas; Edit the structure, content, and style of
the document; and Release the document to your audience after making final revisions.

While the work you do in this class may not go directly to a public audience (though it may, if you choose),
practicing this process will prepare you for circumstances in your future, when you may be asked to create
documents that communicate with a wide variety of audiences. A big part of practicing is becoming aware of
your technical writing process and working to optimize that process based on your experiences doing work for
this class. To help you do this, we'll discuss two types of writing that can help you reach your goals: work logs
and writing journals.
48 | CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS

Work Logs

Grading contract systems rely on the idea of self-directed learning, a type of learning that centers "individuals
taking initiative and responsibility for their own learning" (Loeng, 2020). In self-directed learning, Svein Loeng
writes, "[y]ou are free to set goals and define what is worth learning" and exert "some personal control over
either or both the planning (goals) and the management (support) of the learning experience" (2020). Learning
in the classroom is "a collaborative process between the teacher and the learner" (2020). Our professional and
technical writing classroom, then, is a space where students and teachers work together to accomplish the
learning goals set by the student.

To track your progress towards the goals you set, it can be very helpful to create a document called a Work Log1.
A Work Log is exactly what it sounds like: a space where you record notes about the types of work you do for
your writing projects in the course, when you do that work, and how long your work sessions are. In the table
below (Table 4.1), you can see a very simple example of a Work Log:

     Sample Work Log Entries

Date Time    Session Notes

May          Looked for job ads on Handshake, Indeed, LinkedIn. Found 6 possible ads to use for Project 2.
1, 1pm-3pm
2025

May          Went through job ads to decide which one to use for my project documents. Narrowed it down
2, 9am-12pm  to 2, then annotated those ads. After annotating, I decided that I like the NASA job ad best for
2025         this project.

May          Started drafting a résumé for project 2.
4, 4pm-5pm
2025

May 6, 1:30pm-4:30pm Worked on cover letter, revised résumé document. Peer review on May 8, so I will revise these
2025 one more time, if I have a chance.

1. Also called a labor log in some iterations of contract grading, like Asao Inoue's (2019) book Labor-Based Grading Contracts: Building Equity and
  Inclusion in the Compassionate Writing Classroom, 2nd. ed.
                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 49

     Table 4.1: A sample Work Log showing work sessions for Project 2: Career Documents.

In the Work Log sample above, the student records dates, times, and notes about his work session. He writes
about the ads he's found and makes notes about his process as he's completing the project. Notice how,
sometimes, his notes from the previous session can set him up for what he should do in the next session.
Further, since he's kept accurate time records, he can estimate how much time he's going to need to complete
the work for each session, which helps him to make his work sessions more effective.

Should you choose (or be required) to keep your own Work Logs, you can use the simple example above as a
template. You can also add any extras that make sense for you. For example, you could create a space on your
work log to write down a to-do list for your next work session. You could also write down the location of each
work session to give you data about which locations and times are most productive for you. Some people may
find it easier to use time-tracking apps (as of 2025, Forest is a good example). There are many possibilities,
and as you get into the habit of keeping a work log, you will get a clearer idea of your own needs as a writer
managing technical writing projects.

That is, as Asao Inoue (2019) wrote, the goal of a writing course that is assessed using a grading contract
is to promote mindful laboring. Mindful laboring asks us to focus on how and why we do work, in order to
"investigate" (p. 119) our process. You might be able to answer questions like: how often do I need to work
to finish a project on time? When do I do my best work? What interferes with my work sessions? To help us
answer these questions, we can move from only logging our work to writing reflectively about it.

Writing Journals

The University of York (2025) frames reflection as a tool we use all the time; it helps us "plan and undertake
actions, then think about whether each was successful or not, and how we might improve next time." Reflective
writing, then, is a way to record reflective thinking. Reflective writing, like all other types of writing, is a skill
that you must practice in order to do well. It takes time to practice noticing the steps in your process and how
productive and pleasing you feel those steps were. One way to practice this is regular reflection in a writing
journal.

Keeping a writing journal - a journal that specifically focuses on our experiences of writing - is not something
many of us are accustomed to doing. However, writing journals can be incredibly beneficial when paired with
a work log. As Inoue (2019) wrote, reflecting on our work in a writing class is critical to facilitate "learning how
one learns, managing one's time best, and understanding the boundaries and limits one has in one's life" (p.
50 | CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS

123). Having this information allows us to assess our progress mid-project so that we can adjust our work to
meet our goals - it can even help us to finish our projects on time.

Below are some brief samples of writing journals that relate to the work log in the previous section.

     Sample Writing Journal Entries

     Date: May 2, 2025
     Time: 9am-12pm
     I took a really long time this morning to look through the ads I found yesterday. I used the job ad
     annotation questions we talked about in class to take notes on all of them, and that helped me
     make some decisions. I narrowed it down to two possible choices: the rocket team coach for
     Fayetteville High School's summer science program and the NASA social media internship. Once I
     got to those two, I thought about which one would be a better choice. The coach position at FHS
     pays a little better, according to the ad. But it's a lot of work, and there's no possibility that the job
     will continue after the internship ends. The internship at NASA doesn't pay as well, but I feel like it
     would give me a lot of insight into the organization, and maybe help me make some contacts, too? I
     decided to create documents for the NASA job, since it sounds more interesting and fun to me.
     Date: May 4, 2025
     Time: 4-5pm
     I started working on my résumé draft today, even though I only had about an hour. I started by
     trying to decide whether I should use a chronological or skills-based résumé. That took me a while,
     because I wanted to play around with what it would look like to organize the document both ways.
     That helped me decide that the skills-based option would let me give my materials more of a
     personal touch. Then I started looking for résumé templates that had a science-y feel. I found a few
     that I liked and started experimenting with what I want the header with my contact info to look
     like. That's about as far as I got before I had to go to work, but I have some time to work before
     peer review on Thursday.

In the first entry, the writer thinks about the process he used to think about which job ad to use for Project 2.
He uses reflective writing to recap his reasoning process; doing so will help him begin establishing the reasons
                                                                                               CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS | 51

he wants this position, which will help him think about his fit for the position. This writing journal entry helps
him clarify his purpose before he begins drafting his materials.

In the second entry, the writer explains what he did with his short work period on May 4. Here, we see a
session that sounds less productive, at least if you measure by the number of words on a page. However, notice
how this short work session let the student think through the choices he needed to make to start working on
his draft. It's likely that he can start his next writing session with a clear idea of exactly the work he needs to
accomplish to finish drafts of both documents.

Though reflective writing can be hard at first, it is a skill worth practicing. Reflection is a tool that allows writers
to write, analyze, and adjust; it requires you to observe your writing process and use the information you find
to improve both your process and your project.

What Do I Do with All This Writing?

However your instructor has asked you to track and reflect on your work this semester, you should keep this
writing as you work through the course. Putting these reflections in a place that is easily accessible to you (like
a Google Drive or OneDrive folder) will help you complete important work in the course. Specifically, you
can use any logs or reflections you have to help you write your revision letters, which accompany each major
project. This work will also be useful as you assemble your materials to write your course reflection memo for
Project 5.

As you create revision letters for Major Projects 2, 3, and 4, you can use work logs and writing journals to
understand your writing process. These materials will provide a helpful record of your revision process so that
you can explain your process to your instructor. Work logs and writing journals will also help you to create your
Course Reflection Memo. As you create this document, you can use your logs and reflections to evaluate what
types of work you did on the goals you set in Project 1. Your logs and journal entries will help you to remember
the work you've done over the course of the class and to see your progress towards your goals in that work.

Conclusion

Though this additional writing increases your course workload, the benefits of a clearer perspective on your
writing process are things you can take with you as you continue your education or begin your career. These
skills will help you to be a more thoughtful writer, researcher, and designer.
52 | CHAPTER 4: TRACKING YOUR COURSE GOALS

References

Inoue, A. B. (2019). Labor-Based Grading Contracts: Building Equity and Inclusion in the Compassionate
Writing Classroom. WAC Clearinghouse, https://wac.colostate.edu/books/perspectives/labor/.

Loeng, S. (2020). "Self-directed learning: A core concept in adult education." Education Research
International. Accessed from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1155/2020/3816132, 2 June 2025.

Morffis, A. P. (2024). "A pragmatic workflow for technical writing." The Computist Journal. Accessed from
https://blog.apiad.net/p/a-pragmatic-workflow-for-technical, 26 May 2025.

University of York. (2025). "Reflective writing." University of York: Practical Guides. Accessed from
https://subjectguides.york.ac.uk/academic-writing/reflective, 2 June 2025.
                                                                                   PART 2: DEVELOPING YOUR PROFESSIONAL PERSONA | 53

PART II

PART 2: DEVELOPING YOUR
PROFESSIONAL PERSONA

Part 2: Developing Your Professional Persona contains materials related to Project 2: Career Documents. The
section opens with a brief description of both the project and the concept of the professional persona, which
will be important to thinking about any technical writing task you complete. Subsequent chapters discuss
the process of applying for jobs, creating job application materials, and tailoring those materials to suit your
specific situation.

Part 2 contains the following:

  · Project 2: Career Documents Assignment Sheet: This section defines and describes the concept of
      the professional persona, which you will use for Project 2. It also includes the full assignment sheet for
      the Career Documents project.

  · Chapter 5: Applying to Jobs: This chapter describes the process of applying for jobs. Then, you will
      learn about the two documents you are required to create for the project: the résumé and cover letter.
      Finally, you'll read a few tips for interviewing.

  · Chapter 6: Tailoring Job Materials: Chapter 6 helps you to think through the process of tailoring
      your job materials, or making them more persuasive and appropriate for your specific rhetorical
      situation. You will learn about tailoring as audience analysis, then a tailoring process you can practice on
      your own documents. The chapter also discusses basic document design principles, and how you can use
      document design to create a personal brand.
54 | PART 2: DEVELOPING YOUR PROFESSIONAL PERSONA
                                                                                                                PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS | 55

PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS

   Kat Gray

Section Overview

In this section, you will find a brief overview of Project 2: Career Documents, which asks you to create a résumé
and cover letter tailored to a specific job posting.

Your Professional Persona

In Project 2, you'll have the opportunity to develop a professional persona through your career documents.
A professional persona is the way you present yourself in professional situations. It includes both how you act
when you are in the room and how you appear through your documents. Though the latter may seem trivial,
consider this question:

       When your résumé and cover letter are the only documents in the room, how will the employer
       or hiring committee perceive you?

The answer to that question is that your professional persona tells them who you are. Your professional persona
gives a prospective employer an idea not just about your skills and experiences but also your work ethic, what
motivates you, and your approach to seeking and maintaining productive workplace relationships.
In other words, having a professional persona (or personal brand) that shows up in highly customized, tailored
career documents is one of the ways you can show an employer...

  · You've done your homework. This shows up in cover letters when you've spoken about specific needs
      the company has or indicated that you've done your research on the company by referencing a project
      you'd be interested in working on. It shows up in résumés when you arrange document sections to
      highlight specific skills the employer has asked about in the ad.

  · You know how to write for a particular audience. Don't underestimate this skill - showing that
  56 | PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS

        you know how to talk to people in different professional situations is a critical "soft skill"1 you'll need
        throughout your career. In fact, you'll need to think about your audience when you make pitches, ask
        your boss for a raise, or try to persuade a client to make a purchase. Persuasion in the workplace starts
        with your job documents; through them, you show an employer who you are and what you're about.
     · You have personal qualities that make you a good fit for a position. You know your skills and
        talents the best - and customized, tailored career documents help you showcase them so that employers
        will notice what makes you special as a potential employee. For example, if you're applying for a graphic
        design position, you would want your résumé and cover letter to show good graphic design and elements
        that match or coordinate between documents (like using the same fonts, colors, or document layout
        elements).

  You can read more about how to develop a professional persona in Chapter 6: Tailoring Job Materials.

                  Project 2: Career Documents2

  The purpose of this project is to create a set of career documents (résumé and cover letter) for a specific job
  ad of your choosing. With your instructor's help, you'll find and analyze an ad for a job in your field. Then,
  you'll create a résumé and cover letter, using your skills to compose and design content specifically tailored
  to the position. You will produce two documents: a résumé displaying your contact information, skills, and
  qualifications, and a cover letter expressing your interest in a specific position.

  Completion Requirements:

     · [1/2] page résumé
     · [1/2] page cover letter
     · revision letter

  Note: You may have created documents like these for another class. However, because we are learning how to
  tailor job materials for a specific job posting, you should not reuse those materials "as-is." If you already have a
  resume and cover letter, this project is an opportunity to practice tailoring them to a specific position. Expect
  to make changes!

1. To learn more about soft skills, you can check out Indeed's write-up here. What kinds of soft skills will be important for your career field?
2. Please note: The assignment sheet appearing in this textbook is a template; your instructor will have more specific instructions for you in some areas

  (which are highlighted below in green). Please defer to your instructor's assignment sheet for all course assignments.
                                      PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS | 57

Project Steps

During Week 3, you'll learn about the job search process and take an inventory of your skills and interests.
You'll search for job ads and learn what kinds of questions to ask to help you prepare for tailoring your
materials for a specific position.

By the end of Week 3, you should choose a job ad to respond to for this project and annotate it thoroughly. It's
especially important to make notes about how your qualifications match the job.

By the beginning of Week 4, you should be drafting your resume and cover letter. You can use the questions
below to help you develop your content.

Questions for Résumé Drafting:

· How will you display important information like your name, contact information, and qualifications?
   Can you use design choices like contrast, proximity, or repetition?

· Which of your skills and qualifications match specifically with the employer's needs? How can you
   highlight this information?

· Where could you incorporate keywords from the ad?
· Which designs will be both readable (the reader can easily find information) and concise (keeps your

   information on one page)?

Questions for Cover Letter Drafting:

· Who is your likely audience? Will they have the same skills and qualifications as you, or will you need to
   explain some of the content on your resume?

· As a candidate for this position, what are your strengths? How do they distinguish you from other
   candidates?

· How could you incorporate language from the job ad? In what other ways can you show the employer
   that you read their posting carefully?

· How will you "chunk" information so that each paragraph has a clear main idea?
· Which design decisions will make your letter look professional, clean, and readable?

By the end of Week 4, you should both participate in Peer Review and turn in a draft of your career documents
to your instructor for feedback.

By the end of Week 5, you will decide how to respond to the feedback you received. You'll take time to revise
your materials and write a revision letter detailing how you responded to your reviewers.
58 | PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS

Content and Design Tips

Resumes and cover letters can vary in content and design depending on who is applying to which job. Though
you can personalize these documents in a variety of ways, the design of your documents should suit their
purpose.
In other words, your résumé should be designed so that your qualifications and skills stand out and your cover
letter should provide a narrative that showcases you, your interests, and your attention to the employer's needs.
You can find more information on how to design and format your documents in the following textbook
chapters:

  · Chapter 5: Applying for Jobs
  · Chapter 6: Tailoring Job Materials

Due Dates

      Project Due Dates
 Project Stage Due
 First Draft [WEEK 4]
 Peer Review [WEEK 4]
 Final Draft [WEEK 5]

Revision Letter

When you are ready to submit your final draft, you must include a revision letter that explains the revisions
you made to your original draft and why.

Final Submission Checklist

[Give instructions to students on how to format their assignments here.]

  · Résumé
          1-2 pages
          responds to a specific job ad
                                                             PROJECT 2: CAREER DOCUMENTS | 59

       uses document design to convey important information
· Cover Letter

       1-2 pages
       responds to a specific job ad
       uses letter formatting
· Revision Note
       describes feedback you received
       describes how you used feedback to revise
  60 | APPLYING TO JOBS

 CHAPTER 5: APPLYING TO JOBS

    Katrina Peterson and Kat Gray

 Introduction1

  Looking for and landing the perfect job may seem like a daunting task. If you are uncertain where to start,
  know that most successful job applicants feel the same uncertainty at some point. This chapter will walk
  you through the process of applying for jobs from start to finish. Perhaps most importantly, it will provide
  you with two distinct tools that can help you to construct the materials for a strong, effective, and successful
  job application: 1) the résumé and 2) the cover letter. Finally, the chapter concludes with advice on the
  interviewing process.

 The Job-Seeking Process

  Job seeking is a process that involves multiple steps in order to obtain the desired position. Besides the résumé
  and the job letter, job descriptions, interview questions, writing samples, hiring materials, and the thank-
  you note sent post-interview are other materials you might find yourself reading and writing as your hiring
  process moves forward. If the big-picture job seeking process were visualized through a flow chart, it might
  look something like Figure 5.1:

1. Chapter based on Katrina Peterson, "Chapter 7: Applying to Jobs," in Technical and Professional Writing Genres.
APPLYING TO JOBS | 61
62 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Figure 5.1: Flow chart that illustrates the job-seeking process.

Most job candidates begin with research to gain a clear picture of their target (see Step #1 above), or ideal job,
along with the company where they would like to be employed. From there, they may think in terms of creating
a compelling marketing campaign (Step #2) through a unified job packet. Research (Step #3), of course, will
occur throughout this process, all the way up until the interview (Step #4) and through the final stages of
negotiating and closing the offer (Step #5).

While this graphic helps to visualize both the big picture and some of the individual steps involved, it is only
one of many variations of the job application process. This chapter will provide a framework for you to
construct your own process.

As you research and pursue job choices, keep in mind that the job search process requires a high degree of self-
awareness--not only of strengths, but also of weaknesses. In general, most people find it easier to identify and
discuss their strengths. However, knowing your weaknesses is just as important to your job search as knowing
your strengths. Here are a few reasons to be able to speak fluidly and confidently about weaknesses:

  · Employers want to hire individuals who are self-aware, which requires an awareness of both strengths
      and weaknesses. Being self-aware is the only way to improve.

  · During an interview, a prospective employer may ask about strengths and weaknesses. Employers know
      it takes a certain level of maturity to talk about your weaknesses. They want to ensure you have achieved
      that level of maturity before extending an offer.

Remember that everyone has strengths and everyone has weaknesses, including every CEO, every company
president, every manager, and every one of your coworkers. You will be in good company when considering
and discussing your weaknesses. The trick, if there is a trick, lies in your plan to strengthen them. Having a plan
to strengthen a weakness is impressive, especially if you have already taken steps to do so.

Finding Job Openings

Investing the preparation time to write your employment materials, including researching available positions,
can save you many headaches in the job process. Finding a suitable opening itself can be time-consuming; if
you are serious about finding employment, you have to dedicate the time and energy to make your materials
competitive. Here are some resources to get you started:

  · Job boards: Browse sites like Indeed, CareerBuilder, Glassdoor and Monster to search for jobs in your
      field.
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 63

  · Specialty job lists: Look for lists of jobs in specific industries such as food service (Poached), nonprofits
      (Idealist), or media (MediaBistro).

  · Company, organization and government web sites: Visit the employment section on websites of
      companies you admire; search federal, state, county, and city websites for government job postings.

  · Your own network: Talk to friends, past employers, and professors, or visit LinkedIn to search for
      openings at companies in your network. If you are a member of any social media groups that are career-
      oriented, check for mention of available jobs there.

  · Your college: Visit your college or university placement office/career center and attend job fairs. Here at
      UArk, you can also check Handshake for openings.

  · Craigslist: Many job seekers also use Craigslist to look for work; just be aware that Craigslist postings
      often lack detail and may come from headhunters or placement agencies, rather than from the direct
      employer. Scams have also been reported on Craigslist job boards, so verify the legitimacy of any posting
      before providing personal details.

Once you have found a job, be sure to print and/or save a copy of the job posting or job description. You will
use this document to help you tailor your application materials. Companies often delete the job posting
once they have received sufficient applicants, so it is important that you save your own copy of the document,
along with the date and location you found it (this information is often referenced in the job letter); you might
also copy and paste the text into a new document, or bookmark the webpage.

Constructing Modular Materials

It probably sounds like a lot of work to create a new set of employment materials for every job opening you
will identify. While it is true that it takes time and effort to customize application materials for each new job
application, you do not have to create a new résumé and cover letter for every job opening. Instead, you can
create modular materials with moving parts that can be adapted and reorganized for each job.

For example, if you are a nursing student wanting to work in a different (or indirectly related) field during
school, you might consider applying to be an administrative assistant, a medical translator, or a biology tutor.
Several different résumé formats are available to you. However, you may choose the skills-based résumé format
to place more emphasis on a specific set of current qualifications and slightly less emphasis on your education
or work experience; you might create three different templates of your résumé that emphasize and expand upon
different skill categories: administrative, communication, and educational.

The same holds true with the cover letter. Once you have a letter draft, you can work with it as a template for
numerous other jobs, keeping the overall format but revising some key sentences. It is quite likely that the final
paragraph of your cover letters will change very little if you are applying to multiple jobs within the same career
64 | APPLYING TO JOBS

field or industry. The central paragraphs, on the other hand, may undergo substantial revision, depending on
how different one potential job is from another. Just make sure to change the name of the potential employer
and company for each application; addressing a potential employer by the wrong name is the surest way to
remove your materials from consideration.

Crafting Résumés

The purpose of a résumé is twofold: first, to serve as an overview or quick summary of your skills,
experience, and education as they relate to your career objective; secondly, to function as a marketing
tool that conveys your personal brand. All of us want our résumés to stand out from the stack. The best
way to create an eye-catching résumé is not through gimmicks or flash, but rather through substance and
customization. As a marketing document that sells your candidacy, your résumé should have a format that is
pleasing to read, efficient in its use of the English language, and very concise. Once you have several years of
experience, it is acceptable to have a two-page résumé, although résumés may range from one to three pages.
You should aim for a full page as a new job-seeker, while you build experience and generate content.

Regardless of your starting point--whether you are unsure you can fill a two-page résumé, or whether you
think it will be difficult to fill a single page--this chapter will help you accomplish your goal: designing
an exceptional résumé. Remember, as the most critical component of a marketing campaign in which you
advertise your professional self, your résumé must be clear, concise, and error free. Most seasoned recruiters
scan a résumé in about seven to twenty seconds; because they have many documents to review, they look for
reasons to reduce the number of résumés that demand a second look. This means that a single error can be all
that is needed to discard your résumé and your candidacy. However, recruiters also have an eye for key details,
so they will quickly recognize a well-constructed résumé and discard one that is poorly designed.

While writing your résumé, it is important that you keep in mind not only its purpose, but also its general
goals, which include the following:

  · To make an exceptional first impression. Your résumé will likely be the first impression a potential
      employer has of you and your qualifications, so it must hold attention long enough to propel your job
      search forward.

  · To quantify strengths, responsibilities, abilities, and accomplishments. Mentioning factual,
      numerical examples of praiseworthy attributes and skills will allow you to boast without sounding
      boastful. For example:
          If you reduced errors by 35% and increased profits by 55%.
          If you have been a student teacher with 35 students and student grades improved by 25%.
          If you are part of a marketing team that has increased new patient accounts by 10% last year.
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 65

          If you worked in the school library and the number of lost books has declined by 50%.
  · To argue, in an articulate and polite way, that you are well suited for the job. Based on the

      content of the job ad, you will want to address how your education and/or work experiences (including
      internships and volunteer work) have taught you both technical and "soft" skills that will help you
      perform the listed job duties.
  · To represent you when you are not there. Your résumé can be uploaded to online global job boards
      like Monster and CareerBuilder. It can be sent to a company's online database with a push of a button,
      where it will be shared with dozens of recruiters and hiring managers.
  · To obtain an interview and create talking points. Listing your accomplishments and quantifying
      them can create talking points for future interviews. For example, perhaps you bullet point the
      following: Responsible for intake and outtake of approximately 1,000 books daily, resulting in 80%
      fewer lost books this year. During an interview, with this example in mind, you can easily talk about
      using technology to improve processes. You can discuss the team environment of the library staff and
      how you worked toward decreasing the number of lost books.
  · To show your command of the written word. You do not have to be an English major to make sure
      that your résumé is well-written. Your professors, teachers, peers, and family members may be willing to
      help by answering questions based on their expertise, or even reviewing a résumé draft.

Overall, highlighting specific results in each résumé category will increase your chances of getting your résumé
noticed. Unlike financial investments, past performance is an indicator of future success: include details about
your past performance and quantify your accomplishments whenever possible, and future employers will be
inclined to believe you can do the same for them. What exactly do you do, or what have you done in the
past? Your résumé should answer this question very quickly. The more you quantify your accomplishments
using specific details, the more your abilities will be understood.

For example, stating that you "worked in sales" on your résumé does not provide specific proof of your
skills, and therefore is not likely to be as impressive as a statement that quantifies your experiences and
provides unique details. Stronger examples of résumé statements might include: "completed an average of 65
customer transactions per hour, setting a company record for the 2019 fiscal year" or "managed national and
international supplier accounts with purchase ranges from $1,000 to $10,000,000 USD."

Types of Résumés

Just as work histories come in a variety of forms, so also do résumés. Although career experts debate which style
is the best, you must decide which fits your current situation. There are many reasons to choose one format
over another.
66 | APPLYING TO JOBS

The chronological résumé is the most common format. The focal point is the Employment Experience, so this
format is best for candidates with a long/uninterrupted work history, in fields where the company worked for
is of paramount importance. It is also well suited for those applicants who want to highlight their education,
as many jobs will ask for a degree (e.g. BA, JD, MBA, MA, MD, PhD, etc.) in a certain field as a minimum
requirement. This format lists information in reverse chronological order (starting with the most recent
positions/schools and working backward), and achievements and skills are detailed underneath each position.

In contrast, the skills-based résumé serves candidates who are transitioning between fields, who are shifting
from a military to a civilian career, or who have gained skills in a variety of different settings (workplace,
academic, volunteer). The focal point is a well-developed Skills & Achievements section, in which skills are
organized into categories. The functional résumé still includes an Employment Experience section and likely
an Education section, but these sections are streamlined to include only the basic information about each
position held or each school attended. The functional résumé describes responsibilities, accomplishments, and
quantifiable achievements under categories in the skills section. It typically opens with a brief summary/profile
detailing strengths (one to three sentences).

It is worth noting that, especially in the case of advanced positions, many recruiters expect to see a
chronological résumé with traditional sections like Employment and Education. In most cases, it is best to give
recruiters the résumé they expect. However, both the college student and the more experienced candidate may
choose a functional résumé for these reasons:

  · To highlight skills and achievements rather than past employment/companies.
  · To minimize a less-than-extensive work experience history.
  · To emphasize other achievements, honors, and abilities.
  · To de-emphasize gaps in employment or career mobility.
  · To include categories like communication, teamwork, and leadership skills, as well as volunteer

      experience or athletic achievements.

Following, you will find a brief student example of each style.

Sample Chronological Résumé

In this first example (Figure 5.2), an anonymous student creates a chronological résumé for a job posting.
Notice especially the reverse chronological order in the Experience section.
APPLYING TO JOBS | 67
68 | APPLYING TO JOBS

 Figure 5.2: Detailed chronological résumé with original color and design choices, created using Excel.
                                                                       APPLYING TO JOBS | 69

Click here to download a copy of the example resume in Figure 5.2

Sample Skills Résumé

In the second sample résumé (Figure 5.3), student Nicole Frank creates a résumé for a position in the
healthcare industry, as she describes in her Objective statement. Notice how the document focuses on three
specific skills the student wants to highlight, then creates a list of evidence showing those skills in action.

Figure 5.3: Basic functional resume that emphasizes three skill sets.
70 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Résumé Drafting and Design

Based on your qualifications, goals, and information from the job ad, use the information from the previous
section to choose from the two major résumé types. Below, you will find information on basic conventions for
résumé design, in addition to a brief description of the content your résumé should include.

You might consider using a template as a helpful starting point. However, if you do use a common template to
help with layout and section format, be sure to modify it in some way so it does not look identical to another
candidate's résumé.

Design Conventions

The design conventions below should help you to create a résumé, regardless of your target career field. Check
with your instructor for more advice on how you should write and design contents for your document.

  · Choose a clear, readable, professional, ten-to-twelve-point font.
  · Use the same font in your résumé and your cover letter to create coherence.
  · Place your name and contact information at the top of the résumé to make it obvious to readers who the

      candidate is.
  · When describing work experience (and possibly education), include bullet points. Use the

      formula VERB + DETAILS + RESULT: Start your bullet with an action verb describing a skill or
      achievement. Follow it with the details of that skill or achievement, and then describe the positive impact
      of your achievement.

          Developed (VERB) new paper flow procedure (DETAILS), resulting in reduced staff errors and
            customer wait times (RESULT).

          Provided (VERB) friendly customer-focused service (DETAILS) leading to a 15% improvement in
            customer satisfaction and loyalty (RESULT).

  · Choose design graphics and design features carefully so your résumé does not distract the reader's eye.
  · Be strategic and consistent in your use of capitalization, bold, italics, punctuation, and underlining.
  · Place more space between sections than within a section to create visual groupings of information. This

      way your reader will be able to easily distinguish between the key sections of your résumé, and between
      the items in each section.
  · Learn about field-specific conventions. Length, formality, design, delivery method, and key terms are
      just some of the factors that may vary across disciplines.
  · Quantify your skills and achievements. This means including references to technologies and equipment
      you have used; types of documents you have produced; procedures you have followed; languages you
      speak; technical languages you know; types of clients you have worked with (demographic information
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 71

      that might be relevant in your new workplace); and so on.
  · Avoid filler words, or fluff that does not show meaningful skills. Filler words include: team player,

      results-oriented, fast-paced, and self-motivated. If you MUST use these phrases, find concrete examples
      to back them up. For example, instead of using team player, include a time you "collaborated with peers
      to save the company over $500/month on delivery methods" or "co-managed a team of six to interview/
      hire vendors for annual company picnic."
  · Use key terms gathered from the job description and research into your field. If your potential employer
      is using a résumé-scanning program, these key terms may make the difference between getting an
      interview or a rejection.
  · Proofread your résumé several times, use spell check, and ask an exceptional proofreader to review it.

What to Include

Despite variations in résumé type, formatting, and design, there are understood rules of thumb on what to
include and exclude. As their foundation, most résumés integrate three sections or types of information: the
résumé header with contact information, education section, and work experience. This section will also discuss
optional sections you may choose to add, if the rhetorical situation calls for such information.

Résumé Headers

Your résumé header should include your: full name, address, email address, phone number, and possibly
your professional website or LinkedIn page. If your first name is difficult to pronounce, you could include
your nickname in quotation marks or parentheses (e.g., Xioang "Angie" Kim or Massimo "Mass" Rapini).
Names are typically bolded and centered on the page, but aligning your name to the right or left is also
appropriate, depending on the template or style you have chosen. You may include your school address or
your permanent home address, or both. Most recruiters prefer both because, at times, they may need to send
information to both addresses at different times of the year. In Figure 5.4 below, you can see an example of a
header with one address and with two.

It is important to choose a professional e-mail address because employers frown upon addresses such as
greeneyes2@gmail.com or runningguy44@verizon.net. Instead, consider using your first name and your last
name in a simple format. If you continue your job search after graduation, you might not be permitted to use
your school email address, nor should you once you have graduated.

Include only one phone number on your résumé and record a professional voicemail in case the employer calls.
Do not play music on your voicemail. If in a loud area, do not answer your cell phone, especially when you
do not recognize the number. Allow the call to go to voicemail, listen to it in a quiet place, and return the
call as soon as possible. A professional voicemail might sound like the following: "You've reached John Smith
72 | APPLYING TO JOBS

at 555.555.5555. Please leave a message and I will call you back as soon as possible." Be sure to check your
voicemail on a regular basis.

Figure 5.4: Resume header examples with contact information, both a school address and a permanent
address.

Education Section

The Education section will likely appear before your Experience section. Once you are a working professional,
you may choose to flip these two sections, in order to emphasize the information that is more important to
a particular employer, or to follow the conventions in your field. Within the education section, it is standard
to include your GPA (especially if it is 3.0 or better), along with your expected graduation date, major(s),
and minor(s). You may include your overall GPA, or you may decide to list the GPA of your major. Certain
industries are more concerned with GPA than others, including consulting, investment banking, and trading,
which can require a 3.6 or 3.7 and above.
Be sure to research each industry to familiarize yourself with such requirements. If you attended only one
college, only that college should be listed in this section. If you transferred from another college, you should list
both schools in this section. The first school you list is the current school you attend, followed by the previous
school. If you attend graduate school, law school, and so forth, your postgraduate institution would be listed
first. You also have the option of including relevant courses that prepared you for the job you are seeking and
any special accomplishments related to school--like projects, offices held, service, and awards or scholarships.
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 73

If you have many of the latter, you might alternatively consider placing them in their own section marked
Honors. Below, you can see sample Education sections for a student who has transferred from one school to
another (Figure 5.5) and a student who has only attended one school (Figure 5.6).

Figure 5.5: Education information showing two universities attended.
74 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Figure 5.6: Resume header followed by contact information, an objective statement, and education.

Employment Section

The Employment section should highlight most the most relevant jobs you have held. This section is arguably
the most important of your résumé because recruiters often look for past work experience as a predictor
of future work experience. The conventional method of listing your work experience is in reverse
chronological order (as with your Education section). List your most recent job experience first and include the
following information:

  · Name of the company.
  · City, state, and country.
  · Years of employment. (If you have had several jobs at one company, include the overall years of

      experience; for separate jobs, note specific years of experience.)
  · Three to seven bullet points describing your responsibilities and the results of your work, depending on

      years of experience.
You should use bullet points as a means of clearly and succinctly listing your responsibilities and achievements.
                   APPLYING TO JOBS | 75

Optional Sections

In addition to contact information, education, and work experience, you may be wondering what other
sections to include while developing your résumé. Your options are many, but here are a few additional ideas.

· Objective Statement: Some sources will recommend that you include an objective statement, while
   others will warn strongly against it. Proponents will tell you that recruiters appreciate clarity, and an
   objective can help a recruiter understand exactly what you offer. Naysayers argue that the résumé is
   meant to be scanned in a matter of minutes and the objective statement only slows this process down
   with details that will likely be explored in the cover letter. If included, objective statements should be
   very targeted and mention a specific position. Show what you can do for the company in no more than
   two sentences. See the example below (Figure 5.7), created for an entry-level healthcare position.

Figure 5.7: Resume header with contact information followed by an objective statement.

  · Skills and Additional Information: This section of your résumé includes, but is not limited to, the
      following information.
          Computer Skills: Most employers expect Microsoft Word, Excel, and PowerPoint, but include
            additional software knowledge (e.g., Dreamweaver).
          Language Skills: Include your honest level of fluency (e.g., Spanish, fluent, French, beginner).
          Study Abroad: Include the name of the university, the city and country, and the coursework.
          Community Service: Include volunteer work such as park cleanups, walk-a-thons, or fundraising
            events. Be specific about your responsibilities and your results, including dollars raised, hours
76 | APPLYING TO JOBS

            spent, leadership position, and end-user experience (e.g. fund-raising efforts reached over $20K,
            providing for five developmentally disabled students and their parents to travel to Florida to swim
            with the dolphins).
          Licenses and Certifications: Individuals can achieve literally hundreds of professional licenses in the
            areas of health care, finance, real estate, insurance, and so forth. Examples include Chartered
            Financial Analyst (CFA) Level I or Licensed Real Estate Agent.
In constructing this section, be sure to keep your options in mind. If you want to highlight certain
information, or if you need to add a lot of detail, you might consider making a separate section for an item, or
you might decide to combine similar items within the same section. See the example in Figure 5.8 for a skills
section that highlights computer and language skills, certifications, and community service experience.

Figure 5.8: A skills section that groups together additional qualifications from computer skills to language.

  · References: One of the famous last lines of a résumé is "References furnished upon request." This is
      not necessary because employers can simply ask for references when they want them. In fact, if you
      simply include a references page with your résumé, it may save an interested employer the trouble of
      having to ask in the first place; a proactive, impressive strategy would be to create a single-page document
      that includes the following information.
          Header (that matches the résumé header) to include your name, address, and contact information
          Reference's name
          Reference's company and title
          Reference's relationship to you (e.g., manager, peer, vendor, and so forth)
          Reference's contact information, including e-mail address and phone number
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 77

Be sure to notify those who have agreed to serve as references that they may be receiving a call or email from a
potential employer.

See the example below (Figure 5.9) for section listing three references (a fairly typical requirement for most
jobs).
78 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Figure 5.9: List of three references (a standard number), with applicant's contact information repeated at
the top.
                       APPLYING TO JOBS | 79

Writing Cover Letters

In the era of social media, the idea of writing a cover letter to introduce your résumé may seem outdated.
However, the cover letter still serves several crucial functions. If the résumé is characterized by breadth (giving
a broad overview of your qualifications), the cover letter is characterized by depth (choosing some of your most
significant information to cover in detail). Written in paragraphs rather than bullet points, this letter is the first
writing sample your employer will see from you. It offers an opportunity to market your unique qualifications
and to show how you will fit with the culture of the company. An effective cover letter will create a picture of
you as a potential employee and inspire a potential employer to learn more about you. Keep the following tips
in mind as you write your cover letter:

  · Your letter is essentially an argument for why you should be granted an interview. Make sure to support
      the claim that you are qualified for the position - use evidence from your experiences.

  · Demonstrate your authority by speaking in detail about your qualifications.
  · Show the reader that you have skills and abilities necessary to do the job at hand. The more detail you

      offer and the more precise your language is, the more the reader will be able to picture you doing the job.
  · Conduct additional research to help you connect with the company and to choose the appropriate tone,

      level of formality, and level of technicality.

At some point you may find yourself asking, "Is it worth writing a cover letter knowing it might never be read?"
The short answer is yes. Some recruiters go straight to the résumé and make an initial decision, while other
recruiters carefully weigh the information in the letter. There is no way of knowing which will be the case, so
you are better off putting your best foot forward every time. A well-written cover letter is an opportunity to
present yourself well and influence a recruiter, so always take full advantage of that opportunity. It can also be
viewed as your first conversation with a future employer, so its quality should be exceptional.

When writing a cover letter, remember that the immediate objective of your cover letter and accompanying
résumé is to attract the reader's attention. The ultimate goal is to obtain an interview. As you write your
application letter, strive to complete three tasks: 1) catch the reader's attention favorably, 2) convince the reader
that you are a qualified candidate for the job, and 3) leave a lasting impression. Below, you'll learn skills to
complete this task: how to read job descriptions and use the information in your materials, and how to make
sure you have a cover letter with all the required content.

Deciphering the Job Description

Most job descriptions can be copied from the employer's website. Once you have identified a position that
interests you, copy the job description into a text document. (If you only have a hard copy of the ad, it
80 | APPLYING TO JOBS

might be worthwhile to type it into a new Word document, so that you can copy pertinent phrases from the
job description into your letter.) You can complete two prewriting steps before writing to decipher the job
description: 1) List each skill and qualification on a separate line and 2) Group like with like. If communication
skills are listed as important, in addition to giving presentations, list one after the other. An example of a job
description and the deciphering process is given below.

Sample Job Description

Entry-Level Sales

The CML Company, a leading provider of recruiting and staffing services, is currently seeking motivated,
career-oriented individuals to join our recruiting team. Our recruiters work with our clients and inside sales
team identifying, screening, interviewing, and presenting qualified candidates for contract and permanent
positions. CML promotes from within. Entry-level sales staff start as recruiters. Once they master that role
and have a desire to become a member of our sales team, they can be considered for promotion. Qualified
candidates for the recruiter position will:

  · Develop recruiting strategies designed to identify qualified candidates through various recruiting tools.
  · Evaluate candidates' strengths compared with clients' requirements by evaluating, screening, and

      interviewing the candidate.
  · Negotiate wage rates and other terms and conditions of employment with candidates and gain

      commitment from candidates for current and future job requirements.
  · Complete necessary pre-employment processes, including reference and background checks and drug

      tests.
  · Work with account executives to identify top accounts, client skill sets, and key market segments, and to

      assess clients' staffing requirements.
  · Interact effectively with others to create a productive team environment.
  · Communicate with peers by sharing recruiting best practices and providing accurate, thorough

      documentation on contract employees in our applicant-tracking system.
  · Maintain relationships with industry contacts to provide customer service, gain industry knowledge,

      and get referrals and sales leads.

Qualified candidates for the recruiter position must also:

  · Have a bachelor's degree or related sales or recruiting experience.
  · Be available to work before and after typical office hours as work may demand.
  · Possess strong written and oral English communication skills.
  · Be familiar with Microsoft Word and MS Outlook (or similar e-mail applications).
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 81

  · Have work experience in a service-oriented business.
  · Reflect a desire to learn and advance in a fast-paced sales environment, and be capable of regularly using

      good judgment and discretion to accomplish goals.
  · Be currently authorized to work in the United States for any employer.

Sample Deciphering Process

As you consider the preceding sample, study each component of the job description and how it relates to your
skills so that you can apply for and gain an interview for the position. Also simplify the job ad description as
you list and group. Your streamlined list of requirements might look something like this:

Requirements:

  · Bachelor's degree
  · Able to work flexible, long hours
  · Strong written and verbal communication skills
  · Computer literate
  · Desire to learn in a fast-paced sales environment
  · Good judgment
  · Discretion
  · Authorized to work in the U.S.

As you compare your abilities and credentials to your list, ask yourself how closely your qualifications match
the items that are listed. Do your skills match all of these requirements, or the vast majority of them? Highlight
the skills that do match and consider where you might reference them directly in your job letter. Then, identify
and write down any requirements that are NOT stated directly. For example, the job ad seems to imply: 1)
individuals must be motivated, 2) they must have the ability to master the work, and 3) they must have a desire
to be a part of the sales team in order to be promoted.

Do not rule yourself out if every requirement does not match; instead, think about how your skills and
knowledge relate to that requirement. For example, if you have never worked in a fast-paced sales environment,
focus on your desire to learn. Highlight the fact that you have observed fast-paced sales environments, and
those situations appeal to you. At the very least, you could use the fact that you have always been very proactive
in completing tasks as efficiently as possible. Or maybe you have taken a course or two in economics or
marketing that might have provided tangentially relevant knowledge. In contrast, if you are a strong match for
most of the requirements, generate specific, results-oriented examples to demonstrate these skills.

Oftentimes, you will not have a clear indication as to which skills are more important than others in the job ad,
82 | APPLYING TO JOBS

so use your best judgment call. Treat each skill as if it is the most important. For instance, when considering
communication skills have a specific, results-oriented example of your verbal skills and your written skills. At
some point, however, you will want to select the three skills you think are most important, match them to your
strongest skills, and then write your cover letter. These three skills, if positioned properly, will make the case for
why you should be hired.

Cover Letter Structure and Contents

Cover letter formatting should be neat and professional. It is recommended that you use left alignment for all
text. Common business letter formats include the block letter, the semi-block letter, the alternative letter, and
the simplified letter. Block format, among the most widely used business letter formats, is recommended for
cover letters. The cover letter includes five main sections: 1) heading and salutation, 2) introductory paragraph,
3) middle paragraphs, 4) closing paragraph, and 5) complimentary close. At the end of this section, you will
find two sample cover letters for job openings.

Heading and Salutation

The beginning of your cover letter orients readers to the rhetorical situation by telling them who is writing
the letter, and to whom. These elements, usually placed at the top left of the letter's first page, are highly
conventional - that is, a reader will know they're looking at a letter if they see the heading and salutation at the
top of the document.

Heading

The heading of a letter contains the following elements, in order:

 1. Writer's Address: one line each for the writer's name, street address, and country/postal code
      information.

 2. Leave one line blank.
 3. Date: date is needed in headings on letterhead stationery.
 4. Leave one line blank.
 5. Inside Address: one line each for the recipient's name (using the appropriate professional title), the name

      of the company (exactly as that company writes it), street address, and country/postal code information.

Salutation

The greeting or salutation directly addresses the recipient of the letter and is followed by a colon. You should
                                                                                                                                     APPLYING TO JOBS | 83

use the recipient's professional title (like Mr. Pough or Dr. Agbozo). If you do not know the recipient's
gender, you may use their full name. In some cases, you may address the salutation to a department name,
committee name, or position name: Dear Personnel Department, Dear Recruitment Committee or Dear
Hiring Committee.

Introductory Paragraph

In the introductory paragraph, introduce yourself to the hiring manager or recruiter. The paragraph
should include the following general information, intended to familiarize the reader with you as a candidate in
very quick fashion:

  · Why you are contacting them (to apply for X position--give its specific name).
  · How you heard about the position (for example, give the name of the website where you found the ad).
  · The date of the ad if applicable.
  · What the minimum requirements for the job are and how you meet them (for example, if the job

      requires a degree and three years of experience, you will want to mention right away that you meet these
      requirements).
  · Optional: Something specific about the company or the job itself that has made you interested in the
      position (for example, does the company have a good environmental track record? Do they mention on
      their website that they like to promote from within? Have they won awards? Are they working on any
      projects that pique your interests?).

Middle Paragraphs

The middle paragraphs of the cover letter should make the case for why you would be an exceptional hire.
Select two to four strengths necessary to excel and assign each strength to a bulleted section (Figure 5.10) or
brief paragraph (Figure 5.11). Boldly indicate your strengths and include your best examples of how you excel
at each strength. For a one-page cover letter, some candidates have two paragraphs, while others have three.
Oftentimes, one of these paragraphs will focus on education and the ways it has prepared the candidate for the
position, while another discusses work experience and applies skills learned to the position. Anything listed as
a strength in the résumé needs to include visible proof of that strength. For example, if you mention having
strong interpersonal skills, be sure to give a concrete example, like writing about a course that required group
work to finish a large project. Show exactly how the example built or showcased the skill you reference.
84 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Closing Paragraph

The closing paragraph should reiterate any major points or takeaways that you want readers to
remember. It will likely do the following:

  · Re-state your interest in the position and/or organization.
  · Highlight how your strengths mesh well with the required skills.
  · If applicable, inform them when you will contact them (within a certain number of weeks, usually).
  · Invite them to contact you (and include contact information, typically your professional email address).
  · Refer them to your enclosed résumé.
  · Thank them for their time and consideration.

Complimentary Close

The end of a business letter is called the complimentary close. Other common closing phrases are Sincerely
yours, Respectfully, or Thank you, or All the best. Notice that only the first letter is capitalized, and it is always
followed by a comma. Usually, you type your name four lines below the complimentary close and--if the letter
is a physical copy--sign your full name in between.

Sample Cover Letters

Below, you will find two sample student documents that use the genre conventions above to create cover letters
applying for a specific position. In the first letter (Figure 5.10), the student is applying for an internship
position and uses a bulleted list to highlight skills he believes have prepared him for the job. In the second letter
(Figure 5.11), a student is applying to an entry-level accounting job; she uses her letter to explain how she
found out about the position, then divides her strengths into three separate paragraphs, which she fleshes out
with specific examples to support her case.
APPLYING TO JOBS | 85
86 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Figure 5.10: Job letter addressed to a general hiring manager (as specified in the job ad) that incorporates
bullet points.
APPLYING TO JOBS | 87
88 | APPLYING TO JOBS

Figure 5.11: Job letter organized around three body paragraphs that highlight previous experience, ability to
organize/analyze data, and teamwork/leadership.

Interviewing

Interviewing for a job position comes with its own set of challenges. However, having made it to this moment
in the hiring process means that you have already faced and beaten many obstacles. Be encouraged! Even if
you do not receive (or accept) a job offer after interviewing, the interview itself provides valuable preparation
for career advancement. Some universities offer mock interviews to help students prepare, so you may want to
check with your adviser, department, and career services to be aware of these opportunities.

There are ways of preparing for possible interview scenarios--for example, drafting a set of potential questions
that you may be asked and writing out or speaking possible responses in advance. Keep your support system
involved. Just as you may have asked family or friends to look over job materials, so also might you ask a friend
or family member to help you practice responding to interview questions. The following information is not
meant to be a comprehensive guide to interviewing; however, it will provide you with information on the types
of interviews you may encounter.

On-Campus Recruiting

If you are participating in on-campus recruiting (when a company comes onto your campus to recruit potential
hires), three interview scenarios are possible: open, closed, or mixed schedule. The school dictates the type of
schedule, and it is important to know in which type you are participating.

  · An open schedule allows any student to go to the career services office to submit their résumé for the
      specific position in which they are interested. An open schedule is open to any candidate who wishes to
      be considered for an interview. The company recruiter will then review all of the résumés and select the
      top ten or twelve candidates they will interview on campus. (For example, thirty-minute interview
      schedules would allow for twelve students to be interviewed, while forty-five-minute interview schedules
      would allow for nine students to be interviewed.) The company will select the length of interviews when
      they initially book the schedule with career services.

  · A closed schedule happens when the recruiter selects all of the ten or twelve individuals they will
      interview from the résumé book, from interactions they have had on campus, or from a colleague's
      recommendation. Perhaps they met a student who impressed them at a marketing event. The recruiter
      could choose to include that student in a closed schedule.

  · A half open/half closed schedule is a hybrid of the two preceding schedules. Half the students will be
      selected from students who have submitted their résumés, and the recruiter will select the other half
                                                                                                                                    APPLYING TO JOBS | 89

      from the résumé book, a recommendation, or a direct interaction with students while they were on
      campus.

Whether you submit your résumé for an open schedule or you are selected to participate in a closed schedule,
the recruiting cycle is fast-paced and job materials can be missed or overlooked due to no fault of the writer.
Sometimes recruiters review hundreds of documents to find the ten or twelve they will pursue, and sometimes
materials can be missed because of something as simple as pages sticking to one another. Should you not be
selected, you can write to the recruiter, using your cover letter to make a strong case for why you should be
considered. In some cases, this may work to get you an interview. The recruiting process is not perfect, so
it is recommended that you apply for as many positions as possible. Never rely solely on the submission of
one résumé. Instead, when on-campus recruiting takes place, apply for all positions that fit your strengths and
interests.

Off-Campus Recruiting

Do not limit your search to only on-campus opportunities because off-campus opportunities can also be
fruitful. Conducting both an on-campus and off-campus job search increases the number of opportunities you
can consider. You may pursue off-campus opportunities for three reasons:

 1. Your school does not have a robust career services department that attracts a variety of employers.
 2. You are interested in a company that does not recruit on campus.
 3. You want to hedge your bets to have as many opportunities as possible, representing a mix of on-campus

      and off-campus possibilities.

The main difference between on-campus and off-campus recruiting is that in off-campus recruiting, you
manage the entire process. You are responsible for getting your résumé into the hands of the company recruiters
or hiring managers, along with scheduling the interview and following up on your own. An off-campus job
search demands that you are organized and proactive enough to keep things moving. After completing a job
interview, send a follow-up thank you note or email to the interviewer - usually within about a week is best.

Conclusion

Job application materials are some of the first professional writing you will do - in many ways, these
documents are part of your entry into the professional world, since they are often the avenue through
which you obtain and interview, and thereafter, a job. It's helpful to practice such common technical writing
documents because they can help introduce us to thinking like a technical communicator. In the next chapter,
90 | APPLYING TO JOBS

you'll learn how to extend your skills, using your rhetorical knowledge to tailor your materials for the people
who are most likely to read them.

References

Gross, Allison, Annemarie Hamlin, Billy Merck, Chris Rubio, Jodi Naas, Megan Savage, and Michele DeSilva.
(2017). Technical Writing. Open Oregon Educational Resources. Licensed CC-BY-NC-SA. Retrieved 19 July
2025, from https://openoregon.pressbooks.pub/technicalwriting/.

Kinonen, Amber. (2017). ENGL 145: Technical and Report Writing. Bay College Online Learning
Department, licensed CC-BY. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Zmt-
NPk-0IEHNde_gJrzjk8ao2K4W1ksL1HBpDpaP9s/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.iwajine52l1x.
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 91

CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

   Kat Gray

Introduction

Chapter 6 provides an overview of how you can use the rhetorical analysis skills you already have to create
personalized, tailored job documents that help you put your best foot forward on the job search. It's important
to think about this because when you apply for a position, you are one of many candidates - to have the best
chance at moving to the interview stage, you should think carefully about how your documents portray you as
a professional.

In the first section, you will learn how projecting a professional persona is, by and large, a product of good
audience analysis during your planning, drafting, and revision stages. Then, you'll learn specific steps to take
when you are doing research to decide how to tailor your career documents. Afterwards, you'll learn about
the PARC document design principles for résumés and cover letters: Proximity, Alignment, Repetition, and
Contrast. Finally, the chapter closes with tips about establishing a personal brand through your materials
and online presence. You can use this chapter as you work through Project 2, especially if you are creating
documents that you plan to submit to a real job application.

Tailoring: The Art of Audience Analysis

In the Project 2: Career Documents section, you learned briefly about the professional persona and why it is
important to develop this aspect of your personality in your job materials. In this section, you will learn more
about why you should take time to tailor materials for every job application you submit. You'll also learn and
practice technical writing principles and skills that you can use to improve your materials every time you apply
to a job.

As you read in Chapter 5, it's common for job-seekers to have base documents (usually a résumé and cover
letter, though you might also create a separate references document to send upon request). These documents
serve as the starting point for an individual job application, but the work doesn't stop there. As Peterson
indicates, you must find information about the job requirements, the organization for whom you hope to
work, and, as in all technical writing genres, you must research your audience.

Technical writing is an audience-centered subdiscipline of writing studies. This means that all technical
  92 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

  writing projects attempt to factor in their audience from the beginning of the planning process all the way
  through the end of the project. Technical writers research their audiences at the outset of a project (one
  example is localization, or researching the local area where a document will be deployed in order to better
  understand the audience who will use that document). Further, technical writing often involves testing - think
  of a set of instructions for heavy machinery, which will need to be tested before it is released to workers because
  if the instructions aren't clear, someone could get hurt. Finally, technical writers consider their audience during
  revisions, changing their documents to better communicate a clear message to a specific audience.

  However, job application materials have a different kind of audience than, say, the audience for a car stereo
  user manual. One way technical writers analyze their audiences is through eye tracking studies. According to
  The Ladders, a career advisory organization at Boston University, eye tracking is "a technologically advanced
  assessment of eye movement that records and analyzes where and how long a person focuses when digesting
  information or completing activities." Reporting on an eye-tracking study of job recruiters (2018), The
  Ladders found that "recruiters spent almost 80% of their resume review time on the following data points:
  name; current title/company; previous title/company; previous position start and end dates; current position
  start and end date; and education." Will Evans, the study's author, found a surprising figure: "recruiters spent
  about 6 seconds on their initial `fit/no fit' decision." In other words, recruiters decide very quickly whether or
  not a candidate looks like a good fit for a job. If your documents don't grab the recruiter's attention, you may
  never get your foot in the door.

  What does that mean for you, as a job candidate? Evans has a few key takeaways:

     · Recruiters ranked highest job documents with good organization and clear visual hierarchy.
     · Recruiters experienced higher cognitive load1 with documents they perceived as poorly organized.
     · Recruiters became distracted by job documents with too many visual elements.

  With some careful thinking and knowledge of basic design principles (which you'll learn about below) you
  can use this information to your advantage to produce job documents that grab recruiters' attention for all the
  right reasons.

  Below, you'll find a list of audience analysis questions you might ask in the process of tailoring your Career
  Documents project.

1. Cognitive load is the amount of brain processing power a person has to use to understand something, in this case job documents.
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 93

     Audience Analysis Questions for Technical Writers

     While you're planning...
          · What is the name of the company to which you are applying? What is its industry or area of
             interest? What role does the position you're applying to play in the company?
          · To whom will you send your application materials? Hint: If the job ad includes a name, search
             for that person on the company's website, or on other career sites like LinkedIn.
          · Based on the job ad, what will this audience most want to see in your materials? Will they be
             looking for education or degrees? Certifications? Particular skills, like knowing a
             programming language? Particular experiences, like having worked in the field previously?

     When you're seeking feedback...
          · When the reader looks at your documents, what's the first thing he/she notices about your
             professional persona? That is, how do your materials portray you as a job candidate?
          · What skills, experiences, or certifications does the reader think your documents highlight
             best?
          · Does the reader find your document easy or hard to read? What parts are organized well?
             What parts are confusing your reader?

     While you're revising...
          · Based on the feedback you've received, which parts of your career documents need
             clarification to communicate a clear message?
          · If you had more than one reader, did you get the same feedback from them? If so, this is an
             indication of a change you might make in revision.

Once you've thought about who your audience is and what they need from you in order to receive a clear
message and a detailed picture of you as a job candidate, you can move into the tailoring process. In the next
section, you'll find an overview of specific tailoring steps to take when applying to a job.
94 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

Tailoring Your Materials: A Process Overview

This section will walk you through the steps a job-seeker might take when thinking about how to tailor job
application materials. As Peterson indicated in Chapter 5, the best way to start tailoring your materials is by
gaining a clear understanding of the job ad itself. However, you shouldn't stop there. You don't just need
information about this particular job position - you'll also need to know about the company to which you're
applying and to whom you're speaking when you write your documents. It may also be helpful to look at
example career documents from other candidates in your field to decide how you want to organize and present
your own materials.

How to Use Job Ads

As Katrina Peterson wrote in Chapter 5, the first place you start when you are tailoring application materials
is the job ad for the position to which you are applying. It's important to have a copy of the job ad's exact
wording, since that is your best set of clues about what the organization wants from a job candidate. As
Peterson mentions, however, a company often takes a job posting down after a certain period of time. That means
that if you want a copy of the exact wording, you should copy it as soon as you decide you are applying to the
position. You can copy and paste it into a new document, use the "print" feature on a web browser (which you
can use to print the document or to save it as a PDF), or save screenshots.

Once you have a copy of the job ad, you are ready for the next step: annotating the job ad. Much like you'd
annotate a source you plan to use in a document, annotating a job ad helps you highlight the most important
information so that you can respond to it. The strategies below will help you to annotate your ad.

     Annotation Strategies for Job Ads

     To annotate a job ad, find a way to make comments on the copy of the document you saved. You
     might use a text editing program to highlight and comment on important information. If you prefer,
     you could print the job ad and make comments and marks on a printed document. You'll use any
     notes you make to help you create your materials.

         1. Start with the basics. You'll want to know: the name of the company posting the job ad;
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 95

             the title of the available position; the location of the position; whether the position offers
             remote work options.
         2. Understand the required and preferred qualifications. Most job ads will list required
             qualifications, which are the minimum skills and certifications they will accept from
             applicants for the position. Many job ads also list preferred qualifications, which list skills that
             are not required but strongly preferred. Candidates who can show these preferred
             qualifications may have an edge over candidates who cannot.
         3. Learn about the organization. Job ads usually give information about the company
             posting the ad. As a job-seeker, you will want to understand who you're working for - but
             you'll also want to read closely to understand the company's values, goals, and motivations.
         4. Make careful note of any submission instructions. Often, the company posting the job
             ad will give particular instructions for applying or submitting your materials. The ad may ask
             that you submit all materials as attachments to an email, or that you make an account on a
             hiring website or the company's website and apply in that manner.

Before you can begin composing your job application materials, you will want to know a little bit more about
the audience you are attempting to persuade. The basic information you gather from the job ad will serve as a
jumping off point for further research.

How to Research a Company or Organization

The job advertisement provides enough information for you to derive an understanding of the position and
its requirements. You may learn some information about the company itself from a job ad, but the more
information you have about your audience, the better you will be able to understand how to communicate
with them in your application materials. Use the questions below to help you dig deeper.

     Questions for Researching a Company, Organization, or Hiring Committee

         1. Start with the company's website. Most modern companies use this space to
             communicate not just information about the organization's products and services but also
96 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

             about the organization's structure, values, and goals. You might ask...

                   What is the company's history?
                   What does this organization seem to value most based on their website?
                   How is the organization structured? Who is in charge, and what are their positions? Is

                      the organization split into `divisions' - like Engineering, Human Resources, or Digital
                      Media? How many people work for the organization?
                   Who are the clients or customers of this company?
                   What does this website hope to communicate to current clients and employees? What
                      about to potential clients and jobseekers?
                   Does the company have social media accounts? Which networks? How active are
                      those accounts? What do they tell you about the company?

         2. Use web search information, but use it carefully. A company's website can provide a lot
             of information, but it's important to get other perspectives too. The questions below will
             help you think through the information you might find when you web search a company, but
             you should also remember to fact-check this information. Many of these sites allow anyone
             with an account to post, so you will want to verify your findings.

                   When you use a web search like DuckDuckGo or Google, what information do you
                      learn about the company?

                   Does the company have any ratings on GlassDoor?
                   Does the company have any Yelp reviews?
                   Do you find any information on the company from forums like Reddit?
                   You might also consider asking some questions about the company on a social forum -

                      but remember that you may not necessarily be anonymous in these spaces.

         3. Use your personal and professional contacts. Another important step is to talk with any
             people you know, personally or professionally, who have worked with this organization. You
             might ask questions like...

                   When did you work for this organization, and for how long?
                   What was a typical work day or work week like for you?
                   What were your experiences working for this organization, good and bad?
                   What did you like most about the organization?
                   Why did you leave the company?

The questions above will help you dig much deeper into the organization to which you'll send your
                                                                                                       CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 97

documents. This will give you a clearer sense of your audience and more information to include in your
materials. It is important not only to show your audience that you are qualified for the job - they also want
to know that you've done your research on the organization and understand how you might fit within it as an
employee.

How to Research Documents in Your Field

Finally, before you start working on your own materials, it can be very helpful to look at other job-seekers'
materials. In doing so, it's important to know that career documents vary based on field. For example, a
software engineer's résumé will look different from a nurse's résumé and both of these documents will look
different from a graphic designer's résumé. Not only will the information vary, so will the order in which that
information is presented, and the document design used to convey it. A graphic designer's résumé needs to
show an understanding of clean, attractive document design, while a software engineer's or nurse's résumé will
focus on showing qualifications, education, and experience. Luckily, many of these documents are digitized
and easily available to us; the strategies and questions below will help you find them.

     Strategies and Questions for Researching Documents in Your Field

     Research Strategies

         1. Ask people you know. The best option you have is to talk with people you know, either
             personally or professionally, who already work in the field you are targeting. Ask family
             members, friends, acquaintances, or coworkers if they will allow you to see their job
             application documents - be specific that you plan to use them to help you understand how
             to construct your own.

         2. Search the internet. Using a search engine, try phrases like "software engineer résumé
             examples" or "public health résumé examples." Remember to look at both the web links your
             search returns and the image search results.

         3. Use templates. Finally, you can use image creation apps (Canva is only one example) to
             view template documents. Try some of the same search terms you used in Step 2, above -
             "software engineer résumé" or "nurse résumé."

     An important note: Step 1, above, is the best way to guarantee that you are looking at real
98 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

     examples of career documents. The web search results or the templates you find may not
     accurately reflect the way job-seekers construct documents in your field.
     Research Questions

          · Do the example résumés use a chronological or skills-based template? That is, are they
             ordered based on when the writer has held specific positions or received specific
             certifications? Or are they ordered based on personal and professional skills the writer wants
             to emphasize?

          · How do the example cover letters order information? What types of information do they
             focus on? Do they focus on degrees earned? Experiences in the job field? Projects worked on
             or completed?

          · What information is most emphasized in these documents? Is this information emphasized
             through text? Document design? The order of information? Something else?

          · What types of document design do you see in these documents? Do career documents in
             your field seem to focus primarily on the text content? Are there document design choices
             that seem consistent across these materials?

Once you have this information in hand, you're ready to start creating your own documents. This means
not only creating the text, but also using thoughtful document design to match your documents with your
professional persona. Next, we'll discuss some basic document design principles that will help you to think
about not only what your documents say, but how they are organized and how they appear to the reader. Both
written text and document design are rhetorical; that is to say, both the text and design of a document act
persuasively on your audience.

Beginner Document Design Principles

Document design is tricky: when a document is designed well, we may hardly notice the design elements a
writer uses to guide us through the text and emphasize important messages. When a document is designed
poorly, however, we might miss the point, become confused, or stop reading altogether. Document design,
then, is an incredibly important piece of your relationship (as the writer) with your audience.

To think about document design, we'll start with the PARC design principles: proximity, alignment,
repetition, and contrast (Williams, 2004).
           CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 99

Proximity

Proximity governs how we group related elements in a document. For example, writers tend to place a caption
directly under the photo it describes or explains. Readers assume that, since the caption text is right beneath
the photo, it gives more information about the photo's contents. Using proximity thoughtfully "helps organize
information" and "gives the reader a clear structure" (Williams, 2004).

To use proximity in your document designs, you should group related items together. These items should be
physically close to one another on the page so your audience can view them together, as a cohesive unit. In
other words, the placement of elements on your page should give the reader helpful information about the
organization of your document. Readers should know where to start reading and have a clear idea of when
they're done. Further, they should understand clearly which items are related, and which aren't. As Williams
(2004) wrote, "[t]he closeness or lack of closeness indicates the relationship" (p. 21) - if items are close to one
another, readers interpret them as related and if they aren't, readers interpret them as unrelated.

Alignment

Alignment is a way to think about how we place items on a page and how that placement creates visual
connections with other elements on the page. If a writer centers an image on the page, the audience's eyes are
drawn towards the center of the page and the information the image contains. The image and its caption create
a visual unit, which readers interpret as belonging together. In other words, as Williams (2004) said, "[e]very
item should have a visual connection with something else on the page" (p. 31).

To start with, you can consider three different types of alignments for your document:

 1. Left-aligned: text that lines up along the left margin of the page. Left-aligned text is common in
      documents written in languages that we read left-to-right, such as English. Because the text lines up
      against the same margin on the left, it is easier for our eyes to follow the text without getting confused.

 2. Right-aligned: text that lines up along the right margin of the page. Right-aligned text has some of the
      same advantages as left-aligned text: it creates a hard edge on the right side of the page so that your reader
      can very clearly see the text alignment. It may be slightly more difficult for readers who usually read left-
      to-right to read right-aligned text, since that edge occurs on the right side of the page.

 3. Centered: text aligned to the center of the page. Centered text creates a soft edge - since it runs down the
      center of the page, the amount of white space on either side of the words differs.

As always, consider your audience when you make these document design choices. What information do you
100 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

need the audience to understand from your document? How can you use alignment to make sure they see that
information and receive your message?

Repetition

Repetition utilizes the human ability to recognize and interpret patterns to visually organize a document. The
headings in this chapter are a prime example: they repeat the same font and size to draw your eye to the topic
of the text that follows and to help you understand the organization of the topics - and which subtopics fit
with which larger topic. Repeating this pattern consistently throughout the chapter helps readers understand
the document and how to use it.

You might think of repetition as consistency. That is, repetition shows readers that each page is part of the
same document; this, in turn, increases your document's readability. Most of us already use repetition without
thinking. We know, for example, to use the same style of bullet points throughout a document when we
create lists. We know that all the headings in a document should use the same font. Utilizing the principle of
repetition effectively means becoming more conscious of these practices and using them thoughtfully to help
communicate your message to the audience.

Contrast

Contrast is a tool that communicates meaning through difference. Headings also work on the principle of
contrast, since they are usually bigger than the text around them. Because of this, the reader is able to better
understand how to interpret the information given in the headings (usually the topic of the paragraphs to
follow). Contrast can be shown in a wide variety of ways: font, font size, shape, color, line thickness, and more.

Contrast serves two important purposes: it increases visual interest on the page and, more importantly, it helps
us create organizational hierarchy in a document, which in turn increases readability. Where repetition leads
readers through a document using repeated design elements, contrast leads readers through a document by
creating difference. The headings in this chapter also utilize contrast. Because the heading is larger than the text
around it, the reader understands that the difference means something - and it does, because the heading text
helps to visually introduce the reader to a change in topic.

Building a Personal Brand

As you may have guessed from reading the information about design principles above, creating a personal
brand for your documents is a matter of audience awareness, what you hope to accomplish with your texts, and
                                                                                                      CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 101

your own personality and style. The PARC principles can help you make these decisions with more confidence
and consistency. By making intentional design choices, you present yourself as a technical communicator who
is thoughtful and attentive to details - a plus in most rhetorical situations!

To use this information to build a personal brand, you will need to think about both design and content
choices. Through these choices, you convey your professional persona to the audiences who interact with your
materials. Remember, too, that the materials you use to convey your professional persona aren't just your career
documents. Your professional persona should also be reflected in places like your LinkedIn page, or any social
media accounts to which your materials link. By thinking carefully about how you project your professional
persona into the world, you can have more control over the first impression you make on your audience.

Creating Branded Materials

The choices you make when building your personal brand rely on the answers to two related questions:

 1. What do materials in your field usually look like? What information do they include? In what order or
      format?

 2. What design choices can you make to emphasize your message about yourself? What design choices can
      show your personality, or who you are as a candidate?

As you create your materials, you generally have two options: customizing templates and building from
scratch.

Customizing Templates

Document design and creation programs and apps usually offer a wide variety of document design templates.
These templates can make your life a lot easier, especially if you don't have a lot of experience designing
documents. However, other job-seekers also have access to these templates - you and another candidate might
choose the same look for your documents, which defeats the purpose of thinking about branding in the first
place!

This doesn't mean you can't use a template. It does mean that you should think carefully about how to
customize the template you choose to reflect your own professional persona. To do so, you might ask questions
like...

  · What organization best reflects your skills and capabilities, as they relate to the position to which you
      want to apply?
102 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS

  · How can you use the visual elements in the template to emphasize the most important information in
      the document? Tip: eye-tracking studies suggest that the upper left-hand quadrant of a document is
      where many readers focus most clearly - place your most important information here!

  · What choices can you make about colors for your document? What makes sense for your profession, or
      for the field you hope to enter? Remember: think about contrast - your reader needs to be able to clearly
      distinguish between the colors you use.

Building from Scratch

If you feel confident in your document design skills, you can build materials from scratch. This means starting
with a blank page in a text or image editor and building your professional documents from the ground up.
You'll need to choose, and then figure out how to execute, every document design element you want to add.
This approach gives you a great deal of freedom over how your documents look, but it can be intimidating to
start with a blank page.

However, the advantage of creating documents from scratch is twofold. First, taking the time to build from
scratch means that you can customize your documents to suit your specific needs. Second, creating your own
documents means that you'll gain skills in document design and creation that you can also apply on the job!
Remember to give yourself a little extra time to work if you want to design your documents from scratch.

As you decide on design and organization elements, you might ask yourself the following questions...

  · What content best highlights your qualifications and achievements as a job candidate? How can you
      place this content early in the document?

  · What headings will you use to organize your document? How will you distinguish these headings
      visually so that your audience can easily see topic changes and document organization?

  · What fonts will you choose? Consider readability, as well as how you can use size and emphasis (bold,
      italic, underline) to emphasize particular messages.

  · What design elements will you use to emphasize the most important information in your document?
  · What design elements will you repeat across your documents to create a sense of cohesion or unity?

Conclusion

As this chapter indicates, it takes time to do the work of tailoring your documents. This process requires
you to do careful research not just on the job position to which you are applying, but also the company or
organization you'll be working with, and the people you may be meeting early in the hiring process. However,
tailoring is also a way to show that you are an attentive, intelligent professional who takes your potential career
                                                                                                      CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS | 103

seriously; through tailoring, you gain more thoughtful control over your first impression on an employer.
Putting your time and effort into this process pays off!

References

Keeping an Eye on Recruiter Behavior: New Study Clarifies Recruiter Decision-Making. (2018). The Ladders
at Boston University. Retrieved 19 July 2025, from https://www.bu.edu/com/files/2018/10/TheLadders-
EyeTracking-StudyC2.pdf.

Williams, Robin. (2004). The Non-Designer's Design Book: Design and Typographical Principles for the Visual
Novice. Peachpit Press.
104 | CHAPTER 6: TAILORING JOB MATERIALS
                                                                  PART 3: RESEARCHING PROBLEMS AND PROPOSING SOLUTIONS | 105

PART III

PART 3: RESEARCHING PROBLEMS
AND PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

Part 3: Researching Problems and Proposing Solutions contains content that covers the third and fourth
projects in the class: the Problem Primer and the Collaborative Grant Proposal. These projects are framed as
a response to the UArk Cares Foundation Community Improvement Grant Request for Proposals (RFP),
linked below. This document, from a fictional nonprofit organization, frames the rhetorical situation for your
next two major projects.

You will begin work on this project by selecting a problem you want to investigate with a group, then doing
both primary and secondary research on those problems. As an individual, you will create a problem primer
report that details your findings. Then, you will come back together with your group and talk about which of
your solutions you will write about for the collaborative grant proposal. As a group, you will create a proposal
that responds to the UArk Cares Foundation RFP, then remix that information into a multimodal resource
for your stakeholders. Finally, you will create a transmittal letter to accompany your project and discuss your
process.

Part 3 contains the following sections:

  · UArk Cares Foundation Community Improvement Grant RFP: This Request for Proposals
      document frames the work you will do for the next two projects in the course: the Problem Primer and
      Collaborative Grant Proposal.

  · Project 3: Problem Primer: The assignment sheet for Project 3 describes the process of selecting a
      problem and gives an outline of the process for writing the primer.

  · Chapter 7: Explore Potential Problems: This chapter explores the idea of technical writing as
      problem-solving and reviews processes for exploring a problem to solve with your group. Additionally, it
      gives details about the intermediate step of creating a community profile.

  · Chapter 8: Research a Technical Writing Problem: This chapter discusses the process of secondary
      research for technical writing. It also explains the idea of information literacy, details note-taking for
      research projects, and explains how to create the project pitch on which you will receive feedback before
      starting your work.

  · Chapter 9: Design and Run a Pilot Study: Chapter 9 explains how to construct a pilot study for
      your problem primer project. First, it details human research ethics, then research methods that you
      might use for technical writing projects. Finally, you will learn about the type of progress report you will
106 | PART 3: RESEARCHING PROBLEMS AND PROPOSING SOLUTIONS

      write for this project, the research progress memo.
  · Chapter 10: Synthesize and Report Research: Chapter 10 discusses the high-level research writing

      skill of synthesis, and explains how you will use those skills to create a problem primer. The chapter also
      explains what a report is, and talks through the style of report you will write for Project 3. Finally, you
      will learn about visual design for reports.
  · Project 4: Collaborative Grant Proposal: The assignment sheet for Project 4 describes how to take
      the research you've done in the past few weeks and transform it into a grant proposal with your group.
  · Chapter 11: Create a Grant Proposal: This chapter discusses the specific type of proposal you will
      write for Project 4. Additionally, the chapter explains the process of collaborative writing and gives you
      documents and tools to manage collaborative work. Finally, the chapter explains the type of progress
      report you will write for Project 4: the design memo.
  · Chapter 12: Remix Research for a Public Audience: Chapter 12 describes the next step of Project 4:
      turning your research into a multimodal resources for the stakeholders who will be most affected by
      your project. You will learn about how to talk to a public audience, then about multimodal
      composition. Finally, the chapter closes with recommendations for a design process to help you design
      your remix.
  · Chapter 13: Write a Transmittal Letter: This short chapter explains the correspondence subgenre
      you will write to finish Project 4: the transmittal letter. You will learn about the parts and contents
      required for this project, as well as how such documents are usually used in technical writing projects.
                                                                     UARK CARES FOUNDATION COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT GRANT | 107

 UARK CARES FOUNDATION COMMUNITY
 IMPROVEMENT GRANT

    Kat Gray

                 Grant Applications Are Open!1

  Dear University of Arkansas (UArk) students and Northwest Arkansas (NWA) community leaders,
  UARK Cares, with the financial support of the University of Arkansas, is pleased to offer grants to support
  community-engaged projects that benefit the Northwest Arkansas region and its community members. The
  purpose of UARK Cares is to help connect the resources offered by the foundation to the community
  members and organizations who know best how to use them in service of the NWA area at-large.

1. UArk Cares is a fictional foundation created for the purpose of helping students practice writing in contexts that approach the professional
  experiences they are likely to have writing these documents. This approach is inspired by Dr. Shyam Pandey's presentation "Beyond Persuasion:
  Exploring Innovative Approaches to Grant-Writing in TPC," given at ATTW 2025. The UArk Cares Foundation will be the audience for your
  grant proposal project.
108 | UARK CARES FOUNDATION COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT GRANT

We accept grant proposals once a year in the Fall. Proposals will be reviewed and rated by the UARK Cares
Advisory Board.

We invite grant proposals from any NWA community members with projects aimed to support the
community in the following areas:

  · Community access and belonging
  · Environmental preservation
  · Educational access and literacy development
  · Food access and insecurity
  · Mental health
  · Technology and design

The maximum funding UARK Cares will provide per grant is $25,000.

Recently Funded Projects

  · Initiative 1: Local brewery used UARK Cares fund to open a new public tornado shelter in South
      Fayetteville in response to an uptick in tornadoes affecting the NWA region.

  · Initiative 2: UARK Food Nutrition and Health (FNAH) students partner with a local vegan food truck
      to create a community fridge and combat food insecurity.

  · Initiative 3: UARK Communication students work with a local PR firm to create a campaign to educate
      vulnerable community members about housing resources.

  · Initiative 4: UARK football players work with the City of Fayetteville to create a new community
      garden to battle food insecurity and save the bees.

  · Initiative 5: UARK students used funds to host a music festival celebrating, honoring, and educating the
      public about local musical traditions and histories.

  · Initiative 6: Local book club requests funds to create a multilingual school literacy program in
      Springdale, AR.
             UARK CARES FOUNDATION COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT GRANT | 109

Eligibility

The proposed initiatives and programs must be free and open to the public. Individuals and groups submitting
grant proposals will be more successful if they are affiliated with a local organization or group (other than the
University of Arkansas). As an organization affiliated with the University of Arkansas, UARK Cares prefers
and typically funds grant proposals that are sufficiently grounded in peer-reviewed research and community
expertise.

Please upload your grant proposal as a single pdf file. Every submission should include:

· Name and contact information
· Transmittal letter
· Project description

       Introduction
       Purpose
       Community stakeholders
       Funding request and plans for use
       Anticipated outcomes
· Budget for project
· References
· Relevant appendices
· Resume/CV of grant applicant(s)

On behalf of UARK Cares, I look forward to receiving and evaluating your proposals.
All the best,
Jamie G. Freeman, UARK Cares Foundation President
  110 | PROJECT 3: PROBLEM PRIMER

 PROJECT 3: PROBLEM PRIMER

    Kat Gray

                   Project 3 Assignment Sheet1

  The purpose of this project is to practice the early stages of the research process for a larger technical writing
  project. With a small group, you will define a problem you want to solve and begin researching solutions. Each
  group member is responsible for creating a Problem Primer, an informational report that explores one specific
  aspect or cause of the problem and identifies stakeholders, community partners, and subject matter experts
  who might provide further information. The revised draft of your proposal should be 4-6 pages double-spaced,
  or around 1000-1200 words.
  To be considered complete, your final draft should include:

     · Your revised problem primer of 1000-1200 words (4-6 pages double-spaced)
     · Your works cited or references page (minimum 3 academic, peer-reviewed sources)
     · Your revision note, which includes a discussion of your revisions

  To get started, work with your group in class to brainstorm about problems you're interested in writing about.

     · Tip 1: Think locally! What problems can you identify on campus? In Fayetteville or Northwest
        Arkansas?

     · Tip 2: Think about technology! What kinds of problems involving technology impact students or locals
        in Fayetteville? Think about digital access (access to technology or resources), digital infrastructure (Wi-
        Fi, for example), and privacy, to name just a couple of examples.

     · Tip 3: Choose a problem with multiple possible causes, solutions, and affected stakeholders. Since each
        group member needs to write about a different aspect of the problem, you should choose a problem that
        is complex and requires research to solve.

  When you're ready to begin the writing process, think about the following:

1. Please note: this assignment is a template - please see your instructor's assignment sheet for specific details.
                                                                                                                     PROJECT 3: PROBLEM PRIMER | 111

  · How can you clearly and persuasively explain your problem? What types of research can you use to
      support your explanation?

  · How can you clearly and persuasively explain your solution? What types of research can you use to
      support your explanation?

  · How much will your project cost? How will you show the cost breakdown to your audience? What do
      you need to price for the project?

  · How long will your project take? Can it start immediately, or will there be a research and development
      or design stage first? Do you have to account for factors like acquiring sponsorship, filing paperwork,
      getting permission, shipping delays, or weather delays?

  · How experienced is your organization with similar projects? Who are the team members working on the
      project? What are their qualifications and expertise?

  · How will your organization be accountable for your work? That is to say, how will you make sure the
      project is complete, ethical, on time, and within the client's budget?

  · How can you use graphics and document design to emphasize your points? Which parts of your report
      would be most effectively supported by document organization and visual choices?

Collaboration Requirements

You will work with your team to research a local problem and research possible solutions. While you will
research and problem-solve collaboratively, your major assignment for this unit will be individually composed.

Content and Design

For help understanding this assignment and what types of content you might create for it, please visit the
following resources:

  · Chapter 7: Explore Potential Problems
  · Chapter 8: Research a Technical Writing Problem
  · Chapter 9: Design and Run a Pilot Study
  · Chapter 10: Synthesize and Report Research

Final submission should be uploaded on Blackboard as a PDF or Word file.

Sample Assignment Outline

  · Title Page
112 | PROJECT 3: PROBLEM PRIMER

  · Introduction: What is the problem?
          What is the problem at hand?
          Why is it important to solve this problem?
          What is the main question your research seeks to address?
          What communities are affected by the problem?

  · Research Design
          What are the steps you took to answer your question?
          How did you choose the secondary research you reviewed for this project?
          How did you choose your research method (interview, survey, observation)?
          How did your positionality affect your research design choices?

  · Literature Review
          According to subject-area experts, what are the various causes of the problems?
          What are key themes in the peer-reviewed research?

  · Community-Engaged Research Findings
          What do community members think about the problem?
          What are community members doing already to address the problem?

  · Conclusion: Looking Forward
          Based on your primary and secondary research, what are the various solutions to these problems?
          Which solution(s) responds best to the needs and interests of the community members most
            impacted by the problem?

  · Works Cited/References
          Match the style (APA, IEEE, Chicago, etc.) you've chosen for the document
          List all sources you have quoted, paraphrased, or summarized

Due Dates

Project Due Dates

Project Stage  Due

Group Community Profile [WEEK 5]

Problem Pitch  [WEEK 6]

Research Progress Memo [WEEK 7]

Conferences + First Draft [WEEK 8]

Peer Review    [WEEK 9]

Final Draft    [WEEK 9]
                                                                          PROJECT 3: PROBLEM PRIMER | 113

Revision Note

When you are ready to submit your final draft in Week 9, you must include a revision note at the beginning of
this document, before your final draft begins. Your revision note must explain the revisions you made to your
original draft and why.

Final Submission Checklist

[Give instructions to students on how to format their assignments here.]

  · Research Primer
          Length - 4 pages
          Works Cited/References page
          Annotated Bibliography

  · Revision Note
          describes feedback you received
          describes how you used feedback to revise
  114 | CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS

 CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL
 PROBLEMS

    Kat Gray; Tricia Hylton; and Robin L. Potter

 Introduction

  Now that you have worked through a project that asks you to think about how to communicate (using your
  professional persona) with a particular audience, it's time to think about what happens when the audience
  for technical writing broadens. Career documents are intended for a relatively narrow rhetorical situation
  - usually, you are writing for recruiters and hiring committees in the context of trying to get hired for a
  job. However, technical communication works with and towards a wide variety of audiences and contexts.
  Technical writers may write to public audiences (public service announcements, company social media posts),
  consumers (customer service emails/chats, user manuals), and other experts (grant proposals, memos, white
  papers). Technical writing might inform, educate, or persuade, and it might do so in contexts ranging from a
  corporate board room to a public community meeting. Projects in the course now turn towards considerations
  of broader and more complex audiences, purposes, and contexts.

  Chapter 7 sets you up for the two largest projects in the course: Project 3 - Problem Primer, and Project
  4 - Collaborative Grant Proposal. First, this chapter discusses how to see technical writing projects as
  opportunities to problem solve. This section offers two different problem solving models for you to try as you
  decide on a topic for Projects 3 and 4. In the next section, you will learn how to create a community profile
  that works ethically with community members to understand who is affected by a problem, and how.

 Technical Writing as Problem Solving1

  In the workplace, many of the communication tasks you perform are designed to solve a problem, improve a
  situation, or act on an opportunity. Whether you are working for a client, for your employer, with your team,
  or for someone else, you will typically use some sort of organized process to tackle and solve the problem,

1. Adapted from "From Challenges to Opportunities" (https://pressbooks.senecapolytechnic.ca/technicalwriting/chapter/problemsolving/) by
  Robin Potter and Tricia Hylton
                                                                                              CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS | 115

pursue the opportunity, or transform a challenge into an opportunity. Along the way, your communications
reflect the values and policies of the organization, which should also include active promotion of ethically
responsible initiatives.
Using a design process can offer a clear, step-by-step plan for finding the best approach for addressing
communication situations. Take a moment to search the Internet for the term "design process" and look at
"images." You will find many variations. Have a look at several of them and see if you can find a common
pattern.
One commonality you will likely find in examining other people's design process diagrams is this: The first
steps in designing any solution is to clearly define the problem. When defining the problem, you are also
determining, in part, a course of action. Figure 7.1 shows NASA's basic design process. Think about the kind
of communication that each step of this process might entail.

Figure 7.1 NASA's Design Process Diagram (NASA, 2018).
116 | CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS

This critical first stage of the design process requires that you effectively communicate with the clients,
stakeholders, or whoever has the problem that needs solving. Completing a good audience analysis will prepare
you for the process. That's why it's important to investigate the stakeholders - that is, the people who have
a stake in the results of your project. You will write up your findings about stakeholders in the Community
Profile assignment that begins Project 3.

Defining the Problem

For our purposes, we will use Barry Hyman's Problem Formulation model (2002) to clearly define a problem.
Hyman's Problem Formulation model consists of four elements:

 1. Needs Statement: recognizes and describes the need for a solution or improvement to an
      "unsatisfactory situation." It answers the questions: What is wrong with the way things are currently?
      What is unsatisfactory about the situation? What negative effects does it cause? You may need to do
      research and supply data to quantify the negative effects.

 2. Goals Statement: describes what the improved situation would look like once a solution has been
      implemented. The goal statement defines the scope of your search for a solution. At this point, do not
      describe your solution, only the goal that any proposed solution should achieve. The broader you make
      your goal, the more numerous and varied the solutions can be; a narrowly focused goal limits the
      number and variety of possible solutions.

 3. Objectives: define measurable, specific outcomes that any feasible solution should optimize (aspects you
      can use to "grade" the effectiveness of the solution). Objectives provide you with ways to quantitatively
      measure how well any solution will solve the problem; ideally, they will allow you to compare multiple
      solutions and figure out which one is most effective (which one gets the highest score on meeting the
      objectives?).

 4. Constraints: define the limits that any feasible solution must adhere to in order to be acceptable (pass/
      fail conditions, range limits, etc.). The keyword here is must - constraints are the "go/no go" conditions
      that determine whether a solution is acceptable or not. These often include budget and time limits, as
      well as legal, safety and other regulatory requirements.

Once you have this information, you can begin thinking about writing a problem statement - which will be
an integral part of your Pitch assignment, discussed in Chapter 8. For now, review the short video below to
understand what a problem statement contains, and why it's critical to have one:
                                                                                              CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS | 117

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=339#oembed-1

(What is a Problem Statement?, 2015)

Communication as a Solution

This model can apply to a communications task as well as more physical design tasks. Imagine your
communications task as something that will solve a problem or improve a situation. For example, you may
want to think about how to increase severe weather safety in town - specifically, how to get threat warnings to
residents in a timely way. This is a communications problem that allows you to further your design thinking
(Tham, 2021) skills.

Before you begin drafting your community profile and pitch, define the problem you want to solve with these
documents. The questions below will help you to develop a clear understanding of the problem:

  · Understand the Needs: Consider what gave rise to the need to communicate.
          Does someone lack sufficient information to make a decision or take a position on an issue? Who,
            and how does this lack of information affect them?
          Did someone request information? Who was it, and why did they request it? What do they plan to
            use the information to do?
          Is there some unsatisfactory situation that needs to be remedied by communicating with your
            audience? What specifically is unsatisfactory about it?
          What does your audience need from you in this communication? That is, what will they expect to
            hear from you in response to the problem?

  · Establish Goals: Consider your purpose in writing.
          What do you want your reader to do, think, or know? Do you want your reader to make a
            decision? Change their opinion or behavior? Follow a course of action?
          What is your desired outcome? And what form and style of communication will best lead to that
            outcome?
          How do the goals you have set relate to your audience's goals?

  · Define Objectives: Consider the specifics of your message and your audience to determine what criteria
      you should meet.
          What form should the communication take? What content elements will you need to include?
118 | CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS

            What genre constraints exist for this type of document?
          What kind of research will be required? How will you conduct it, and how long will you need?

            How will you make sure your audience's needs and knowledge are represented in your research?
          What information does your audience want/need?
          What do they already know?
  · Identify Constraints: Consider your rhetorical situation. What conditions exist that present barriers
      or challenges to communication? How can you address them? What are the pass/fail conditions of this
      document? For example,
          How much time is your audience willing to spend on this? How long can you make your

            document or presentation? (word length/time limit)
          What format and style do they require? Is there a Style Guide you must follow? A template you can

            use?
          How much time do you have to create it? Do you have a deadline or due date?
          Are there requirements for using sources, like academic integrity rules, style guides, or a code of

            ethics?

     Example: A Technical Writing Problem Statement

     A large furniture company specializes in selling relatively inexpensive flat-pack furniture that
     consumers can put together for themselves. One of their most popular pieces is a 5-shelf bookshelf
     called Model B-5. The company includes instructions with each item, but there's been some memes
     on social media lately about how hard it is to put B-5 together. There are also a lot of videos on
     YouTube where consumers show other consumers how to put together Model B-5. This is not ideal
     for the company, since it means that customers may become frustrated and return items or leave
     bad reviews.
     The company decides that its technical writing department should investigate the problem. They
     must understand the current problems with the instructions, then figure out what types of
     solutions will work best. Given the amount of circulation on public media, the company is thinking
     of this as an urgent problem - the team is given a month to finish their review and come up with
     recommendations.
     Let's use the framework above to break down the problem.
                                                                                              CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS | 119

          · Understand the Needs: In this situation, something unsatisfactory has happened:
             customers are dissatisfied with the quality of assembly instructions for the Model B-5
             bookcase. The audience will want to know that the company is paying attention and, ideally,
             that the company will do something about the problem.

          · Establish Goals: The company has two goals with this communication: (1) give consumers a
             more helpful set of instructions so they can put together the Model B-5 without problems,
             and (2) establish a better relationship with their customers by showing they are listening to
             customer complaints. The audience probably shares the first goal, though, depending on
             their level of frustration, they may or may not respond to the second goal.

          · Define Objectives: The team wants to give the audience instructions of some kind, but
             there are a few different ways they might do that. For example, they could revise the
             content of their current instructions, which come on a single sheet of paper, packed inside
             the box with the furniture pieces and hardware. If the only problem is unclear wording, these
             revisions might do the job - and they could be accomplished quickly. On the other hand, the
             team might decide, based on seeing users' YouTube assembly videos for Model B-5 that
             video instructions would work better. This will take more time to script, produce, and edit,
             but it might be worth it in the end. The technical writing team will want to talk directly to
             the audience, likely through surveys, polls, or focus groups, about their needs. They will want
             to know which specific parts of the instructions work, and which don't. They will need a clear
             understanding of their customers' "pain points" so they can go forward with revisions.

          · Identify Constraints: The first instructions for the Model B-5 came on a single sheet of
             paper, printed with black type and diagrams. This template is used for all of the company's
             furniture, so major changes here will probably mean work down the line, changing the
             instructions for every item to more closely match the revised template for Model B-5. The
             company hopes to work with about the same size document, since this keeps printing costs
             down. On the other hand, the team might argue that video instructions won't be hard to
             make (they could be about the length of your average TikTok for example, if scripted
             cleverly). A link to the video instructions could simply be linked via a QR code printed on the
             package. If the team can make a case for video instructions, they might be able to have more
             time on the project - especially if their research indicates that customers would respond
             favorably to these changes.

In addition to the process above, the following video provides a slightly different problem solving process;
however, it incorporates many of the same principles described above. Both processes can lead you to a
workable solution.
120 | CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=339#oembed-2

(How to Solve a Problem in Four Steps, 2015)

Together with a clear understanding of the problem, you need an understanding of the community affected
by this problem. Below, we'll discuss some techniques for learning about your stakeholders, or the people who
will be affected by both the problem you're researching and any solutions you hope to implement.

Creating a Community Profile

As you've learned in this class (and prior writing classes), all writing requires you to consider your audience.
Thinking about your audience in technical communication is especially important because of the
circumstances in which your documents are used - on the side of the road changing a tire, on a factory floor
to run a machine, or to put together a computer at home. In other words, technical communication is often
present in a person's life when they need help fixing a problem, as we discussed above. That's why the first step
of Dr. Jason Tham's (2021) design thinking framework for technical communication is empathize; a technical
communicator must understand the users' needs before it is possible to conceive of a solution.

To produce technical writing that helps audiences fix problems, technical writers must have an understanding
of both the problem and the community or communities most affected by it. To start working on Projects 3
and 4, you'll build a profile of a community affected by a problem you want to research. This will help you to
practice ethical technical writing skills for a long-term, complex research-based project.

Ethical Work with Communities

Technical writers should work closely with the people who will use their documents for a variety of reasons.
For one thing, companies want to make sure that their products are used by consumers both successfully and
safely; one way to do that is to think about the documentation that accompanies the products and services
people use. Technical writing genres like grants - let's say for a new public cooling facility in town - need
community insight to offer effective solutions for where and how to build it and how to get information about
the facility to people who need it. Working ethically with members of a community takes effort and time,
which pay dividends when it comes to solving problems that affect the lives of people.
                                                                                              CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS | 121

One avenue to pursue when you search is academic research, which we will discuss in the next chapter. This
includes both primary sources (like interviews, surveys, or observations) and secondary sources (like studies,
white papers, or experiments). Libraries are a great place to start, since they can give you sources that show you
how people have tried to solve problems similar to yours in the past. You can also conduct research yourself.
For now, it's sufficient to say that for many projects, a firm grounding in academic research work is important
for thinking about how to solve a problem.

Further, you might search for community organizations dedicated to the problem you want to research. If
you'd like to renovate a local park, you might check with a town's Parks and Recreation organizations to learn
who uses the park and who is currently responsible for its upkeep. If you're interested in helping elementary
school kids learn more about ecology in their backyards, you might investigate Arkansas Master Naturalists'
programs to understand how another organization did the same type of work. Community organizations do
not stand in for working directly with community members, but these groups often have their finger on the
pulse of a problem in a specific local area.

Though you have many options for finding information that helps you create a community profile, there
is no substitute for communicating directly with the people who are experiencing the effects of
the problem you want to solve. You might find community contacts through your personal network, or
through a larger group like one of the community organizations discussed above. Regardless of how you find
community contacts, you should ask politely for their time and treat it respectfully, should they agree to help
you. It's important to respect all the stakeholders involved in your project, but beyond that, the relationship
you cultivate with community members in a professional project has a bearing on how the project turns out.
In Chapter 9, we will discuss how to design a pilot study that accounts for community needs and opinions.

Questions a Community Profile Should Answer

Regardless of the form your community profile takes, you should make sure it answers the following questions:

  · Who is affected by the problem?
  · How are they affected?
  · What are the community's needs and goals?
  · How urgent is the problem for this community? Why?
  · Why does the community need to solve this problem?
  · What, if anything, is already being done? By whom? How successful is this work, and why?

Though you may ultimately decide to include more information as you research your community, these
questions serve as a basis for the deep understanding required to understand, plan, create, and complete
technical writing solutions that are not only successful, but also helpful and attuned to the needs of the users.
122 | CHAPTER 7: EXPLORE POTENTIAL PROBLEMS

Conclusion

Now that you know how to think about professional and technical communication through a problem-solving
lens, you have the skills to understand any technical writing task you face, whether in a professional or personal
setting. After completing your community profile, you will also have a clear understanding of the stakes of
the problem you will investigate for projects 3 and 4. In the next two chapters, you'll learn how to use that
understanding to plan and execute research on a technical writing project.

References

100% Effective. (2015). What is a Problem Statement? [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=vjCCC2kFJcQ&t=43s

DecisionSkills. (2015). How to solve a problem in four steps [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
   watch?v=QOjTJAFyNrU

Hyman, Barry. (2002). Ch. 2: Problem formulation. In Fundamentals of engineering design. Upper Saddle
   River, NJ: Prentice Hall, pp. 40-54.

NASA. (2018, January 30 updated). NASA design process. NASA STEM Engagement. Retrieved 19 July 2025,
   from https://www.nasa.gov/audience/foreducators/best/index.html.

Tham, Jason. (2021). Design thinking in technical communication: Solving problems through making and
collaboration. Routledge.
                                                                               CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 123

 CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL
 WRITING PROBLEM

    Kat Gray; Michael Beilfuss; Suzan Last; and Will Fleming

 Introduction1

  At some point during your college career, and likely also in your professional career, you will be asked
  to conduct research and then use that research to support your ideas. While this may seem intimidating,
  remember that engaging in research is basically just using a systematic process to find out more
  information about your topic. Nicholas Walliman, in his handbook Research Methods: The Basics, defines
  research methods as "the tools and techniques for doing research." These techniques include collecting,
  sorting, and analyzing the information and data you find. The better the tools and more comprehensive the
  techniques you employ, the more effective your research will be. By extension, the more effective your research
  is, the more credible and persuasive your argument will be.
  Here are some basic terms and definitions you should be familiar with:
  Research: the systematic process of finding out more about something than you already know, ideally so that
  you can prove a hypothesis, produce new knowledge and understanding, and make evidence-based decisions.
  Research Methods: techniques of collecting, sorting, and analyzing information/data.
  Data: pieces of information gathered in the process of research.
  Data can be categorized in several ways, detailed in the table below (Table 8.1):

1. Adapted from Will Fleming's "Chapter 6: Research and Information Literacy," in Technical Writing at LBCC and Suzan Last's Chapter 5:
  Conducting Research from Technical Writing Essentials.
124 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

                                                Table 8.1: Types of Research Data

Primary data                                                    Secondary Data

Data that have been directly observed, experienced and          Comes from sources that record, analyze, and interpret
recorded close to the event. This is data that you might        primary data. It is critical to evaluate the credibility of
create yourself by                                              these sources. You might find such data in

  · Measurement: collecting numbers indicating                    · Academic research: refereed academic studies
      amounts (temperature, size, etc.)                               published in academic journals

  · Observation: with your own senses or with                     · Print sources: books, trade magazines, newspapers,
      instruments (camera, microscope)                                popular media, etc.

  · Interrogation: conducting interviews, focus groups,           · Online research: popular media sources, industry
      surveys, polls, or questionnaires                               websites, government websites, non-profit
                                                                      organizations
  · Participation: experience of doing or seeing
      something (visit the site, tour the facility, manipulate    · Non-written Material: TV, radio, film, such as
      models or simulations, Beta test, etc.)                         documentaries, news, podcasts, etc.

Note: primary research done in an academic setting that           · Professional Documents: annual reports,
includes gathering information from human subjects                    production records, committee reports, survey
requires strict protocols and will likely require ethics              results, etc.
approval. Ask your instructor for guidance and see
Chapter 9: Design and Run a Pilot Study.

Quantitative Data                                               Qualitative Data

Uses numbers to describe information that can be                Uses words to record and describe the data collected;
measured quantitatively. This data is used to measure,          often describes people's feelings, judgments, emotions,
make comparisons, examine relationships, test hypotheses,       customs, and beliefs that can only be expressed in
explain, predict, or even control.                              descriptive words, not in numbers. This includes
                                                                "anecdotal data" or personal experiences.

In other words, you may encounter a wide variety of data during research for a technical writing project. You
will likely need to combine (or synthesize) your understanding of academic and trade publications, quantitative
data you have collected, and information about stakeholder needs, goals, and constraints. You'll need to think
about how to do this in a way that combines accountable information gathering with honest and above-board
information sharing.

For a brief overview of this process, please watch the video below, "Research in Technical Writing," by William
Smith:
                                                                               CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 125

                      One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
          them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=341#video-341-1

 Technical Writing Research Methods2

  Research is not just collecting facts for a technical writing document; it is a process in which information is
  uncovered and expressed in meaningful ways to the audience. Before you begin creating any documents, you
  need to gather all the required information. In technical writing, you will use a variety of different research
  methods to do this work.

 Primary Research

  Primary research comes from studies you conduct and from published records and documents. Primary
  research methods allow you to gather first-hand information from data, users, stakeholders, and subject matter
  experts (SMEs). This information helps technical writers understand the problems they hope to solve and the
  solutions they might implement in greater depth.
  Examples: lab experiments, product testing, surveys, observations, measurements, interviews, site visits,
  prototype testing, beta testing, print media, websites, published raw statistical data, historical records, legal
  documents, firsthand historical accounts, discussions with subject matter experts (SMEs) like engineers,
  developers, or project managers.

 Secondary Research

  Secondary research comes from studies that others (usually researchers, academics, or SMEs) conduct.
  Secondary research provides the backing of professional researchers who are researching similar problems to
  your own. This information helps technical writers broaden their understanding of the problems and solutions
  they are researching. For example, seeing how a traffic congestion problem was solved in a city of a similar size
  to Fayetteville might help you understand how to write about the likely results of such a project here in town.

2. Based on Suzan Last's Chapter 5: Conducting Research from Technical Writing Essentials and Michael Beilfuss' Chapter 4: Ethics from Technical
  and Professional Writing Genres: A Study in Theory and Practice
126 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

Examples: library databases, research papers, studies, white papers, reviews, analyses, critiques.

Tertiary Research

Finally, tertiary research involves using general information sources - such sources consolidate primary and
secondary information into compressed, brief formats. They are, in other words, often summaries of the
knowledge on a topic. They help technical writers to corroborate facts and to gain a general understanding
of both your topic and major concepts, lines of inquiry, or schools of thought in a particular field (like
architecture, engineering, or chemistry).
Examples: dictionaries, encyclopedias, handbooks, bibliographies.

     Research Tips

     As you prepare to research any writing project, keep these takeaways in mind:
          · Primary research is research you conduct. How you choose to conduct it depends on what
             types of questions you need to answer.
          · Secondary research is research others have conducted. Typically, you read secondary
             research before you do primary research to get an idea of what is already happening in your
             professional field or academic discipline.
          · Tertiary research helps you to confirm facts and get a quick overview of a topic.
          · Strong research projects thoughtfully blend primary, secondary, and tertiary research.

Using Reliable Sources

Whether you are writing for class, colleagues within a workplace, or outside vendors, customers, or
stakeholders, you will want to utilize your writing as an opportunity to build a positive, ethical reputation with
your audience. Your goal is to maintain and enhance your credibility, and that of your organization, at all times.
Credibility can be established through many means: citing respected sources, providing reliable evidence, using
sound logic, and writing with clear, concise language. Make sure as you start your research that you always
question the credibility of the sources you find. You should know the answers to the following questions:
                                                                               CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 127

     · Are the sources popular or scholarly?
     · Are they peer reviewed by experts in the field?
     · Can the information be verified by other sources?
     · Are the methods and arguments based on solid reasoning and sound evidence?
     · Is the author identifiable and do they have appropriate credentials?

  You can also learn more about evaluating sources in the "Note-Taking for Research Projects" section, below.

  Be cautious about using sources that are not reviewed by peers or editors, or in which the information cannot
  be verified, or seems misleading, biased, or even false. Be a wise information consumer in your own reading and
  research in order to build your reputation as an honest, ethical writer.

  Quoting the work of others in your writing is fine, provided that you credit the source fully enough that your
  readers can find it on their own. If you fail to take careful notes, or the sentence is present in your writing
  but later fails to get accurate attribution, it can have a negative impact on you and your organization. That is
  why it is important that when you find an element you would like to incorporate in your document, in the
  same moment as you copy and paste or make a note of it in your research file you need to note the source in a
  complete enough form to find it again.

  Giving credit where credit is due will build your credibility and enhance your document. Moreover, when your
  writing is authentically yours, your audience will catch your enthusiasm, and you will feel more confident in
  the material you produce. Just as you have a responsibility in business to be honest in selling your product or
  service and avoid cheating your customers, so you have a responsibility in professional writing to be honest in
  presenting your ideas, and the ideas of others, and to avoid cheating your readers with plagiarized material.

 Information Literacy and the Research Process3

  Regardless of the type of information you need for a technical writing project, you will need a careful plan (a
  research process) to help you gather information before you begin writing a document. In this section, you will
  learn about the concept of information literacy - a particular framework for thinking about the information
  we gather - as a precursor to understanding how to think about the research process. Further, you will learn
  practical tips that will help you practice your information literacy skills when you do research, no matter why
  you need the information.

3. Adapted from Will Fleming's "Chapter 6: Research and Information Literacy" in Technical Writing at LBCC.
128 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

What is Information Literacy?

Information literacy can be defined as a critical perspective, point of view, or framework that guides how
people consume, evaluate, produce, use, and archive information. In fact, the United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization wrote that "[i]nformation literacy empowers people in all walks of life
to seek, evaluate, use and create information effectively to achieve their personal, social, occupational and
educational goals" ("Information Literacy," 2023). It is a cluster of core, interconnected competencies people
possess to identify, find, evaluate, apply, and acknowledge information.

For more information on what it means to be information literate, watch the video "The Five Components of
Information Literacy" from Seminole State Library:

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=341#oembed-1

Why Is Information Literacy Important?

Through information literacy, we learn to recognize that not all information is created equal. For instance,
content on the internet is easy to access, and there's a lot of it - but it doesn't always come from credible
sources, as anyone can publish content for others to access. This means that there is a lot of bad or useless
information to sort through when performing research. In an age of misinformation and disinformation,
it's not always easy to determine which are credible sources and which are not, which makes becoming an
information literate researcher all the more crucial. Information literacy helps us to recognize misleading, out-
of-date, or false information. It also helps us sort through the data and interpret it intelligently.

Being information literate means we're able to:

  · Recognize problems and create questions
  · Make a plan for finding information and solutions
  · Formulate hypotheses and make predictions
  · Find information and data from libraries and the Internet
  · Evaluate the credibility of the sources (i.e. is the material peer-reviewed or held to an ethical standard?)
  · Organize and synthesize all gathered information
  · Make conclusions and process understanding
                                                                            CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 129

Developing your information literacy skills pays off. You won't just use these skills in a college classroom - you
might use information literacy skills to help you make a decision about which car to buy, to decide how to vote
in your next local election, or to inform your decision to evacuate (or not) in front of an incoming hurricane.
There are many times in our lives, in fact, when we need to use information literacy skills to make the best
decision possible for our situations. Further, if the goal of an ethical technical writer is to honestly and clearly
communicate information to an audience, that commitment must begin with finding the best information
you can to support the content you create.

Using Information Literacy for Research

Implementing information literacy practices in your research process takes careful planning before you start.
In particular, you will want to go into a research session with a clear list of questions to answer. The questions
you ask are likely to change depending on where you are in the research process. Earlier in the process, it's
important to confirm and extend your understanding of your topic, while in the later parts of the research
process, you will probably be looking for information that helps you to refine the details of your document.
It's also important to plan for effective research sessions before you begin your search. You will want to create a
list of keywords to use in your searches, and you will also want to have a good understanding of what kinds of
sources you need, which will subsequently affect where you look for information.

Have Clear Research Questions

By the time you are ready to start working on your problem primer, you should have a basic understanding of
what problem you are investigating, who is affected by the problem, and why it is important to find a solution.
To do that, you need to create a list of research questions you need to answer. You might ask research questions
that help you...

  · Understand the problem
  · Understand stakeholders
  · Investigate causes
  · Investigate solutions
  · Evaluate solutions
  · Understand the audience, purpose, and context for the document

Plan for Effective Research Sessions

Once you develop a list of research questions, you're almost ready to start searching for information. Before
you can do that, however, you will want to create a plan. Planning your research sessions helps you to work
130 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

more effectively. Having a clear list of questions is a part of that plan. However, you will also need to think
about how to create keywords, what types of sources you'll need, and where to look for them.

Effective research sessions necessitate that you...

 1. Know your goals: Why are you undertaking this project? Why are you creating this document? The
      answers to these questions will help you center your research process on finding the information you
      need.

 2. Double-check information: Even if you are certain you know a fact, double-checking your
      information for accuracy lets you catch problems or mistakes before the document goes out to your
      audience.

 3. Verify information using multiple sources: Whenever possible, verify your information is correct by
      cross-checking it using multiple sources. If you find the same estimated percentage of food insecurity in
      NWA in three different sources, odds are, that number is probably correct.

 4. Talk with experts in the field: Another option for verifying your information, talking with experts in
      the field can help you to ensure that the information you are communicating with your audience is both
      accurate and precise.

Keyword Searches

Once you know the questions you need to answer, you will need to determine keywords that you can use to
search different resources. That is, instead of putting your research questions directly into the search bar, you
need to develop short phrases that represent the most important themes represented in your questions. For
example, if you wanted to research how much it would cost to build a community garden in the common
area of your apartment complex, you might try search terms like community garden, community garden
program, sustainable gardening, and community garden planning.

Developing keywords by looking through your research questions. You should be able to pick out the most
important words and phrases from those questions; then, you can attempt to use those phrases to find more
information that will help you build your project. It is important to have a wide range of keywords because not
all search terms will return the same information. You might also use a keyword search to find out what terms
other people use to talk about the topic or to learn about related terms and concepts.

You should have a basic understanding of how you can use Boolean operators, which allow you to combine
keywords or exclude information from searches. These words refine your search results to be more relevant to
your needs. Below (Table 8.2), you can find a brief explanation of how these terms work, based on this resource
from the University of Minnesota.
                       CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 131

                       Table 8.2: Boolean Operators for Research

Operator How It Works                                                Example

AND  Using AND combines keywords. All search results must            Aspirin AND Children AND
     contain both terms. The more concepts you link with AND, the    Reye's Syndrome
     fewer results you will receive.

Using OR broadens results to include synonyms. Retrieves results OR in which either or both terms appear. The more concepts you link Kidney disease OR Renal
                                                                     disease
     with OR, the more results you will receive.

NOT  Using NOT excludes concepts not relevant to your search. Using  Dementia NOT Alzheimer's
     NOT reduces the number of search results you receive.

              Using quotation marks around a search term narrows your results
"..." to contain only those words, in that specific order and with no other words between them. Putting a search term in quotation "food desert"

              marks reduces the number of search results you receive.

For more specific help searching for and evaluating sources and deciding which types of sources are best suited
for your project, consult with your instructor.

Note-Taking for Research Projects4

Research in technical writing involves finding information that will help you create a correct, clear, ethical
document that accomplishes both your goals and the audience's goals. Research for such projects takes a lot
of time, and researchers can't memorize all the information they find - that's why it's important to have some
idea of how to take notes on your sources. To further complicate this process, as the section on information
literacy above suggests, you must also make space in your notes to evaluate your sources. The information
below will help you ensure that you work with your sources in a way that promotes deep understanding of
both the problem you are investigating and the work you are producing.

Basic Source Information

To begin with, make sure that you document all the information that you will need to correctly cite each source
you find. Having this information in your notes will not only help you to cite ethically - you will also be able
to find the source again if you need to access it a second time. This includes:

4. Based on Suzan Last's "Finding and Evaluating Research Sources," from Technical Writing Essentials.
132 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

  · Title
  · Author's name
  · Publication date
  · Associated organizations (publishing house, website, university, etc.)
  · Type of media (journal article, book, newspaper, video, social media post, etc.)
  · Digital location (if you accessed your source digitally, save either the web URL or the Digital Object

      Identifier [DOI] number)

Next, you will want to take notes that help you remember the contents of each source. You'll also want to jot
down any ideas you have about how you might use this source in your current project. Consider adding the
following elements to your research notes:

  · A brief source summary so you can easily remember a source's contents when you need to reference your
      notes later.

  · Memorable quotes you may want to use in your own project. Remember to always put quotes
      around other people's words in your notes. This will help you to make sure you don't accidentally
      present their words as your own.

  · Further questions you have about either the source itself or the topic after you have read and understood
      the source.

  · Connections between this source and the other sources you've investigated. What ideas link these
      sources together? How do the sources differ?

Evaluating Sources

Once you comprehend a source's message, you can evaluate that source. When you evaluate sources, you are
looking for credible sources that can provide reliable and useful data to support your ideas. Using credible
sources also improves your relationship with your readers, who will feel more confident in your findings if they
know you did your due diligence.

Scholarly articles published in academic journals are usually required sources in academic research essays;
they are also an integral part of engineering projects and technical reports. Many projects require a literature
review, which collects, summarizes and sometimes evaluates the work of researchers in this field whose work
has been recognized as a valuable contribution to the "state of the art." However, they are not the only kind of
research you will find useful. Since you are researching in a professional field and preparing for the workplace,
there are many credible kinds of sources you will draw on in a professional context. Table 8.3 lists several types
of sources you may find useful in researching your projects.
Source Type                                                   CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 133

                         Table 8.3 Typical Research Sources for Technical Projects
                     Description

Academic Journals,   Scholarly (peer-reviewed) academic sources publish primary research done by professional
Conference Papers,   researchers and scholars in specialized fields, as well as reviews of that research by other
Dissertations, etc.  specialists in the same field.

                     For example, the Journal of Computer and System Sciences publishes original research papers in
                     computer science and related subjects in system science; International Journal of Robotics and
                     Animation is one of the most highly ranked journals in the field.

Reference Works      Specialized encyclopedias, handbooks and dictionaries can provide useful terminology and
                     background information.

                     For example, the Kirk-Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology is a widely recognized
                     authoritative source.

                     Do not cite Wikipedia or dictionary.com in a technical report.

Books                Books written by specialists in a given field and contain a References section can be very
Chapters in Books    helpful in providing in-depth context for your ideas.

                     For example, Designing Engineers by Susan McCahan et al. has an excellent chapter on
                     effective teamwork

Trade Magazines      Reputable trade magazines contain articles relating to current issues and innovations, and
and Popular          therefore they can be very useful in determining the "state of the art" or what is "cutting edge"
Science Magazines    at the moment, or finding out what current issues or controversies are affecting the industry.

                     Examples include Computerworld, Wired, and Popular Mechanics.

Newspapers           Newspaper articles and media releases can offer a sense of what journalists and people in
( Journalism)        industry think the general public should know about a given topic. Journalists report on
                     current events and recent innovations; more in-depth "investigative journalism" explores a
                     current issue in greater detail. Newspapers also contain editorial sections that provide personal
                     opinions on these events and issues.

                     You should be aware of the ideological leanings of journalistic sources; for help determining
                     this information, you can use the Media Bias Chart at this link.

Industry Websites    Commercial websites are generally intended to "sell," so you have to select information
(.com)               carefully, but these websites can give you insights into a company's "mission statement,"
                     organization, strategic plan, current or planned projects, archived information, White Papers,
Organization         technical reports, product details, costs estimates, etc.
Websites (.org)
                     A vast array of .org sites can be very helpful in supplying data and information. These are often
                     public service sites and are designed to share information with the public.
134 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

Government         Government departments often publish reports and other documents that can be very helpful
Publications and   in determining public policy, regulations, and guidelines that should be followed.
Public Sector Web
Sites (.gov/.edu)  University web sites also offer a wide array of non-academic information, such as strategic
                   plans, facilities information, etc.

Patents            You may have to distinguish your innovative idea from previously patented ideas; you can look
                   these up and get detailed information on patented or patent-pending ideas.

Public             Public Consultation meetings and representatives from industry and government speak to
Presentations      various audiences about current issues and proposed projects. These can be live presentations
                   or video presentations available on YouTube or TED talks.
Other
                   Can you think of some more? (Radio programs, Podcasts, Social Media, etc.)

The importance of critically evaluating your sources for authority, relevance, timeliness, and credibility cannot
be overstated. Anyone can put anything on the internet; and people with strong web and document design
skills can make this information look very professional and credible--even if it isn't. Since much research is
currently done online, and many sources are available electronically, developing your information literacy skills
is crucial to finding valid, credible evidence to support and develop your ideas. In fact, this has become such a
challenging issue that there are sites like Beall's List of Predatory Journals that regularly update its online list of
journals that subvert the peer review process and simply publish for profit.

When evaluating research sources and presenting your own research, be careful to critically evaluate the
authority, content, and purpose of the material, using questions in Table 8.4.
                                                            CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 135

              Table 8.4 Evaluate the Authority, Content, and Purpose of Information

Authority     Who are the researchers/authors/creators? Who is their intended audience?

Researchers,  What are their credentials/qualifications? What else has this author written?
Authors, and
Creators      Is this research funded? By whom? Who benefits?

              Who has intellectual ownership of this idea? How do I cite it?

              Where is this source published? What kind of publication is it?

              Authoritative Sources: written by experts for a specialized audience, published in peer-reviewed
              journals or by respected publishers, and containing well-supported, evidence-based arguments.

              Popular Sources: written for a general (or possibly niche) public audience, often in an informal or
              journalistic style , published in newspapers, magazines, and websites with a purpose of entertaining
              or promoting a product; evidence is often "soft" rather than hard.

Content       Methodology
              What is the methodology of their study? Or how has evidence been collected?
Methodology   Is the methodology sound? Can you find obvious flaws?
and Data      What is its scope? Does it apply to your project? How?
              How recent and relevant is it? What is the publication date or last update?

              Data
              Is there sufficient data here to support their claims or hypotheses?
              Do they offer quantitative and/or qualitative data?
              Are visual representations of the data misleading or distorted in some way?

Purpose       Why has this author presented this information to this audience?
Intended Use
and Intended  Why am I using this source?
Audience
              Will using this source bolster my credibility or undermine it?

              Am I cherry picking - the use of inadequate or unrepresentative data that only supports my
              position (and ignores substantial amount of data that contradicts it)?

              Could cognitive bias be at work here? Have I only consulted the kinds of sources I know will
              support my idea? Have I failed to consider alternative kinds of sources?

              Am I representing the data I have collected accurately?

              Are the data statistically relevant or significant?
136 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

We all have biases when we write or argue; however, when evaluating sources, you want to be on the look out
for bias that is unfair, one-sided, or slanted. Consider whether the author has acknowledged and addressed
opposing ideas, potential gaps in the research, or limitations of the data. Look at the kind of language the
author uses: is it slanted, strongly connotative, or emotionally manipulative? Is the supporting evidence
presented logically, credibly, and ethically? Has the author cherry-picked or misrepresented sources or ideas?
Does the author rely heavily on emotional appeal?

     Critical thinking lies at the heart of evaluating sources. It is important to use data ethically and
     accurately, and to apply logic correctly and validly to support your ideas. You want to be rigorous in
     your selection of evidence, because once you use it in your paper, it will either bolster your own
     credibility or undermine it.

Creating a Project Pitch

A pitch is a short speech (75-100 words) typically delivered in around 30-60 seconds. Jennifer Herrity (2015)
explained the genre as a "concise introduction" to both yourself and something you are trying to promote - a
project or a relationship (a collaboration or mentorship, for example).

Pitches are a common technical writing genre. You may have also heard the term elevator pitch, which helps
to explain how such genres are meant to be used: to introduce yourself to someone you don't know but are
hoping to network with. Though a pitch is short and may be used in a relatively casual setting (like an elevator
ride, or introducing yourself to someone at a conference), the genre still takes thought and practice.

A good pitch will accomplish two key goals. First, a pitch seeks to make a good impression on the listener.
Second, a pitch makes clear your strengths and values as a professional. The pitch should give your audience a
good idea of who you are, what matters to you, and why it's worth it for the audience to develop or continue a
relationship with you.

You are being asked to create an individual project pitch for project 3. This assignment should:

  · Identify a research method for your pilot study
  · Clearly state your research questions
  · Cite one local media source
                                                                               CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 137

 Four Steps to Create a Pitch5

  Since pitches are a compact genre, it's important to be clear and concise. This means you will want to carefully
  compose your pitch to communicate information in words that are both accurate and interesting. The four
  steps below, derived from Indeed.com's "How to Craft and Deliver an Effective Elevator Pitch" can serve as a
  guide for your work.

   1. Introduce yourself. Make sure to give your name and organizational affiliation, if you have one. Follow
        with a polite greeting like "It's nice to meet you."

   2. Summarize what you do. What is your specialty, educational background, or field? Tailor this
        information towards which parts of your professional background are most relevant to your audience.

   3. Explain what you want. Why did you start this conversation? Clarify your goals, whether that is to
        seek a job opportunity, collaboration, mentorship, or to give a project overview. Emphasize your
        professional values.

   4. Finish with a call to action. What are the next steps? You might ask for a call or meeting with your
        audience, or exchange contact information.

       Example: Project 3 Pitch

       Project 3 asks you to create a pitch about a problem you want to examine for the Problem Primer
       and Collaborative Grant Proposal. Here's a brief example of how that might look.

            · Introduce: Hi, I'm Cody, and I'm a junior here. It's nice to talk with you all today!
            · Summarize: I'm getting a degree in Computer Engineering, and I'm most interested in

                cybersecurity.
            · Explain: I want to work on a project that looks at cybersecurity issues at the city level in

                Fayetteville.
            · Call to Action: This could be a really important project because residents need to log in to

5. Steps derived from Indeed.com's "How to Craft and Deliver an Effective Elevator Pitch (with Examples)" (https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/
  interviewing/how-to-give-an-elevator-pitch-examples).
138 | CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM

             the website to pay their water and sewer bills, and last month, a cybersecurity incident
             happened that meant about 50% of users had their payment information exposed. I want to
             understand why that happened and how we can make the city's systems more secure. I
             want to do interviews with both city workers and customers to understand what happened
             and suggest some possible solutions.

As you prepare to deliver your pitch, remember that you will need to practice. In a professional situation, you'll
want to be able to deliver the pitch without notes, which you can only do by practicing. Practice also helps you
to understand whether your wording is going to work - sometimes trying to read our words aloud calls our
attention to revisions that help us communicate more clearly. Further, you should always think about tailoring
your pitch towards your audience. What information will help your audience not only to understand your
message but also to want to follow up on your proposal?

Conclusion

This chapter has reviewed the elements of the technical writing research process with an aim of helping you
understand how to begin preparing for your problem primer. The second part of researching your problem
primer is conducting a pilot study, which is the topic of the next chapter. You'll use the secondary research to
support the design of this study and to fully explain the problem you are investigating.

References

Beall's list of potential predatory journals and publishers. (2024). Retrieved 15 July 2025, from
http://beallslist.net.

"Boolean Operators: A Cheat Sheet." (2024). University of Minnesota Libraries. Retrieved 3 July 2025, from
https://libguides.umn.edu/BooleanOperators.

Engineering Communication Program. (n.d.). Literature reviews. University of Toronto Faculty of Applied
Science and Engineering. Retrieved 15 July 2025, from https://ecp.engineering.utoronto.ca/resources/online-
handbook/components-of-documents/literature-reviews/.

Herrity, Jennifer. (2025, March 21, updated). How to craft and deliver an effective elevator pitch (with
                                                                            CHAPTER 8: RESEARCH A TECHNICAL WRITING PROBLEM | 139

examples). Indeed. Retrieved 15 July 2025, from https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/interviewing/how-
to-give-an-elevator-pitch-examples.

Seminole State Library. (2014, Jan. 29). "5 Components of Information Literacy." YouTube. Retrieved 30
June 2025, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1ronp6Iue9w.

Smith, William. (2020). "Research in Technical Writing." YouTube. Retrieved 30 June 2025, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Y5WJQzeDpjc.

UMA Writing Center. (2016, Oct. 16). "Writing is a Recursive Process." YouTube. Retrieved 30 June 2025,
from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=n94KtBoWaU0&t=2s.

UNESCO. (2023). "Information Literacy." Retrieved 30 June 2025, from https://www.unesco.org/en/ifap/
information-literacy.

Walliman, Nicholas. (2011). Research Methods: The Basics. Routledge: New York.
  140 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

 CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT
 STUDY

    Kat Gray; Suzan Last; Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt; and Matt McKinney

 Introduction

  After investigating your problem with a research report in Project 3, you and your group will use the
  information you have collected to create a collaborative grant proposal. Proposals are another common
  technical writing genre, which we will review more closely in Chapter 11. A grant proposal is a type of proposal
  with particularly high stakes, since a grant is a monetary reward for a proposed project. Granting organizations
  want to see a proposal for a project that is logically planned, realistic, and well-researched.
  However, before you can create a successful proposal, you need more information about your problem. In this
  chapter, you'll learn about how to design a pilot study that engages ethically with your stakeholders and also
  helps you answer your research question. First, the chapter discusses research design ethics for projects that
  require human subjects research. Then, the chapter expands on three of the most common types of primary
  research for technical writing projects: interviews, observations, and surveys. The chapter closes with a brief
  discussion of the research memo you will write for this project.

 Research Design Ethics1

  Primary research is any research in which you collect raw data directly from the "real world" rather than from
  articles, books, or internet sources that have already collected and analyzed the data. If you are collecting data
  from human participants, you are engaging in "human research" and you must be aware of and follow strict
  ethical guidelines at your academic institution or organization. Doing this is part of your responsibility to
  maintain academic integrity. You can learn more about these requirements at the University of Arkansas from
  the Division of Research and Innovation on their page about Human Subjects Research.
  In all post-secondary educational institutions, we must ensure that research involving human subjects is ethical

1. Based on Suzan Last's "Chapter 5: Conducting Research," in Technical Writing Essentials.
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 141

and complies with all related laws (you can find a brief summary of those policies at the American Psychological
Association's website here). These rules are in place to protect people and communities from potential risk or
harm and to ensure ethical conduct while doing research. To conduct ethical research that collects data from
human subjects, you must follow all ethics requirements carefully.

Guidelines for Students Conducting Human Research

In order to adhere to the ethical requirements involved in conducting human research for your course project,
you should abide by the following ethics guidelines when recruiting participants, gaining their informed
consent, and managing the data you collect.

     Ethics Guidelines for Conducting Course-Based Human Research

    Recruiting Participants

     When recruiting potential participants, you must give them the following information before you
     begin:

          · Student researcher name(s): give your name and contact information.
          · Affiliation: provide (a) the name of your institution, (b) your course name and number, and

             (c) your instructor's name and contact information.
          · Purpose: describe the purpose of your research (your objectives), and the benefits you hope

             will come from this research (overall goal). Your research should not involve any deception
             (e.g.: claiming to be gathering one kind of information, such as "do you prefer blue or green
             widgets?", but actually gathering another kind, such as "what percentage of the population
             is blue/green color blind?").

    Informed Consent

     You must gain the informed consent of the people you will be surveying, interviewing, or observing
     in non-public venues. This can be done using a consent form they can sign in person, or an "implied
     consent" statement on an electronic survey. The consent form should include all the information in
     the "recruiting" section above; in addition, you should...

          · Inform participants that their participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw at any
142 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

             time without consequence, even if they have not completed the survey, interview, or
             observation process.
          · Disclose any and all risk or discomfort that participation in the study may involve, and how
             this risk or discomfort will be addressed.
          · Ensure that all participants are adults (18 years of age or older) and fully capable of giving
             consent; do not recruit from vulnerable or at-risk groups, and do not collect data regarding
             age, gender, or any other demographic information not relevant to the study (e.g.: phone
             numbers, medications they are taking, whether they have a criminal records, etc.).

    Managing the Data

     Participants should be told what will happen to the data you gather:

          · In the case of surveys, the data is anonymous if you will not track who submitted which
             survey. In anonymous surveys, let participants know that once they submit their survey, it
             cannot be retrieved and removed from the overall results.

          · Let survey participants know (a) that your research results will be reported without their
             names and identifiers, (b) where the data will be stored, (c) how it will be "published", and
             (d) what will happen to the raw data once your project is complete

          · Let interview participants know how their information will be used and if their names will be
             included or cited.

          · Let observation participants know how they will be identified in the data, should they
             appear.

There may be additional issues that must addressed, such as accessibility and cultural considerations. If you are
unsure whether a particular line of inquiry or method of data collection requires ethics approval, you should
consult with your instructor about how to construct your pilot study. Most importantly, you should always
be completely upfront and honest about how you are conducting your research. People participating in your
research need to be reassured that you are doing this for legitimate reasons.

Stakeholder Engagement and Consultation

One important area of primary research undertaken when embarking on any large scale project entails public
engagement, or stakeholder consultation. Stakeholder engagement can range from informing the public about
plans for a project to engaging in consultative practices like getting input and feedback from various groups,
and even to empowering key community stakeholders in the final decision-making process.
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 143

For projects that have social, economic, and environmental impacts, stakeholder consultation is a critical part
of the planning stage. Creating an understanding of how projects will affect a wide variety of stakeholders is
beneficial for both the company instigating the project and the people who will be affected by it. Listening to
stakeholder feedback and concerns can be helpful in identifying and mitigating risks that could otherwise slow
down or even derail a project. For stakeholders, the consultation process creates an opportunity to be informed,
as well as to inform researchers about local contexts that may not be obvious, to raise issues and concerns, and
to help shape the objectives and outcomes of the project.

What is a Stakeholder?

Stakeholders include any individual or group who may have a direct or indirect "stake" in the project - anyone
who can be affected by it, or who can have an effect on the actions or decisions of the company, organization or
government. They can also be people who are simply interested in the matter, but more often they are potential
beneficiaries or risk-bearers. They can be internal - people from within the company or organization (owners,
managers, employees, shareholders, volunteers, interns, students, etc.) - and external, such as community
members or groups, investors, suppliers, consumers, policy makers, etc. Increasingly, arguments are being made
for considering non-human stakeholders such as the natural environment (Driscoll and Starik 2004).

Stakeholders can contribute significantly to the decision-making and problem-solving processes. People most
affected by the problem and most directly impacted by its effects can help you to

  · understand the context, issues and potential impacts more fully;
  · determine your focus, scope, and objectives for solutions; and
  · establish whether further research is needed into the problem.

People who are attempting to solve the problem can help you

  · refine, refocus, prioritize solution ideas;
  · define necessary steps to achieving them; and
  · implement solutions, provide key data, resources, etc.

There are also people who could help solve the problem, but lack awareness of the problem or their potential
role. Consultation processes help create the awareness of the project to potentially get these people involved
during the early stages of the project.

Stakeholder Mapping

The more a stakeholder group will be materially affected by the proposed project, the more important it is
  144 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

  for them to be identified, properly informed, and encouraged to participate in the consultation process. It is
  therefore critical to determine who the various stakeholders are, as well as their level of interest in the project,
  the potential impact it will have on them, and the power they have to shape the process and outcome. You
  might start by brainstorming or mind-mapping all the stakeholders you can think of. See Figure 9.1 as an
  example.

  Figure 9.1: Sample Brainstorm Stakeholder Map. 2
  Once you have identified stakeholders who may be impacted, organize them into categories or a matrix. One
  standard method of organizing stakeholders is to determine which ones are likely to be in support of the project
  and which are likely to oppose it, and then determine how much power or influence each of those groups has

2. M. Hagan, "Stakeholder mapping of traffic ticket system," Open Law Lab [Online] Aug. 28, 2017. Available: http://www.openlawlab.com/2017/
  08/28/stakeholder-mapping-the-traffic-ticket-system/ . CC-BY-NC-SA 4.0.[Accessed Feb 24, 2019].
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 145

(see Figure 9.2). For example, a mayor of a community has a strong level of influence. If the mayor is in full
support of the project, this stakeholder would go in the top right corner of the matrix. Someone who is deeply
opposed to the project, but has little influence or power, would go at the bottom left corner.

Figure 9.2: Sample stakeholder mapping matrix

A matrix like this can help you determine what level of engagement is warranted: where efforts to consult and
involve might be most needed and most effective, or where more efforts to simply inform might be most useful.
You might also consider the stakeholders' level of knowledge on the issue, level of commitment (whether in
support or opposed), and resources available.

Planning Stakeholder Engagement

There are various levels of stakeholder engagement, ranging from simply informing people about what you
plan to do, to actively seeking consent and placing the final decision in their hands. This range, presented in
Figure 9.3, is typically presented as a spectrum or continuum of engagement from the least (left) to most
(right) amount of engagement with stakeholders.

Figure 9.3: Spectrum of public engagement
146 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

A more in-depth understanding of each step will help you understand how stakeholder engagement changes
between levels:

1. Inform: Provide stakeholders with balanced and objective information to help them understand the
    project, the problem, and the solution alternatives. There is no opportunity for stakeholder input or
    decision-making.

2. Consult: Gather feedback on the information given. Level of input ranges from minimal interaction
    (online surveys) to extensive. Can be a one-time or ongoing/iterative opportunities to give feedback to
    be considered in the decision-making process.

3. Involve: Work directly with stakeholders during the process to ensure that their concerns and desired
    outcomes are fully understood and taken into account at each stage. Final decisions are still made by the
    consulting organization, but with well-considered input from stakeholders.

4. Collaborate: Partner with stakeholders at each stage of the decision-making, including developing
    alternative solution ideas and choosing the preferred solution together. Goal is to achieve consensus
    regarding decisions.

5. Empower: Place final decision-making power in the hands of stakeholders. Voting ballots and referenda
    are common examples. This level of stakeholder engagement is rare and usually includes a small number
    of people who represent important stakeholder groups.

Depending on the type of project, the potential impacts and the types and needs of stakeholders, you may
engage in a number of levels and strategies of engagement across this spectrum using a variety of different tools
(see Table 9.1):

                          Table 9.1 Typical tools for public engagement

Inform                    Consult                                 Involve / Collaborate / Empower

· Public meetings         · Public meetings, hearings, workshops  · Consensus workshops
· Briefings               · Focus groups                          · Charrettes
· News media              · Study circles                         · "World Cafes"
· Public Presentations    · Interviews                            · Study groups
· Info Kiosks             · Surveys                               · Focus groups
· Hotlines                · Opinion polls                         · Task Force
· Newsletters             · Questionnaires                        · Think Tanks
· Bulletins               · Social Media                          · Advisory boards, committees
· Social media            · Suggestion boxes                      · Citizen panels or juries
· Websites                · Comment forms                         · Polling
· Fact sheets                                                     · Votes, referenda
· Arts and entertainment                                          · Social media

There is no single "right" way of consulting with stakeholders. Each situation will be different, so each
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 147

consultation process will be context-specific and will require a detailed plan. A poorly planned consultation
process can backfire, as it can lead to a lack of trust between stakeholders and the researchers. It is critical that
the process be carefully mapped out in advance, and that preliminary work is done to determine the needs
and goals of the process and the stakeholders involved. In particular, make sure that whatever tools you choose
to use are fully accessible to all the stakeholders you plan to consult; an online survey is not much use to a
community that lacks robust wifi infrastructure.

Use the steps below to plan stakeholder engagement and consultation:

 1. Situation Assessment: Who needs to be consulted about what and why? Define stakeholders, determine
      their level of involvement, interest level, and potential impact, their needs and conditions for effective
      engagement.

 2. Goal-setting: What is your strategic purpose for consulting with stakeholders at this phase of the project?
      Define clear goals and objectives for the role of stakeholders in the decision making process. Determine
      what questions, concerns, and goals the stakeholders may have and how these can be integrated into the
      process.

 3. Planning/Requirements: Based on situation assessment and goals, determine what engagement
      strategies to use and how to implement them to best achieve these goals. Ensure that strategies consider
      issues of accessibility and the needs of vulnerable populations. Consider legal or regulatory
      requirements, policies, or conditions that need to be met. Determine how you will collect, record, track,
      analyze and distribute the data.

 4. Process and Event Management: Keep the planned activities moving forward and on-track, and
      adjust strategies as needed. Keep track of documentation.

 5. Evaluation: Design an evaluation metric to gauge the success of the engagement strategies; collect,
      analyze, and act on the data collected throughout the process. Determine how will you report the results
      of engagement process back to the stakeholders.

Example Stakeholder Engagement Plans

     Example 1: Public Participation Guide, EPA

     The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) hosts an online Public Participation Guide. The
     agency describes the document as a "primer" for "government agencies" that will help "manage
  148 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

       processes where public input is key to decision-making." The document details how to decide on
       the right amount of public planning and provides tools to help government agencies plan and
       execute public participation projects, including conflict resolution skills.

       Example 2: Public Participation Plan, NWARPC

       The Northwest Arkansas Regional Planning Commission (NWARPC) is an organization dedicated to
       large-scale regional transit and transportation planning. On their website, they provide a Public
       Participation Plan (PPP) that details how they intend to solicit stakeholder input. Their stated goal
       is to "provide opportunities for citizens, employers, and transportation providers to contribute ideas
       and opinions early and at every stage of the planning process." Specifically, their plan has three
       goals:

            · "Prioritizes providing complete information, timely notices, access to decisions, and early,
                ongoing public involvement";

            · "Adapts to regional growth and changing demographics with flexible tools";
            · "Builds on successful past efforts and identifies future strategies without listing every

                potential engagement opportunity" (NWARPC, 2025).

 Designing and Running a Pilot Study3

  For project 3, you will design and run a pilot study that will help you to write your problem primer and later,
  your grant proposal. The library at the University of Melbourne describes a pilot study as "a small initial study
  that is conducted to test the practicality and feasibility of a full research project" (n.d.). Once you've conducted
  the pilot study, you can use it as evidence for your problem primer, and possibly for your grant proposal.

3. Based on Suzan Last, "Chapter 5: Conducting Research," in Technical Writing Essentials; Adam Pope, "Chapter 7: Research Methods for
  Technical Writing," in Open Technical Writing; and Suzan Last, Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt and Matt McKinney, "Chapter 11: Research Methods
  and Methodologies," in Howdy or Hello: Technical and Professional Communication.
                               CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 149

Defining Your Project's Scope

Often, when you begin a project, the problem is fairly general and open-ended. This allows you to approach
the problem in a variety of ways, but also requires you to do some work to decide which approach you will
take. Most projects will require careful consideration of scope.

You must define the scope by considering:

· Who is your primary audience? Who else might read this?
· Who are the people who will be affected by this project? Who are the stakeholders?
· What is the specific outcome you want this document or project to achieve? What do you want your

   readers to do, think, or decide after reading it?
· What is the best format to use to present this project to these readers? What format or specific

   information have they requested?
· Are there limitations in terms of geography, demographics, or available technology?
· Is there a time frame? A budget?
· Are there legal considerations, regulations, policies, and guidelines that must be taken into account?

Your project will first require background research to clearly define the problem you are tackling - that is
why we are taking time to do academic research in addition to the pilot study. Project 3 is intended to help
you answer several key questions: How do you know there is a problem? What measurable impacts can you
point to? What will you need to prove that this is a significant problem that needs to be addressed? Can you
provide data to show the extent of the "unsatisfactory situation" and how it negatively affects people? Is there
an expected goal or target that any proposed solution is expected to meet?

In presenting your solution(s), you will have to find research to provide support for the basic premise of your
research question (is this idea feasible?) and prove your hypothesis (it will be effective/beneficial). You might
do this by showing that similar ideas have been implemented and/or researched in other areas, or that the ideas
you are presenting are based on sound evidence. The primary data from your pilot study should help you show
how your ideas are feasible in the local community context.

Clearly you can't solve the problem of climate change in one paper or project and no reasonable reader would
expect you to. However, you might be asked to explore effective ways to reduce carbon emissions in a specific
industry in a given period of time and/or geographical region. Or you might investigate whether a particular
form of alternative energy would be effective in a particular situation. Even then, you would have to consider
approaches. Would you recommend changing a policy or law to try to address the causes of the problem?
Providing incentives to industry or consumers? Innovating a current technology or process? Creating a new
technology or process? Evaluating a currently proposed solution?
150 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

Research Methods

For Project 3, you will design a pilot study that uses one of three methods: interviews, surveys, or observations.
Which method you choose depends on what type of information will be most helpful to you as you assemble
the information that will become evidence for your problem primer and grant proposal. You should
brainstorm questions you need to answer, then decide which method is most suitable for that work.

  · Interviews: one-on-one or small group question and answer sessions. Interviews will provide detailed
      information from a small number of people and are useful when you want to get an expert opinion on
      your topic. For such interviews, you may need to have the participants sign an informed consent form
      before you begin.

  · Observations: watching and taking organized notes about an event or process related to your research.
      The goal is to be as unobtrusive as possible, so that your presence does not influence or disturb the
      normal activities you want to observe. If you want to observe activities in a specific place, you must first
      seek permission and let participants know the nature of the observation. Observations in public places
      do not normally require approval. However, you may not photograph or video your observations
      without first getting the participants' informed voluntary consent and permission.

  · Surveys: a form of questioning that is less flexible than interviews, as the questions are set ahead of time
      and cannot be changed. These involve much larger groups of people than interviews, but result in less
      detailed responses. Like interviews, surveys require that you get the participants' informed consent
      before you begin.

Below, you will find more information about each method so that you can make the best possible decision
about the research design for your pilot study. If your research design requires informed consent, talk with your
instructor about how to incorporate these documents into your plan.

Interviews

Interviewing requires you to prepare fully and act with purpose. When you plan an interview, you need to
know what you're hoping to get out of the process. You can't simply go into an interview and let things
develop--you're going to waste your own time and that of your subject(s). Instead, think about what you want
to know. Do you want to know about a specific experience? Do you want a broad overview of how a problem
happens? Carefully consider your goals and the scope of your questions. One interview shouldn't do too much
or too little.

Time and timeliness also comes into play. Think about how much time you have to complete your pilot study,
and what your schedule looks like. Align the type of interview you want with your goals and your timeline -
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 151

be realistic about what is possible in the time you have. Contact your potential interviewee as soon as possible.
Individuals, especially those who work outside academia, may operate on different timelines.

Writing Successful Interview Questions

Preparing good interview questions takes time, practice, and testing. An interview is not simply a conversation
- while treating it as such can generate information, you will often find that important questions have not been
addressed. It is therefore critical to think about both the content and order of your questions as you design
your interview.

Carter McNamara offers the following suggestions for wording interview questions. This passage is quoted in
its entirety:

  · Wording should be open-ended. Respondents should be able to choose their own terms when
      answering questions.

  · Questions should be as neutral as possible. Avoid wording that might influence answers, e.g.
      evocative, judgmental wording.

  · Questions should be asked one at a time. Avoid asking multiple questions at once. If you have related
      questions, ask them separately as a follow-up question rather than part of the initial query.

  · Questions should be worded clearly. This includes knowing any terms particular to the program or
      the respondents' culture.

  · Be careful asking "why" questions. This type of question infers a cause-effect relationship that may
      not truly exist. These questions may also cause respondents to feel defensive, e.g., that they have to
      justify their response, which may inhibit their responses to this and future questions.

Further, you will want to craft questions with your goals in mind. When you write questions, craft them to
get the information you need. Think about who your subject is and why their particular viewpoint or expertise
is valuable, and craft questions to draw out that information. That is, you should give your interviewee
prompts to direct their answers. You can vary the level of specificity as needed.

  · Example Open-Ended Question: What do you think about the proposal to expand the Razorback
      Greenway to the other side of town?

  · Example Specific Question: If the Razorback Greenway opens an extension near Rupple Road, how
      will that affect the challenges you face with transportation to and from work?

Interview Strategies

Interviews are a very personal form of research - often a one-on-one conversation. Setting the stage for a
152 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

successful interview requires work on your part to ensure that participants are comfortable and that they
understand what is about to happen. The following strategies can help you set the stage for a successful
interview:

 1. Create a sense of comfort. Prepare your interview location beforehand. If you are interviewing in
      person, try to find a quiet, comfortable space where you won't be interrupted. Dress to reflect your
      professional persona - aim to be professional, but comfortable.

 2. Be clear about the interview structure. Let your subject know what to expect from the interview:
      what you'll discuss, the types of questions you will ask, and the length you're aiming for. This helps
      them understand what you want and be less anxious about the interview process.

 3. Consider how you ask questions. Think about your tone as you write and speak your questions. You
      don't want to be accusatory or aggressive if your aim is to keep your subject comfortable, nor should you
      be too personal or sensitive.

Recording Interviews

Regardless of how you choose to do so, you should record information during your interview. Below, we'll
discuss the use of video, audio, and notes for recording, but before we start, it is important to remember that
you owe your interview subjects disclosure if you will record them. If you plan to use video or audio, you
must tell your subjects beforehand and give them an opportunity to respond. Interviewing is in large
part about the relationship you cultivate with your interview subject, so when it comes to taking notes or
recording data, being as transparent as possible helps you to do your research ethically.

You have several options for recording notes:

 1. Video. Using video can preserve body language, facial expressions, and other environmental elements,
      which may be useful for you as you analyze your interview data. However, video cameras often make
      people uncomfortable, so you should be aware that this option may affect your interviewee's behavior.

 2. Audio. Using audio can record the wording and tone of voice of the interview. You may need to
      transcribe an audio interview, so allow time for that if this is your recording method. As with video,
      knowing that there is an audio recorder may make your subjects uncomfortable.

 3. Notes. Recording notes by hand can be challenging if you don't practice beforehand - you won't be
      able to write down every word your interviewee says, so you will need to think carefully about how to
      take notes during the process. Be aware that if you make notes as though something is important, your
      interviewee may pick up on that.

Finally, if you are going to be using anonymous data, you will need to transcribe the interview recordings and
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 153

anonymize them and then destroy the originals. Voice recordings or video are not anonymous and if you've
promised that to your subjects, you'll need to make sure to honor that promise.

Observations

Another research method is observation - one of the simplest of all research methods, depending on the
implementation. Use observation to witness people experiencing a problem or going through a process that is
relevant to your research questions. Observation is a tool to figure out how folks experience something without
intruding into their experience and altering it. You simply sit back and watch the situation, taking notes of
things as they happen.

In public, observation can be extremely unobtrusive in that you can sometimes simply blend into the
background. You may, for example, want to see how folks navigate the signage in the campus cafeteria. You
could simply park yourself near the front of that cafeteria and observe patterns and when folks stop to interpret
things. Obviously this would be more useful when you have large groups of folks using these facilities for the
first time, such as during orientation week or when a visiting group are present.

In more closed locations, you should have permission to observe. Before observing in such locations, you will
need to make sure that you are allowed to be there. You will likely want to keep your recording to written notes,
and you may need to get your notes checked with those that you're working with before you use them or take
them out of the location, especially when sensitive information is involved.

Doing Field Observations

To set up for and conduct a field observation, you will need to consider the following:

  · Gain appropriate permissions for researching the site. Your site is the location you are observing.
      Sites could include potential locations for a community garden, a classroom where you're observing
      student behaviors or a professor's teaching strategies, or a local business. Certain sites will require
      specific permission from an owner or other individual. Depending on your study, you may also need to
      acquire IRB permission.

  · Know what you're looking for. While people-watching is interesting, your most effective field
      research will be accomplished if you know roughly what you want to observe. For instance, say you are
      observing a large lecture from a 100-level class, and you are interested in how students use their laptops,
      tablets, or phones. In your observation, you would specifically focus on the students, with some
      attention to how they're responding to the professor. You would not be as focused on the content of the
      professor's lecture or whether the students are doing non-electronic things such as doodling or talking to
      their classmates.
154 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

  · Take notes. Select your note-taking option and prepare backups. While in the field, you will be relying
      primarily on observation. Record as much data as possible and back up that data in multiple formats.

  · Be unobtrusive. In field research, you function as an observer rather than a participant. Therefore, do
      your best to avoid influencing what is happening at the research site.

Recording Observations

Be aware that sensitive information can be relayed during an observation, even if you are doing this work in
a public venue. Take care that you're not going to be recording in a way that will disrupt locations or violate
privacy. You may be asked to leave a room during a private observation, and you may need to ignore anything
you hear in a more public venue if the content that is being shared would be embarrassing or otherwise
troublesome to record and share. Default to written notes with observation, unless there is good reason to do
otherwise - this choice allows you to be your own editor as far as what is recorded and what is not. In addition,
you should check with those you will be observing to see what types of sensitive information you should ignore
or not record.

Interpreting Observational Data

Observation excels at helping you understand how a process, system, or problem actually happens in the
physical world. By observing a situation, you can see how folks navigate a situation - when something works,
when people become frustrated, and more. In private situations, you get a better sense of how work flows in
a given location and the types of interactions that happen in a given space. Each type of information can be
valuable for you as a technical writer because it gives you even more information to take into account when you
consider the choices you make in your own designs and documents.

Surveys

Surveys allow you to ask a set number and type of questions to a large group of users. Virginia Tech Libraries'
Research Methods Guide: Survey Methods (2025) argues that survey methods allow you to accomplish two
goals:

 1. "Collect information from a small number of people to be representative of a large number of people to
      be studied"; includes "information about their attributes, behaviors, preferences, attitudes, and
      opinions" (VT Libraries, 2025);

 2. "Systematically draw information from a certain population in order to describe demographic
      information (e.g., age, gender, school year, affiliation), draw patterns from the population studied, [and]
      explain trends" (VT Libraries, 2025).
                                                                                             CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 155

You can conduct surveys in a variety of ways, including phone, face-to-face, paper and pencil, and online or
web-based (VT Libraries, 2025). Below, you'll find some tips on writing and designing survey questions that
will get you the types of answers you need to complete your pilot study.

Writing Survey Questions

When designing surveys, remember the rhetorical situation:

  · What are the goals of your survey?
  · Who are you hoping will complete the survey? What will they know? What will they not know?
  · How long can you expect them to engage with your survey?
  · What is the best method of surveying them (online, say through Google Forms, or in person)?
  · How many responses do you hope to obtain?

Use this information to inform the design of your survey and any preliminary materials you include. All surveys
should feature clear statements of purpose, as well as specific directions for answering the questions and how
to contact the researcher if participants have any questions.

After determining your audience and purpose, you will need to design your questions. Remember, in online
surveys you will not be there to provide immediate clarification, so your questions need to be carefully worded
to avoid confusion and researcher bias. As a rule, your survey questions should:

  · Be as specific as possible. Avoid ambiguity by providing specific dates, events, or descriptions as
      necessary.

  · Ask only one question at a time. Specifically, avoid survey questions that require the participant to
      answer multiple items at once. This will confuse the reader about what you are looking for and will
      likely skew your data.

  · Be neutral. Present your survey questions without leading, inflammatory, or judgmental language.
      Avoid using language that is obviously biased.

  · Be logically organized. Present questions in a way that makes sense. For example, if you introduce a
      concept in Question 1, don't return to it again in Question 12. Follow-up questions and linked
      questions should be asked in succession rather than separated.

  · Allow participants to decline answering. Be wary of questions that require participants to divulge
      sensitive information, even if they are answering anonymously. This information could include details
      such as a trauma, eating disorders, or drug use. For research projects that require these questions, consult
      the university IRB (Internal Review Board).
156 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

Designing Survey Questions

After writing the questions, you will also need to consider how your participants can answer them. Depending
on your needs, you may opt for quantitative data, which includes yes/no questions, multiple choice, Likert
scales, or ranking. Note that what makes this data "quantitative" is that it can be easily converted into
numerical data for analysis. Alternatively, you may opt for qualitative data, which includes questions that
require a written response from the participant. A description and some of the advantages of these answer
styles follow below:

  · Yes/No (Quantitative). These simple questions allow for comparison but not much else. They can be
      useful as a preliminary question to warm up participants or open up a string of follow-up questions.

  · Multiple choice (Quantitative). These questions allow for preset answers and are particularly useful
      for collecting demographic data. For example, a multiple-choice question might look something like
      this: "How many years have you attended your university?" Depending on the question, you may wish
      to allow a write-in response.

  · Likert scale (Quantitative). The Likert scale is a rating, usually on a 1-5 scale. At one end of the scale,
      you will have an option such as "Definitely Agree" and on the other side, "Definitely Disagree." In the
      middle, if you choose to provide it, is a neutral option. Some answers in this format may use a wider
      range (1-10, for example), offer a "Not Applicable" option, or remove the neutral option. Be mindful of
      what these choices might mean. A wider scale could, in theory, mean more nuance, but only if the
      distinctions between each option are clear.

  · Ranking (Quantitative). In a ranking-based answer, you provide a list of options and prompt your
      participant to place them in a certain order. For example, you may be offering five potential solutions to
      a specific problem. After explaining the solutions, you ask your reader to identify which of the five is the
      best, which is second best, and so on. Participants may assign these items a number or rearrange their
      order on a screen.

  · Written responses (Qualitative). Ask for written responses when you want detailed, individualized
      data. This approach is beneficial in that you may receive particularly detailed responses or ideas that the
      survey did not address. You might also be able to privilege voices that are often drowned out in large
      surveys. However, keep in mind that many participants do not like responding to essay-style questions.
      These responses work best as follow-up questions midway or later in the survey.

Finally, before officially publishing your survey online or asking participants in person, make sure that you
conduct preliminary usability testing on your survey. This testing allows you to seek feedback on confusion
or ambiguity in question wording, lack of clarity in question order, typographical errors, technical difficulties,
and how long the survey took a user to complete. Remember, surveys with unclear questions and sloppy
formatting annoy participants and damage your credibility. Conversely, the more professional a survey looks
and the easier it is for your reader to complete it, the more likely you will receive useful responses.
                         CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY | 157

Research Progress Memos

As you take time to work through your pilot study, you will be asked to return to a technical genre with which
you are already familiar: the memo. You are responsible for one research memo over the time you run your
study. Below, you'll find a brief explanation of how the contents of this memo differ from the memo you
composed for Project 1.

Research Memo Contents

A research memo is a subgenre of the memorandum - as we discussed in Chapter 3, memos are documents
meant to communicate a clear, specific message about a relevant topic. In this case, you will be communicating
with your instructor about your progress on the pilot study for project 3. This makes the research memo (and
the design memos you will write during the next project) a very specific type of document: a progress report.

Your research memo you write should answer the following questions:

  · How is your pilot study going?
  · What academic sources have you identified to use in your project?
  · What research do you still need to accomplish?

For a review of memo genre conventions, please see Chapter 3, "Memo Genre Conventions."

Conclusion

In this chapter, you've learned about concepts and tools that will help you to design and run a successful
pilot study. The pilot study will inform your writing in the problem primer project; this primary research
will provide grounding and connection with a local community who needs help with the problem you are
investigating. Next, we'll explore how to put together your primary and secondary research in the problem
primer itself.

References

American Psychological Association. (2025). Human research protections. Retrieved 15 July, 2025, from
https://www.apa.org/research-practice/conduct-research/human.
158 | CHAPTER 9: DESIGN AND RUN A PILOT STUDY

Charrette. (n.d.). Wikipedia. Retrieved 15 July 2025, from https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charrette.

Driscoll, Cathy and Mark Starik. (2004). The primordial stakeholder: Advancing the conceptual consideration of
stakeholder status for the natural environment. Journal of Business Ethics, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 55-73. Retrieved 6
July 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1023/B:BUSI.0000013852.62017.0e.

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). (2024). Public participation guide: View and print version. United
States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved 6 July 2025, from https://www.epa.gov/international-
cooperation/public-participation-guide-view-and-print-versions.

Hagan, Margaret. (2017). Stakeholder mapping the traffic ticket system. Retrieved 6 July 2025, from
https://www.openlawlab.com/2017/08/28/stakeholder-mapping-the-traffic-ticket-system/.

Human Subjects Research Home. (n.d.) University of Arkansas Division of Research and Innovation.
Retrieved 15 July 2025, from https://rsic.uark.edu/humansubjects/index.php.

McNamara, Carter. (2009). General guidelines for conducting interviews. Free Management Library. Retrieved
6 July 2025, https://managementhelp.org/businessresearch/interviews.htm.

Northwest Arkansas Regional Planning Commission (NWARPC). (2025). Public participation plan.
Retrieved 6 July 2025, from https://www.nwarpc.org/public-participation-plan/.

University of Melbourne Library. (n.d.). Pilot study or feasibility study. University of Melbourne. Retrieved 6
July 2025, from https://unimelb.libguides.com/whichstudytype/Pilot-Feasibility.

Virginia Tech Libraries. (2025). Research methods guide: Survey research. Virginia Tech. Retrieved 6 July 2025,
from https://guides.lib.vt.edu/researchmethods/survey.

The World Cafe. (2025). Accessed 15 July, 2025, from https://theworldcafe.com/.
                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 159

CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT
RESEARCH

   Kat Gray; Will Fleming; and Katrina Peterson

Introduction

To write the problem primer for Project 3, you will need to think about how to synthesize and report research.
That is, you will need to think about how your sources talk to one another, and what those conversations mean,
and how to talk about your research for a nonexpert audience. For this assignment, you will be talking to the
advisory board of the UArk Cares Foundation - they do not know your topic intimately, but they have
experience with prior community improvement projects, and they run the Community Improvement Grant
contest yearly.

This chapter will show you how to use the information you have about your topic and your rhetorical situation
to compose effective reports. It begins by discussing synthesis, an advanced writing skill that helps you use
research to support and enhance your message. This section also reviews quotation, summary, and paraphrase
as key research writing skills and gives tips for avoiding plagiarism. Next, the chapter explicates the problem
primer document, beginning with a brief exploration of reports as a technical communication genre. Each
section of the problem primer is then discussed in detail. The chapter closes with a section that gives basic skills
for designing and integrating visuals into reports.

What is Synthesis?

Once technical writers collect research and evaluate their sources, they can begin writing, incorporating the
knowledge they have gained from their source materials, whether primary, secondary, or tertiary. When
technical writers utilize research in their projects, they use a skill called synthesis to bring together what they've
learned from that research with their own skills, expertise, and rhetorical needs.

According to MacPháidín Library at Stonehill College, synthesis "refers to the process of combining ideas
and arguments from multiple sources and analyzing them to provide new insights" (2025). Synthesis should
"[organize] information in such a way that helps the reader make sense of the sources and better understand
how they overlap" (2025). The Center for Scholarly Communication at Indiana University of Pennsylvania
argues that synthesis accomplishes a wide variety of tasks: synthesis can be used not only to "interpret and
  160 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

  analyze multiple sources," but also to "compare, contrast, and make insightful connections to create a new
  whole" (n.d.). Synthesis is a higher-order thinking skill that helps you to communicate clearly, accurately, and
  persuasively with your readers.
  Before you start writing your problem primer, it will be helpful to think about how your sources relate to
  one another. One way writers prepare for writing with research is to complete a synthesis chart. Below, in
  Table 10.1, you will see an example of how you might fill out such a chart, using growing traffic congestion in
  Northwest Arkansas as a sample topic1.

1. Please note: these sources and themes are fictionalized.
                                                          CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 161

                                     Table 10.1: Example of a Synthesis Chart

Themes          Source 1:            Source 2: City of    Source 3: Rogers    Source 4:                       Source 5: City of
                Northwest            Fayetteville         City Council        University of                   Springdale Traffic
                Arkansas             Website -            Meeting Minutes     Arkansas                        Engineering
                Regional             Planning Page                            Associated                      Report
                Planning                                                      Student
                Commission                                                    Government
                Report                                                        Annual Report

Theme 1:        all areas of NWA     influx of young      Walmart             growing student                 more people
local           are experiencing     and middle-aged      recruitment plans   population in the               using the roads
population      population           people in the past   will mean a sharp   past 5 years                    inevitably means
growth rates    growth               decade               increase in                                         more roads to fix
                                                          population in the
                                                          coming years

Theme 2:        regional traffic     not enough           parking at the      challenges related              rising commute
traffic         infrastructure       walkable areas       AMP is limited to   to traffic                      times due to
infrastructure  does not yet have    downtown for         an extent that      congestion and                  congested
                the capacity to      pedestrians,         makes it difficult  on-campus                       interstate
                handle the           causing unsafe       for event-goers to  parking                         on-ramps during
                predicted            walking and          attend                                              peak hours
                population           driving
                growth               conditions

Theme 3:        reports plans for a  announcing a         not enough bus/     most students                   public
public          light rail           feasibility study    public              have to live off                transportation
transportation  feasibility study,   for a consumer       transportation      campus, but find                lines don't run
infrastructure  starting in two      light-rail line      lines to other      public                          often enough in
                months               connecting NWA       locations in NWA    transportation                  the evening
                                     population hubs,                         options limited or
                                     partnering with                          difficult to access
                                     NWARPC

                                     city planners are

                UArk and City of working with university
                Fayetteville must planners to plan a
Theme 4:        plan together to town hall
town and        handle increased meeting about n/a                            n/a                             n/a
university
relations       demands on           projected

                transportation population
                infrastructure
                                     growth in the

                                     coming decade

                discover             need to balance increase traffic                                         come up with a
                long-term                                                                                     sustainable road
Theme 5:        transportation       rising student       capacity for                                        maintenance plan
long-term       solutions for a                                                                               and expand
growth goals    growing              population with concerts, sporting rising overall events, and other n/a  interstate
                Northwest                                                                                     capacity
                Arkansas             population in the large-scale

                                     area                 gatherings
  162 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

  You can find a blank chart like the one above at the Arkansas English Resource. Use it to prepare your thoughts
  for writing your problem primer.

 Incorporating Sources in Technical Writing Documents2

  When you are ready to write, you will want to think carefully about how to use the information you gathered
  during the research process. In particular, this means thinking about the stakeholders for your project, your
  audience (should they be different from your stakeholders), and their needs in terms of clear, accurate
  information. There are three common techniques for using sources in researched writing: Quoting,
  Summarizing,and Paraphrasing.

 Quoting

  A direct quotation is a word-for-word restatement of another author's thoughts. The quote must match the
  original source word for word, and it should begin and end with quotation marks, which tells the reader that
  the information is directly quoted. Direct quotes are especially useful when the original writing is unique or
  difficult to summarize; when used effectively, they can also work to strengthen your support and credibility.
  EXAMPLE:
  According to the EPA's assessment: "Lead can enter drinking water when service pipes that contain lead
  corrode, especially where the water has high acidity or low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures."
  Source: "Basic information about lead in drinking water." EPA.gov.

 Summarizing

  Summaries are condensed versions of the original source, written in your own words. Summaries focus on
  the main ideas, but do not copy any of the original language. A 500 page book or a 2 hour movie could be
  summarized in a sentence. Summaries do not contain the same level of detail as the original source.
  EXAMPLE:
  Original text: "Lead can enter drinking water when service pipes that contain lead corrode, especially where
  the water has high acidity or low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures. The most common problem

2. Based on Will Fleming's "Chapter 6: Research and Information Literacy," in Technical Writing at LBCC.
                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 163

is with brass or chrome-plated brass faucets and fixtures with lead solder, from which significant amounts of
lead can enter into the water, especially hot water."

Summarized text: Water becomes contaminated by lead when lead pipes, solder, or certain types of fixtures
degrade, and hot water can increase the amount of lead released.
Source: "Basic information about lead in drinking water." EPA.gov.

Paraphrasing

Similar to summarizing, paraphrasing is a restatement of source material in your own words. The main
difference is that paraphrasing tends to be closer in length to the original source. Paraphrases have the same
(or nearly the same) level of detail as the original. Remember, though, if you copy from the original source
even two or three words in a row, you must provide quotation marks around those words.

EXAMPLE:

Original passage: "Lead can enter drinking water when service pipes that contain lead corrode, especially
where the water has high acidity or low mineral content that corrodes pipes and fixtures. The most common
problem is with brass or chrome-plated brass faucets and fixtures with lead solder, from which significant
amounts of lead can enter into the water, especially hot water."

Paraphrased passage: Water becomes contaminated by lead when lead pipes or lead solder degrades. Certain
types of fixtures, such as those plated with chrome and brass, as well as hot water, acidic water, and water with
lower amounts of minerals can make lead contamination significantly worse.
"Basic information about lead in drinking water." EPA.gov.

Regardless of whether you choose to directly quote, summarize, or paraphrase a source, you must document
the source material. Failure to do so properly could be viewed as plagiarism and can lead to allegations of
academic or workplace dishonesty.

What is Plagiarism and How Can I Avoid It?

Plagiarism is the presentation of someone else's work as your own. More formally stated, it is the act of claiming
language, ideas, opinions, theories, software code, artistic material, or anything else developed by another
person without acknowledging that person as the source of the material. Because of the ubiquity of
information online and the ease with which we can cut and paste, it is very easy to commit plagiarism and
164 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

not even be aware of doing so. But whether the plagiarism is intentional or unintentional, it is considered
dishonest, unfair, and unethical.

Plagiarism is fairly easy to avoid as long as you pay close attention to how you integrate your source material
and make sure that you give credit to the source when using someone else's words or ideas. There are two ways
to use someone's ideas: you may use them word for word (verbatim) as a quote, or you may paraphrase or
summarize the idea in your own words. Either way, the original author should be credited for their words or
ideas (usually with an in-text citation - these may look different depending on which citation style you use).

Credit must always be given to others for:

                their words, either quoted or paraphrased;
                their artistic material (photos, charts, slideshows, etc.);
                and their research findings, analyses, and conclusions.

The best way to avoid plagiarism is to simply list the sources you used in preparing your work (many writers
find it helpful to jot down or bookmark all their sources as they find them). You may not end up using all of
your sources, but saving them as you work will save you a lot of trouble down the road.

Ethical Citation Tips

As you incorporate research into your writing, you can use the tips below to help you cite all of your sources
ethically and appropriately.

 1. Cite while you write. To avoid missing citations, insert them while you are writing your document.
      Otherwise, you risk forgetting where you found a particular piece of information.

 2. Avoid copy/pasting from other sources. Lean on summary and paraphrase to reproduce someone
      else's idea in your own words - you should still provide a citation for the original source. If you are
      quoting directly, remember to enclose the words in quotation marks.

 3. Use short quotations. Limit quotations to one or two key sentences. Further, limit the total number of
      quotations in your document. Choose them carefully and use them effectively.

 4. Cite images and photos. If you wish to use someone else's visuals in your own documents, make sure
      you obtain permission. Many copyright holders will allow you to reuse imagery if you properly cite and
      attribute the original source. Follow the guidance of the copyright holder regarding the best wording to
      use for attribution.

 5. Be careful about reusing your own work. Reusing your own previous work or imagery is tricky. In
      the academic world, you might cite previous pieces to build on your prior work. However, in the
      professional world, you often give up copyright when you transfer your work to a publisher - and the
                                                                                        CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 165

        writing you do for your employer almost always belongs to the company, not you as an individual.

 Creating a Problem Primer

  The problem primer you will write for Project 3 is a type of informational report, customized to suit the
  needs of our course. The report is a very common technical writing genre used in a wide variety of rhetorical
  situations in the professional and academic worlds. In this section, you'll learn more about reports as a genre,
  then see a breakdown of the required parts of your problem primer assignment.

 What is a Report?3

  Reports are documents designed to record and convey information to the reader. The type of report is often
  identified by its primary purpose or function, as in an accident report, a laboratory report, a sales report, or
  even a book report. Reports are often analytical, or involve the rational analysis of information. Sometimes
  they simply report the facts with no analysis at all, but still need to communicate the information in a clear and
  concise format. Other reports summarize past events, present current data, and forecast future trends. A sales
  report, for example, is not designed to make an individual sale. It is, however, supposed to report sales to date,
  and may forecast future sales based on previous trends.

 Types of Reports

  The type of report you write depends on its function, or its purpose, often indicated in the thesis or purpose
  statement. The function will also influence the types of visual content or visual aids, which represent words,
  numbers, and their relationships to the report's central purpose in graphics that are easy for the reader to
  understand. The function may also contribute to parameters like report length (page or word count) or word
  choice and readability.

  Reports also vary by style and format. This section discusses reports in general terms, focusing on common
  elements. Referencing similar documents or specific report examples may serve you well as you prepare your
  own reports.

  There are two main categories for reports, regardless of their specific function or type. An informational
  report informs or instructs by presenting details of events, activities, individuals, or conditions without

3. Based on Will Fleming's "Chapter 7: Technical Reports," in Technical Writing at LBCC.
166 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

analysis. An example of this type of report is a police accident report or a workplace incident report. The report
will note the time, date, place, contributing factors, like weather, and identification of those involved. It does
not establish fault or include judgmental statements. You should not see, for example, "Driver was falling
down drunk" in a police accident report. Instead, you would see "Driver failed sobriety tests and breathalyzer
test and was transported to the station for a blood sample." The police officer is not a trained medical doctor
and is therefore not licensed to make definitive diagnoses but can collect and present relevant information that
may contribute to that diagnosis.

The second type of report is called an analytical report. An analytical report presents information with a
comprehensive analysis to solve problems, demonstrate relationships, or make recommendations. An example
of this report may be a field report by a Center for Disease Control (CDC) physician from the site of an
outbreak of a virus, noting symptoms, disease progression, steps taken to arrest the spread of the disease, and
recommendations for the treatment and quarantine of subjects.

Table 10.2 lists many common types of technical reports and their functions:
Report Type                                                          CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 167
Laboratory Report
                                    TABLE 10.2: Common Report Types
Research Report       Report Function
                      Communicates the procedures and results of laboratory activities
Field Study Report    Studies problems by developing hypotheses, collecting and analyzing data, and indicating
                      findings or conclusions
Progress Report       Describes one-time events, such as trips, conferences, seminars, as well as reports from offices
Technical Report      and industrial plants
Financial Report      Describes a project in progress, gives updates on milestones and benchmarks
Case Study            Communicates processes and products from a technical perspective
Needs Assessment      Communicates status and trends from a financial perspective
Report                Represents, analyzes, and presents lessons learned from a specific case or example
Comparative
Advantage Report      Assesses the need for a service or product

Feasibility Study     Discusses competing products or services with an analysis of relative advantages and
                      disadvantages
Instruction Manuals   Analyzes problems and predict whether current solutions or alternatives will be practical,
                      advisable, or produced the desired outcome(s)
Compliance Report     Communicate step-by-step instructions on the use of a product or service
                      Document and indicate the extent to which a product or service is within established
Cost-Benefit          compliance parameters or standards
Analysis Report
                      Communicate costs and benefits of products or services.
Decision Report
                      Make recommendations to management and become tools to solve problems and make
Benchmark Report      decisions
                      Establish criteria and evaluate alternatives by measuring against the establish benchmark
Examination Report    criteria
                      Report or record data obtained from an examination of an item or conditions, including
Physical Description  accidents and natural disasters
report
Literature Review     Describe the physical characteristics of a machine, a device, or object

                      Present summaries of the information available on a given subject

Regardless of the type of report you write, you must consider your stakeholders - those who have an interest
in the report. That may include the people the report is about, whom it is for, and the larger audience of the
community, organization, or industry. Each element of the report supports the main purpose or function in
its own way, playing an important role in the representation and transmission of information.
168 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

Composing a Problem Primer

Longer technical reports can take on many different forms (and names), but most, such as recommendation
and evaluation reports, do essentially the same thing: they provide a careful study of a situation or
problem, and often recommend options to improve that situation or problem. These are goals of the
problem primer report you will create.

The structural principle fundamental to these types of reports is this: you provide not only possible
recommendations, but also the data, analysis, discussion, and the conclusions leading to it. That way, readers
can check your findings, your logic, and your conclusions to make sure your methodology was sound and that
they can agree with your recommendation. Your goal is to create a document that helps your project group
decide on a course of action to use for writing Project 4: the collaborative grant proposal. For your report to be
most helpful in this way, you should use careful research, detailed analysis, and documentation.

When creating a report of any type, the general problem-solving approach works well for most technical
reports; the steps below in Table 10.3, generally coincide with how you organize your report's information.

1. Identify the need          Table 10.3: A Problem-Solving Approach to Report Writing
                                            What is the "unsatisfactory situation" that needs to be improved?

2. Identify the criteria for       What is the overall goal?
responding to the need             What are the specific, measurable objectives any solution should achieve?
                                   What constraints must any solution adhere to?

3. Determine the                   Define the scope of your approach to the problem.
solution options you will examine
                                   Identify the possible courses of action that you will examine in your report. You
                                   might include the consequences of simply doing nothing.

4. Study how well                  Systematically study each option, and compare how well they meet each of the
each option meets the criteria     objectives you have set.

                                   Provide a systematic and quantifiable way to compare how well to solution
                                   options meet the objectives (weighted objectives chart).

5. Draw conclusions based on your  Based on the research presented in your discussion section, sum up your
analysis                           findings and give a comparative evaluation of how well each of the options
                                   meets the criteria and addresses the need.

6.                                 Indicate which course of action the reader should take to address the problem,
Formulate recommendations based    based on your analysis of the data presented in the report.
on your conclusion
            CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 169

Title Page

The title page of a report should give some basic information: the document's title, your name, and the date
you are delivering (or turning in) the document. Depending on the citation style you choose, there may be
additional requirements for the problem primer title page. Additionally, the title page is an opportunity for you
to use your document design skills to draw the reader's attention and interest. You might think about how to
incorporate images and fonts to emphasize your message and get the reader engaged before they begin to read.
As with other parts of the problem primer, you should consult with your instructor about which elements are
required.

Introduction: What is the problem?

The beginning of a report should give a clear idea of both a document's purpose and its topic. In a professional
writing setting, readers often have a limited time to review documents, so it's best to paint as clear a picture as
possible.

To start your report, give the reader a concise description of the problem you hope to solve. The problem
statement should clearly discuss what unsatisfactory situation has given rise to this report, and the
requirements that must be met in order to solve the problem. Your reader may also need background
information to understand why the problem you are examining needs to be solved.

Additionally, your problem primer should give a clear picture of your research questions. Since your report
will thoroughly detail your research findings, you will want to make sure that readers have an idea, early in the
report, of what questions you set out to answer.

Finally, you should give an overview of the people and communities most affected by the problem you're
investigating - that is, your stakeholders, or the people who will benefit most from a solution. You should give
readers a clear understanding of who your stakeholders are, how the problem affects them, and any possible
restrictions on the solutions necessitated by stakeholder research. Your writing should reflect an engagement
with your stakeholders and an attempt to clearly articulate their needs.

Your introduction should answer the questions:

· What is the problem at hand?
· Why is it important to solve this problem?
· What is the main question your research seeks to address?
· What communities are affected by the problem?
170 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

Literature Review

To solve a problem, you must have a clear sense of its causes. In this section, you should use your peer-reviewed
research to detail causes that led to the problem. You can use data, studies, and white papers; you want to
deliver a clear, well-balanced picture of the problem that considers a variety of viewpoints. Being able to zero
in on the causes of a problem lets you have a deep understanding not only of how the problem manifests in the
present, but the history of the problem. This gives you a better chance of suggesting solutions that will succeed
long-term.

Your literature review should answer the questions:

  · According to subject-area experts, what are the various causes of the problems?
  · What are key themes in the peer-reviewed research?
  · How did you choose the secondary research you reviewed for this project?

Research Design

In the research design section, you should spend time discussing your pilot study. Specifically, this section
details the steps you decided to take to answer your research questions. You will discuss which research method
you chose, and how you have designed your study to work. This section helps a reader to clearly understand
your methods; in turn, presenting a clear picture of your pilot study process can enhance your credibility as a
writer.

Your research design section should answer the questions:

  · What are the steps you took to answer your question?
  · How did you choose your research method (interview, survey, observation)?
  · How did your positionality affect your research design choices?

Community-Engaged Research Findings

After you explain your pilot study's design, you should present its results. Your research findings will help you
to show your audience the answers to your research questions. From this point, you can begin thinking about
possible solutions to the problem, so it is important that your audience have a clear understanding of what the
results say, and how these results will affect future actions.

Your research findings section should answer the questions:
                                                                                         CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 171

            What do community members think about the problem?
            What are community members doing already to address the problem?

 Conclusion: Looking Forward

  This section, which closes the report, should describe each possible solution so that readers can understand
  how each one works. Readers will need a sense of the process required by each solution so they can think
  through the process with you. This section helps readers follow the logic of your analysis so that they can
  understand the next steps in the problem-solving process. You should also spend some time talking about how
  the options compare to each other. You should close your report by summing up the relative strengths and
  weaknesses of each solution; where possible, you should indicate which option you think is the best choice.
  Your conclusion should answer the questions:

     · Based on your primary and secondary research, what are the various solutions to these problems?
     · Which solution(s) responds best to the needs and interests of the community members most impacted

        by the problem?

 References

  Finally, your references (or works cited or bibliography) page should list all sources you have used to construct
  the paper. Specifically, any source you have quoted, summarized, or paraphrased should be included. Consult
  with your instructor for specific information on how to format this page, how to choose a citation style, and
  what types of sources to include.
  Your references list should:

            Match the style (APA, IEEE, Chicago, etc.) you've chosen for the document.
            List all sources you have quoted, paraphrased, or summarized.

 Designing and Integrating Visuals for Reports4

  Visual elements such as graphs, charts, tables, photographs, diagrams, and maps capture your readers' attention

4. Based on Will Fleming's "Chapter 3: Design and Visuals," in Technical Writing at LBCC
172 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

and help them to understand your ideas more fully. These visuals help to augment your written ideas and
simplify complicated text. They can help the reader understand a complicated process or visualize trends in the
data. The key concept to remember is that visuals clarify, illustrate, and augment your written text; they are
not a replacement for written text, but using them may help you emphasize your ideas. Visual elements in
your document should supplement your written content.

It is important to choose the right kind of visual to convey the story you want your reader to understand.
If visuals are poorly chosen or poorly designed for the task, they can confuse the reader and decrease the
chance that they understand your message. It is also important to introduce visuals with text so that readers
understand what message to take away from the visual. Ideally, visual design and text work together to enhance
your document's message and make it more likely that you will achieve your purpose.

Document Design

Document design refers to the physical characteristics of a document--the size, shape, font, and design
of an event poster, for example. In technical communication, the goal is typically to convey information
for particular purposes: to explain, to describe, to teach, to persuade, and more. Designing your document
effectively ensures that readers understand how to use it. Well-designed documents help readers navigate
information, and that is why document design is one of the basic skill sets required of technical writers.

The foremost purpose of any document is to be read. Choosing effective document design enhances
the readability of your document so that your document is more likely to achieve its intended
purpose. Choose document design elements that make your document user-friendly for the target audience.
Keep in mind that people read technical writing because they need to - they need the information. Your job as
the document designer is to make their reading process easy, clear, useful and efficient by using all the design
tools at your disposal.

For print documents, technical communicators usually focus on page design--text size, font type, color,
sections with headers, and the placement of text and images on the page. For online documents, some of the
design elements are the same, but there are additional elements to consider, such as navigation bars, headers
and footers, search pages, links, and FAQ lists.

The following video from Gregg Learning, "What You Need to Know About Business Document Design,"
provides a good introduction to the basic elements of document design:
                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 173

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=343#video-343-1

Visual Design Choices

Visuals can help make abstract concepts concrete for readers; therefore, as a technical communicator, it is vital
to know how to use visuals to your advantage. Visuals can work to help readers see what something looks
like without having to describe it in writing, such as photos, illustrations, and maps. Visuals can also be
effective in representing data, such as quantities or financial information, by using visually-pleasing and easy-
to-understand tables, charts, and graphs. Technical communicators also use visual tools, such as flowcharts,
Gantt charts, diagrams, and infographics, to help readers understand processes or relationships.
The principles of good technical writing--clarity, conciseness, directness, etc.--are equally important to
consider when using visuals. Much of what's been discussed so far about assessing audience and
understanding purpose in writing also applies to using visuals. Clear visuals with appropriate context can
help readers focus on key elements of your document. Visuals without appropriate context run the risk of
being misunderstood; even the best-looking visual will not help if your reader doesn't understand what it is or
why it is there.
Watch the following video, "Using Graphics in Technical Documents" by Clinton Lanier, for more
information on using visuals effectively:

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=343#oembed-1
174 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

Integrating Visuals in Technical Writing Documents5

Graphics can take many forms--tables, charts, photographs, drawings, to name a few--but their purpose
rarely varies: they should help to clarify information presented in the report. Graphics can break up a text-
heavy report, making the report more visually appealing. They should work together with the text to
communicate, rather than replacing the text altogether.

As you begin thinking about possible visuals to include in your document, the first step is to consider which
graphics are most appropriate for the message you want to convey. The table below provides some general
guidelines on the graphics most suitable to convey specific types of information.

           Table 10.4: Choosing Graphics to Convey Information

Information to Convey               Visual Type

Numbers, percentages, categories    Tables, charts

Processes                           Flow charts

Geographic data                     Maps

Chronological or prioritized lists  Numbered lists

Non-chronological lists             Bulleted lists

Integrating Visuals

In general, whenever you integrate any kind of visual into your documents, you should adhere to five key rules.

 1. Give each visual a numbered caption and title.
 2. Refer to the caption number within the body text and discuss its content.
 3. Label all units (x and y axes, legends, column box heads, parts of diagrams, etc.).
 4. Provide the source of the data and/or visual image if you did not create it yourself.
 5. Avoid distorting the data or image.

Visual elements should also be surrounded with sufficient passive space (or "white space") to emphasize the
image and enhance its readability. If using someone else's image, make sure all elements are clear and the print
size is readable.

5. Based on Will Fleming "Chapter 3: Design and Visuals," in Technical Writing at LBCC and Katrina Peterson's "Chapter 5: Document Design," in
  Technical and Professional Writing Genres: A Study in Theory and Practice
                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 175

After carefully choosing your visuals, you should work to integrate them strategically into your text. In
outlining and planning phases, begin by considering the best or most appropriate locations for your visuals.
Some writers find it helpful to note areas where a visual might help readers better understand data, ideas, or a
concept; once a draft is complete, the writer can then return to these "markers" to help plan the placement of
their visuals. Some technical communicators will create a rough sketch of their visual, while others jot down
some basic information about its contents.

Guidelines for Integrating Visuals

The following guidelines will help you effectively integrate, position, and identify your visuals to maintain
consistency and uniformity:

  · Keep visuals relatively simple: include only the information needed for discussion; remove any
      unnecessary labels, boxes, and lines.

  · Position text horizontally: any explanatory text for the visual should be placed horizontally with
      adequate white space around the visual.

  · Make sure that:
          Units of measurement are specified,
          Relative sizes are clear, and
          Distances are explained or indicated where appropriate.

  · Use consistent terminology and formatting for visual documentation: once you choose a format
      for integrating your visuals into your text, be sure to label them consistently throughout the report, so
      that readers become familiar with the layout and know what to expect.

Preparing Readers for Graphics

When developing graphics, you will want to consider where they should be placed and what information
should surround them. To prepare readers for the information a graphic conveys, also consider these tips:

  · Explain or introduce the information/topic of the graphic in the preceding paragraph.
  · For easy reference, give each visual a title.
  · Make sure the information within the graphic is clear and easy to understand.
  · Include a caption or follow-up text after the graphic, such as an interpretation or a final comment about

      the implications of the visual. If the graphic contains extensive data, you may need to tell your audience
      what information to focus on.
  · Intersperse graphics and text on the same page. Avoid placing graphics on pages by themselves; ideally,
      no visual should take up more than one-third of a page unless absolutely necessary. If a graphic does not
      fit on the same page, indicate that it appears on the next page.
176 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

  · Include identifying details within the graphics such as illustration labels, axis labels, keys, and so on.

Captions and Callouts

Captions and callouts contain information that help readers to interpret graphics. Whereas captions are short
phrases or sentences that describe the graphic, callouts (or labels) are used when parts of the image need to be
labeled or each part requires a longer explanation. You can learn more about how to use both of these graphics
integration options below.

Writing Style for Captions

Captions for graphics should be placed immediately under the graphic; they include the title and any
explanatory material. Good captions guide readers not only to see, but also to understand.

The FranklinCovey Style Guide for Business and Technical Communication (5th edition) provides five
recommendations for caption writing style.

 1. Use interpretive captions. Interpretive captions provide a title and explanatory information to help
      readers understand the message that the writer wants to convey. Example: "Figure 23-Check Valve.
      The risk of bad air entering the changer is near zero because the check valve permits air flow in one
      direction only." The caption states clearly what the writer wants the reader to learn from the drawing.

 2. Avoid short or ambiguous titles. Make sure that you give each image a title that provides information
      to the reader. Specifically, you want your reader to be able to understand the purpose of the image
      through the title and caption.

 3. Number figures and tables. Use the word "Figure" or "Table," and start with number 1. Place the
      number before the caption. Example: "Figure 1-caption."

 4. Place captions thoughtfully. Captions can appear above or below a visual, but consistency
      throughout the document is critical. Choose one, know the rational for your choice, and make sure that
      all images are captioned in the same way.

Guidelines for Callouts

Callouts are labels placed on a graphic that help a reader to understand the parts of the image.

Here are a few guidelines for writing successful callouts:

  · Determine the number of items to identify in the image. Depending on the complexity
      of the image, you may have a lot of callouts to place. Think carefully about how many
      callouts to use, and balance that with your understanding of your reader's knowledge level
                                                                                     CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH | 177

      and the purpose of your image.
  · Use the same terms on the callout as in the text. Remember that, even if you use

      callouts, you need to explain the image to your readers. If you call a part a "safety valve" in
      the callout, make sure you also call it a safety valve in your text. This helps the reader make
      the appropriate connections between the image and the text.
  · Use a standard font and size for readability. Even if you have a lot of callouts to place,
      you should make sure that the font is large enough and clear enough that readers can clearly
      see the text.
  · Place callouts next to the elements in the graphic they identify, using a line to
      connect the two, if necessary. Make sure that your readers can understand exactly which
      part of the image your callout is meant to identify. This can be especially important in highly
      technical drawings or diagrams.
The following graphic (Figure 10.1) adopts a consistent visual style in the way that it identifies the parts of a
locomotive (a relatively complex machine). Labels are placed directly next to the graphic, connected by lines.
The title is placed above rather than below the visual for easy differentiation from the callouts.

       Figure 10.1: Locomotive graphic with a label and additional callouts.

Conclusion

This chapter should give you a clear sense of how to create a report that thinks carefully about audience,
purpose, and context. Being able to tailor researched information for such audiences is a skill that will serve you
well, both during your time in college and once you join a workplace. Thinking about how to utilize research is
178 | CHAPTER 10: SYNTHESIZE AND REPORT RESEARCH

a common technical communication problem, so practicing now will give you an opportunity to understand
the process of problem-solving in the field.

Once you have completed your problem primer, you and your groupmates will reconvene, share your research,
and decide how to move forward on a collaborative grant proposal.

References

"Basic Information about Lead in Drinking Water." (2025). EPA.gov. Retrieved 3 July 2025, from
https://www.epa.gov/ground-water-and-drinking-water/basic-information-about-lead-drinking-water.

Bursi-Amba, Armelle, Aline, Ea, Romain Gaullier, and Manoela Santdiran. (2016). Infographics: A tool for
technical writers? UFR d'etude interculturelle de langues appliquees. Retrieved 16 July 2025, from
https://uark.pressbooks.pub/app/uploads/sites/99/2020/05/Infographic-Article.pdf.

Covey, Stephen R. (2012). FranklinCovey Style Guide: For Business and Technical Communication (5th
Edition). Pearson FT Press.

GreggU. (2015). "What You Need to Know about Business Document Design." YouTube. Retrieved 5 July
2025, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFU6or8MAKA.

Lanier, Clinton. (2016). "Using Graphics in Technical Documents." YouTube. Retrieved 5 July 2025, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O8jDA88ZLqU.

Perelman, Leslie C., Edward Barrett, and James Paradis. (YR). Timetables (Gantt charts). In Mayfield electronic
handbook of technical and scientific writing. Retrieved 16 July 2025, from https://web.mit.edu/course/21/
21.guide/grf-ttab.htm.

"Synthesizing Sources." (n.d.). Center for Scholarly Communication, Indiana University of Pennsylvania.
Retrieved 3 July 2025, from https://www.iup.edu/scholarlycommunication/our-writing-resources/
synthesizing-sources.html.

"Writing a Research Paper: Synthesizing Sources." (2025). MacPháidín Library, Stonehill College. Retrieved 3
July 2025, from https://libguides.stonehill.edu/writing_a_research_paper/synthesis.
                                                                                          PROJECT 4: COLLABORATIVE GRANT PROPOSAL | 179

PROJECT 4: COLLABORATIVE GRANT
PROPOSAL

   Kat Gray

                  Project 4 Assignment Sheet

The purpose of this project is to develop a collaborative grant proposal and remix your work for a public
community audience. When you have completed your Problem Primers, you will work together as a group to
propose a solution to the UArk Cares Foundation. Once you review one another's findings, you will decide
on one project to propose and write a detailed plan for this project. You will also remix this research for a
community audience - the same community to which you spoke for project 3. The revised draft of your grant
proposal should be 7-9 pages double-spaced, or around 1800-2200 words.

Completion Requirements:

  · Collaborative grant proposal (1800-2200 words)
  · Multimodal research remix
  · Project transmittal letter

Project Steps

To begin this project, you will review your findings from Project 3. Together, you and your group will
decide on a specific problem for which to propose a solution, using the UArk Cares Foundation Community
Improvement Grant as a way to generate ideas. You will collaborate on two ways to present your research: a
grant proposal to a granting foundation, and a multimodal remix of your research for a community audience.

Design Memos

At the end of Weeks 11 and 12, you will co-write Design Memos, which update your instructor on the progress
of your project and describe how you are designing your project for a specific rhetorical situation. You may also
use these memos to describe any questions or problems you are having as you work through your project.
180 | PROJECT 4: COLLABORATIVE GRANT PROPOSAL

During Weeks 12, 13, and 14, you will work on drafting and revising the two major components of your
project: the Collaborative Grant Proposal and the Multimodal Remix, described below.

Collaborative Grant Proposal

The Collaborative Grant Proposal should propose a community project that addresses the problem you
researched during Project 3. This document communicates the results of your research to your audience in
support of a specific plan to address your problem - one that aligns with community needs. The completed
report should be 7-10 pages.

Multimodal Remix

During Week 13, you and your group will compose a multimodal remix of your Collaborative Grant Proposal
for an audience of relevant community members. As a remix, your work should be reformatted, revised, and
reimagined for a new audience and purpose. The multimodal remix will include the use of different modes,
including sound and images, in addition to written text. For example, you might transform your grant proposal
into a public service announcement about a problem, or you might repurpose the literature review of your
grant proposal into an informative social media carousel. You will discuss the process of writing and designing
your multimodal remix in the transmittal letter due during Week 14.

Transmittal Letter

Finally, during Week 14, you and your group will revise your drafts based on feedback from your instructor and
peers. You will create a transmittal letter for your project that explains your group's goals, choices, and writing
and revision processes. This letter will accompany the final draft of Project 4.

Content and Design Tips

For help understanding this assignment and what types of content you might create for it, please visit the
following resources:

  · Chapter 11: Create a Grant Proposal
  · Chapter 12: Remix Research for a Public Audience
  · Chapter 13: Write a Transmittal Letter

Please upload your grant proposal as a single pdf file. Every submission should include:
                                                                                      PROJECT 4: COLLABORATIVE GRANT PROPOSAL | 181

· Name and contact information
· Transmittal letter

       Explains your group's process and goals for your grant proposal
       Explains your group's process of creating your research remix and making decisions about how to

         communicate with a public audience
       Details feedback received and revisions made
· Project description
       Introduction
       Purpose
       Community stakeholders
       Funding request and plans for use
       Anticipated outcomes
· Budget for project
· References
· Relevant appendices
       Research remix
· Resume/CV of grant applicant(s)

Due Dates

                 Project Due Dates

Project Stage           Due

Group Research Design   [WEEK 10]

Design Memos x2         [WEEK 11, WEEK 12]

Proposal Draft          [WEEK 12-13]

Multimodal Remix Draft  [WEEK 13]

Peer Review             [WEEK 14]

Final Draft with Transmittal Letter [WEEK 14]

Final Submission Checklist

[Give instructions to students on how to format their assignments here.]

  · Collaborative Grant Proposal
  · Multimodal Remix Draft
182 | PROJECT 4: COLLABORATIVE GRANT PROPOSAL

  · Transmittal Letter
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 183

 CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

    Kat Gray; Allison Gross; Annemarie Hamlin; Billy Merck; Chris Rubio; Michele
    DeSilva; and Suzan Last

 Introduction1

  In a technical writing course, a proposal assignment is an opportunity for you to present an idea to a specific,
  named audience (in this case, the UArk Cares Foundation) about an idea you have to solve a problem or
  improve an experience. Whatever topic you choose, you must be able to conduct thorough research and
  integrate it into your final proposal.
  To begin planning a proposal, remember the basic definition: a proposal is an offer or bid to complete a
  project for someone. Proposals may contain other elements--technical background, recommendations, results
  of surveys, information about feasibility, and so on. But what makes a proposal a proposal is that it asks the
  audience to approve, fund, or grant permission to do the proposed project. Think about what sorts of information
  your audience will need in order to feel confident having your complete the project.
  In this chapter, you will learn about how to create a collaborative grant proposal. In the first section of the
  chapter, you will learn what proposals are, and how you can plan a proposal with your rhetorical situation
  in mind. Additionally, you will learn proposal genre conventions and the parts you are required to include in
  your fourth project. In the second section of the chapter, you will learn about collaborative writing projects,
  including a workflow or process for collaborative writing, conflict management tips, and documents and tools
  that will help you to manage the work of a group project. Finally, the chapter briefly outlines the second type
  of progress report you will be asked to write in this class: the design memo.

 Writing a Proposal2

  To understand how to write your grant proposal, you will first want to have a good understanding of what

1. Based on Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, and Michele DeSilva, "Chapter 3.1: Some Preliminaries," in Technical Writing.
2. Based on Suzan Last's "Chapter 7.2: Proposals," in Technical Writing Essentials.
  184 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

  types of documents proposals are, and how they function rhetorically. Once you have this information, you
  will learn about the parts your group should include in your proposal for project 4.

 What are Proposals and What Do They Do?

  Proposals attempt to persuade the reader to accept the writer's proposed idea. The writer tries to convince
  the reader that the proposed plan or project is worth doing (worth the time, energy, and expense necessary to
  implement or see through), that the author represents the best candidate for implementing the idea, and that
  it will result in tangible benefits for all stakeholders.

  Proposals are often written in response to a Request For Proposals (RFP) by a government agency,
  organization, or company3. The requesting body receives multiple proposals responding to their request,
  reviews the submitted proposals, and chooses the best one(s) to go forward. Their evaluation of the submitted
  proposals is often based on a rubric that grades various elements of the proposals. Thus, your proposal must
  persuade the reader that your idea is the one most worth pursuing. These might include proposals to:

     · Perform a task (such as conducting a feasibility study, a research project, etc.)
     · Provide a product
     · Provide a service

  To do this rhetorical work, proposals must be convincing, logical, and credible. Next, you'll learn about how
  to incorporate your understanding of the rhetorical situation (audience, purpose, and context) into proposal
  writing.

 The Rhetoric of Proposals4

  Technical writing is a highly rhetorical practice - that is, every technical writer must write with the audience,
  purpose, and context of a particular document in mind. Because of the way technical writing audiences
  interact with documents, it is critical to know both their needs and your own purpose.

  To consider the rhetorical situation, we will focus on three primary areas: audience (the people who will

3. For this project, you will respond to the UArk Cares Community Foundation Grant RFP, located here.
4. Based on Will Fleming's "Chapter 7.3: Proposals," in Technical Writing at LBCC, Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, and Michele DeSilva's

  "Chapter 3.6: Proposals and Audience," in Technical Writing, and Staci Bettes' "Chapter 9.3: Proposal Purpose and Audience," in Technical and
  Professional Writing Genres.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 185

read or interact with your document); purpose (the reason you are creating the document); and context
(the situation in which the document will be used). Thinking carefully about these elements gives you a firm
foundation from which to begin writing your proposal.

The questions below will help you to articulate the rhetorical situation for your documents:

  · Audience. Define who your reader is, and sketch out some of their qualities before you start drafting. If
      your readers are preteens, for example, you'll create a different kind of recipe than if you wrote for adults.
      Knowing who your readers are will help you effectively persuade the reader to approve your proposed
      project and guide to you shape the type of information you include in your proposal. Ask yourself:
          Who is your reader?: Your reader should be someone with decision-making authority over your
            problem - an action-taker in a community, organization, business, or agency.
          What type of reader are they?: Are they experts, technicians, executives, non-specialists, etc.?
          What is their knowledge of the topic?: What are the readers' needs and interests? What will persuade
            them to approve your proposed idea?

  · Purpose. Knowing your purpose means having a clear understanding of all the reasons you are writing.
      That is, technical writing documents usually have a primary purpose - perhaps to help a customer put
      together a flat-pack bookshelf. But they may also have one or more secondary purposes, like maintaining
      a good relationship with customers by providing clear, effective assembly instructions. Make notes on
      the following:
          What is the primary reason you are creating this document?: Often, technical writers want to
            inform, teach, or help a reader accomplish a task. However, your primary aim might also be to sell
            an item or to persuade someone to fund your project.
          What are the secondary reasons for creating this document?: Do you want to show customers that
            you are taking a problem seriously? Do you want to show your organization is an industry leader
            by publishing work on a cutting-edge technology that none of your competitors have researched?
          Why are your users interacting with this document?: Do your users need to learn something? Do
            they need to complete a task? Do they need to make a decision? Be as specific as possible about why
            they are using your document.

  · Context. You should have a clear understanding of the situation in which your work will be used. The
      context is the situation in the world in which your document will be utilized for a particular purpose.
      Understanding the context can often help you understand critical design elements - for example, if you
      are creating a set of life jacket instructions to go on a boat, you might want to laminate them to prevent
      them from being damaged by water. You will need to understand:
          How and when will your document be used?: Under what circumstances will users use this
            document? For example, users might use an air compressor for a flat tire under fairly stressful
            circumstances, so any instructions will need to take that into consideration to be effective.
          What challenges could a user encounter with your document?: Here, you might especially think
  186 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

              about the physical design of a document. Will a small booklet get lost? Will a large, fold-out poster
              take up too much space in a small office?
            How can you make sure your document is accessible to its audience?: In short, how can you make sure
              that the people who need the information in your document both a) get that information, and b)
              can understand it clearly?

 Parts of a Proposal5

  Proposals are common technical writing documents and, as such, have fairly solidified genre conventions. That
  is, most documents called "proposals" have the same characteristics - they are divided into the same sections,
  and they have similar visual design. The particulars of a proposal will vary depending on the circumstance. An
  organization you work for might have a template you are asked to use for a proposal. A request for proposals
  might specify which sections you should contain in your proposal. Or, you might have to determine for
  yourself which sections are most appropriate for your project.

  The sections below present a brief overview of the required sections for Project 4. You should check with your
  instructor for more specific information about what to include in your proposal.

 Title Page

  You should design a title page for your grant proposal that includes, at minimum, the title of your grant
  proposal, the name and contact information of each group member, and the date you are submitting the
  document. As with your problem primer, the title page of your report is an opportunity for you to use
  document design to emphasize your message. Consider visuals, fonts, and the placement of the required
  elements as a way to effectively prepare your audience to engage with your proposal.

 Transmittal Letter

  The transmittal letter is a subgenre of professional correspondence that often accompanies a proposal being
  sent to an outside organization, such as a granting organization, another company, or a government office. In
  general, a transmittal letter briefly explains the purposes and goals of your grant proposal and orients the reader
  to the contents of your submitted package of documents. In the transmittal letter for Project 4, you will also
  account for your group's work process and detail the feedback received and revisions made.

5. Based on Suzan Last's "Chapter 7.2: Proposals," in Technical Writing Essentials and Staci Bettes' "Chapter 9.4/9.5: Common Proposal Sections
  and Project-Specific Sections," in Technical and Professional Writing Genres
                                                               CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 187

You can read more about the transmittal letter in Chapter 13.

Introduction

The introduction of your proposal is an opportunity to engage your audience with your topic and prepare
them for what is ahead in the document. Remember that the objective of this grant proposal is to convince the
UArk Cares Foundation to fund your project, so the introduction of your project is a space to make a good first
impression. You should also try to engage your readers: get their attention with an interesting story, surprising
statistic, or a question you want the reader to think about.

Your introduction section should also include a problem description. You should explain to your reader what
brought about the need for the project--introduce, then state and discuss the problem, including what the
basic situation is and what opportunities exist for improving things. It is helpful to cover the 5 Ws of the
problem (who, what, where, when, and why).

You may also want to include background information on the problem. Some proposal audiences may
understand the problem very well, but the background information allows you to focus the audience on your
particular view of the problem. You might describe the causes of the problems, previous solutions to the
problem, and the consequences--both short and long term--of leaving the situation unaddressed. Giving the
background of the problem helps convince the audience that the problem or opportunity exists, has urgency,
and should be addressed in a timely manner.

Stakeholder/Client Analysis

Describe the stakeholders or clients for the project - the people who will be most affected by the solution you
offer in your document. You may need to discuss for whom the proposal is designed in some detail. Be prepared
to pull on information from your community profile and problem primer as necessary.

Solution, Budget, and Schedule

You will need to include a section that focuses on the specific solution you would like the UArk Cares
Foundation to fund. In most proposals, you will need to explain the process for completing the proposed
work. This acts as an additional persuasive element; it shows the audience you have a sound, thoughtful
approach to the project. You might also describe how the solution will function in day-to-day operation for the
stakeholders, audience members, and involved organizations.

This proposal should also contain details about the costs of the project. You will need to think about the costs
of equipment and supplies, the hourly rates of workers you may need for the project, and their project hours.
188 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

You may have to do extra research to find out the specific costs of your project, but the more specific you can
be, the more persuasive your proposal. Remember to stay within the call for proposals limit of $25,000 per
project.

Finally, this section should include a project schedule that shows not only the projected completion date
but also key milestones for the project. If you are doing a project over an extended amount of time, the
timeline should also show dates on which you will deliver progress reports. It may be helpful to back plan your
schedule--work backwards from your due date to set important deadlines. If you cannot cite specific dates,
estimate amounts of time for each phase of the project.

You can use your problem primer and pilot study research to help you fill out information in this section, but
you should adapt this material to fit with the requirements and specific rhetorical situation of Project 4.

Conclusion: Anticipated Outcomes

You should also discuss the advantages or benefits of completing the proposed project. Showing the
meaningful benefits of your proposal is an argument in favor of approving the project. Be sure to show that
your solution will result in substantial benefits for the community stakeholders and the granting organization.
Some proposals discuss the likelihood of the project's success. Your stated benefits should appeal to the reader's
wants, needs, and values.

The final paragraph of the proposal should bring readers back to focus on the positive aspects of the project.
You can close by telling the reader how they can contact you to work out the details, reminding them of the
benefits of doing the project, and making one last argument for you or your organization as the right choice
for the project.

References

The references (or works cited, or bibliography) page details all source information you used in your proposal.
You should format this page according to the citation style you and your group have chosen for the proposal.
You should list any sources that you quote, paraphrase, or summarize.

Appendices

Appendices contain information that may be interesting to the reader, but which are not completely necessary
to understand the main idea of the proposal. They may include the full text of your survey questions and
responses, tables of data, a list of your interview questions, or other information that helped shape the project.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 189

Appendices are usually labeled with letters (Appendix A, Appendix B, etc.) and are the last components of the
document.

For this project, you will have at least 2 appendices:

  · Appendix 1: Resume/CV for grant applicants
  · Appendix 2: Research remix

You and your group can add other appendices as needed.

Proposal Samples

The following proposal samples come from David McMurrey's Online Technical Writing textbook:

  · Proposal 1: Elementary School Garden
  · Proposal 2: Nursing Staff Handbook
  · Proposal 3: Student Guide for Solving Engineering Mechanics Problems

Collaborative Writing

For your grant proposal, you will write collaboratively. It's important to have experience creating technical
writing with a group since this is often how such documents are created in a professional workplace. That
is, rarely does one person create a document (for example, a car's user manual); rather, teams work together
to decide what content is needed, how to organize that content, and how to design the document that will
contain it.

Collaborative writing can be challenging, and many of us aren't used to doing it. This section focuses on how
collaborative writing works and how to build the skills necessary for group work. You will find special emphasis
on project management tools and conflict management strategies.
  190 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

 What is Collaborative Writing?6

  Put simply, collaborative writing is the act of writing together. The main goal of collaborative writing is to
  produce the best possible work by including the ideas and skill sets of multiple writers. Collaborative technical
  writing entails the collaborative efforts of a group of people to write documentation, produce images, provide
  subtext, and more, in an effort to bring a project to completion. Members can work in spaces that are face-to-
  face or virtual.

  Teamwork is a key component of almost any workplace, but it is essential in fields or professional environments
  where you often find yourself working as part of a team on large projects. Imagine for a moment how many
  people must work together to design a product like the video game Minecraft (see the list of Credits for the
  team at Mojang Studios). For teamwork to be effective, all members of the team must understand and share
  the goals of the project, and all members must fully understand their roles, including what is expected of them
  and how they will be held accountable. An effective team leader or project manager will make sure that goals
  and roles are fully understood by all team members.

  In Designing Engineers, Susan McCahan et al. (2015) define a team as "a group of people who come together
  to work in an interrelated manner towards a common goal." In order to work effectively, team members need
  to communicate clearly and constructively, and learn how to deal with the conflicts that will inevitably arise.
  In other words, team members see themselves as part of a collective working towards a common goal.

 Collaborative Writing Processes7

  Working as a team to write a document usually means that each individual writes less content. However,
  to create a coherent document written in one voice, teams must plan carefully and revise thoughtfully. Like
  any kind of teamwork, collaborative writing requires the entire team to be focused on a common objective.
  According to Lowry et al. (2004), an effective team "negotiates, coordinates, and communicates during the
  creation of a common document." The collaborative writing process is iterative and social, meaning the team
  works together and moves back and forth between tasks and roles throughout the process.

  Successful collaborative writing is made easier when you understand the collaborative writing strategies you

6. Based on Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, "Chapter 13: Team Project Management
  Tools and Strategies," in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication.

7. Based on Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, "Chapter 13: Collaborative Writing
  Processes," in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication.
                                                                                                   CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 191

can apply, the best ways to manage a document undergoing revisions, and the different roles people can assume.
Figure 11.1 outlines the activities involved with the various stages of the collaborative writing process.

                                                                                                                  Figure 11.1: Four
                                                                                                                  stages of
                                                                                                                  collaborative
                                                                                                                  writing

Collaborative writing strategies are methods a team uses to coordinate the writing of a collaborative
document. There are five main strategies: single-author; sequential; parallel writing: horizontal division;
parallel writing: stratified division; and reactive writing. Each strategy has its advantages and disadvantages.
Effective teams tend to use a combination of collaborative writing strategies for different points of the project.
When planning to switch between writing strategies, it is important to make sure the team is communicating
clearly regarding which strategy will be used for which task. See Table 11.1 (adapted from Last and Neveu,
2019) for a detailed breakdown of these strategies, their advantages, and disadvantages.
192 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

                                          Table 11.1: Collaborative Writing Strategies

Writing Strategy                 When to Use                                Pros             Cons

Single Author                    For simple tasks; when little buy-in is    Efficient;       May not clearly represent
                                 needed; for small groups                   consistent       group's intentions; less
One member writes for the                                                   style            consensus produced
entire group.

Sequential                       For asynchronous work with poor            Easy to          Can lose sense of group;
                                 coordination; when it's hard to meet       organize;        subsequent writers may
Each member is in charge of      often; for straightforward writing tasks;  simplifies       invalidate previous work;
writing a specific part and      small groups                               planning         lack of consensus; version
writes in sequence.                                                                          control issues

Parallel Writing:                When high volume of rapid output is        Efficient; high  Redundant work can be
Horizontal Division              needed; when software can support this     volume of        produced; stylistic
                                 strategy; for easily segmented, mildly     output           differences; doesn't
Members are in charge of         complex writing tasks; for groups with                      recognize individual
writing a specific part but      good structure and coordination; small                      talents well
write in parallel. Segments are  to large groups
distributed randomly.

Parallel Writing: Stratified     For high volume, rapid output; with        Efficient; high  Redundant work can be
Division                         supporting software; for complicated,      volume of        produced; stylistic
                                 difficult-to-segment tasks; when people    quality          differences; potential
Members are in charge of         have different talents/skills; for groups  output; better   information overload
writing a specific part but      with good structure and coordination;      use of
write in parallel. Segments are  small to large groups                      individual
distributed based on talents or                                             talent
skills.

Reactive Writing

Members create a document        Small groups; high levels of creativity;   Can build        Very hard to coordinate;
in real time, while others       high levels of consensus on process and    creativity and   version control issues
review, react, and adjust to     content                                    consensus
each other's changes and
additions without much
preplanning or explicit
coordination.

Document management reflects the approaches used to maintain version control of the document and
describe who is responsible for it. Four main control modes (centralized, relay, independent, and shared) are
listed in Table 11.2, along with their pros and cons.
                                                 CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 193

                          Table 11.2: Document Management Strategies

Mode         Description             Pros                                       Cons

Centralized  When one person         Can be useful for maintaining group        Non-controlling members may
             controls the document   focus and when working toward a strict     feel a lack of ownership or
             throughout the process  deadline                                   control of what goes into the
                                                                                document

Relay        When one person at a    Democratic                                 Less efficient
             time is in charge but
             the control changes in
             the group

Independent  When one person         Useful for remote teams working on         Often requires an editor to pull
             maintains control of    distinct parts                             it together; can reflect a group
             their assigned portion                                             that lacks agreement

Shared       When everyone has       Can be highly effective; non-threatening;  Can lead to conflict, especially
             simultaneous and equal  good for groups working face to face,      in remote or less functional
             privileges              who meet frequently, who have high         groups
                                     levels of trust

Roles refer to the different duties participants might undertake, depending on the activity. In addition to
whatever roles and responsibilities that individual team members performed throughout other stages of the
project, the actual stages of composing and revising the document may require writing-specific roles. Table
11.3 describes several roles within a collaborative writing team. Members of small teams must fill multiple roles
when prewriting, drafting, and revising a document collaboratively.

                          Table 11.3: Collaborative Writing Team Roles

Role         Description

Writer       A person who is responsible for writing a portion of the content

Consultant A person external to the project and who has no ownership or responsibility for producing content, but who offers content and process-related feedback (peer reviewers outside the team; instructor)

Editor       A person who is responsible for the overall content production of the writer, and can make both style
             and content changes; typically has ownership of the content production

Reviewer     A person, internal or external, who provides specific content feedback but is not responsible for making
             changes

Project      A person who is part of the team and may fully participate in authoring and reviewing the content, but
Manager      who also leads the team through the processes, planning, rewarding, and motivating

Facilitator A person external to the team who leads the team through processes but doesn't give content related feedback
  194 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

 Conflict Management8

  Whenever people work together in teams, conflicts are bound to arise - and this is okay. Some conflict, if
  managed effectively, can be productive and lead to unexpected innovations. Poorly managed conflict, however,
  can be detrimental, and can even derail a team and the project entirely.

  Often, conflict arises from confusion over team members' roles and team goals. For example, if one team
  member's goal is to get an A+ on the project, and another's is to simply pass, their goals are misaligned, and
  this will show in work ethic and commitment to the project. If team members do not share the same goals, or
  if members are unsure of what their role is in the team, this can lead to anxiety, confusion, or even anger. This
  in turn can cause unproductive behaviors like isolating (breaking away from the team and just doing work on
  your own), hijacking (taking over the project without consulting with the team), or hitchhiking (just coming
  along for the ride, but not contributing).

  The first strategy for dealing with team conflict is to develop systems that help to prevent conflict where
  possible. You can do this by creating clear team guidelines and expectations. Creating a Team Charter can
  help you define team goals, expectations for equitable contribution, and procedures for communicating and
  producing work. You can also define problem-solving approaches that your team will use when conflicts arise.

  Even with these preventative measures, however, conflict is bound to come up. So you need to have some
  strategies for managing it effectively when it does arise. Here is a list of some approaches to keep in your tool
  box:

   1. Acknowledge and value differences. Recognize your team members' various strengths and
        weaknesses. Play to your team's strengths, while acknowledging and trying to improve on your
        weaknesses.

   2. Value compromises. Don't get side-tracked by minor differences of opinion or approach that don't
        have a significant effect on the project. Be willing to make some compromises for the good of the team
        and the project.

   3. Advocate for yourself and your ideas. Keep in mind that compromise does not always lead to the best
        solution. Be a strong, but diplomatic advocate for what you think is the best approach. Persuade, but
        don't bully.

   4. Don't ignore problems or conflicts. Communicate issues quickly and directly with the whole team.
        Don't "silo" (break up into smaller teams of us vs. them).

   5. Focus on interests over positions. That is, focus on the best interests of the team rather than "your

8. Based on Suzan Last's "Chapter 4.4: Managing Team Conflict," in Technical Writing Essentials.
                                                                                                     CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 195

        position" vs. "my position." Try using a debate or a pros and cons discussion to talk through ideas in a
        structured way.
   6. Separate the people from the problem. Avoid the "blame game" - don't dwell on past actions and
        consequences. Focus on coming up with solutions that benefit the whole team and allow you to
        complete your project.

  Above all, when you communicate with your group members, you should practice generous interpretation
  with your team members. Ellen Carillo (2018) describes generous reading as "an offering of kindness from
  reader to writer." When we read and interpret generously, we go beyond "remaining open" to the message;
  we commit to kindness as a way to "engage in more productive dialogue across political and related divides"
  (Carillo, 2018). Interpreting your classmates generously is a way to work through differences and conflicts with
  an understanding that you are, in this case, working towards a common goal.

  If your conflict management strategies are not working as well as you'd like, consult with your instructor for
  additional support - before it's too late to solve the problem. Your instructor will have additional "managerial"
  tools to help deal with the problem that are not necessarily available to you as students.

 Documents and Tools for Collaborative Writing9

  Though group work can be challenging, there are a wide variety of strategies for managing that work, and
  it is to those strategies we now turn. Below, you will learn about tools that teams can use to improve their
  functioning and productivity. The following list provides a number of examples - you can also use the links in
  this list to download blank templates of each document for use during your group projects.

     · Team Charter: Identifies rules and expectations agreed upon by the team, as well as individual member
        roles.

     · Meeting-Related Documents
            Meeting Agenda: Outlines main points for discussion at a meeting.
            Meeting Minutes: Records decisions and relevant discussion points for a meeting.

     · Work Log: Records the tasks and time spent for each team member.
     · GanttChart or TaskSchedule: Breaks down tasks and their estimated duration over the work period.

9. Based on Matt McKinney, Kalani Pattison, Sarah LeMire, Kathy Anders, and Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, "Chapter 13: Documents and Tools
  to Improve Team Effectiveness," and "Chapter 18: Designing and Formatting Proposals," in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional
  Communication.
196 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

Team Charter

While all members of a project team may be working toward the same goals, they may have different visions of
what a successful and productive team dynamic looks like. Each member also knows their schedules, strengths,
and weaknesses better than the others. Further still, it is impossible to predict what difficulties may emerge as
the team works toward their project goals.

Composing a team charter (sometimes called a group contract) is an effective strategy for addressing potential
obstacles to group harmony and goal fulfillment. This is because a well-crafted team charter ensures that every
team member articulates and negotiates their expectations with the group from the beginning.

A comprehensive yet adaptable team charter should be drafted and agreed upon by all members, and should
address the following concerns:

  · Member roles and responsibilities. These should be clearly defined, with some flexibility to avoid an
      overly rigid hierarchy (such as members alternating secretarial and management roles).

  · Group member expectations. These are expectations both in completing the work and engaging in
      discussion on the project. There should also be discussion of consequences for failing to meet
      expectations, as it is best to determine consequences before something negative occurs.

  · Procedures for conflict resolution and amending the charter. These procedures could include
      protocol for addressing disagreements and dealing with a member who disappears.

  · A work schedule or task schedule and timeline. This should cover when members are and are not
      available, deadlines for different project components, and when/how often group members are expected
      to meet.

  · Division of labor on project deliverables. These details include who will work on presentation
      visuals, what sections of a written report will be drafted by whom, and how the editing and revising will
      occur. These tasks should be clearly articulated and fairly distributed.

Meeting-Related Documents

A meeting is a group communication around a defined agenda, at a set time, for an established
duration. Meetings can occur face-to-face, but increasingly business and industry are turning to
teleconferencing and videoconferencing options. For instance, during the COVID-19 outbreak of 2020-2021,
nearly all meetings went virtual. You should choose the meeting method that works best for all group members
- you may have to compromise here to find a way for everyone to meet.
                                                                 CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 197

Meeting Agenda

Regardless of how you come together as a team, group, or committee, you will need to define your purpose in
advance with an agenda. The agenda is the plan for what you want to discuss and accomplish at the meeting.
It is usually made up of a list of items, sometimes with a time frame for each item. A meeting also should have
a chair (the person who keeps things on track) and a recorder (who records what happens and what decisions
are made).

The main parts of an agenda for a standard meeting are listed in Table 11.4, below.

                                    Table 11.4: Meeting Agenda Elements

Term         Definition

Title Header Title, time, date, location, phone number, email contact, and any other information necessary to get all participants together.

Participants Expected participants

Subject Line Purpose statement

Call to Order Who will call the meeting to order?

Introductions If everyone is new, this is optional. If even one person is new, everyone should briefly introduce themselves with their name and respective roles.

Roll Call    A group recorder reviews who is in attendance at the meeting. This may quietly take place while
             introductions are made.

Reading of   Notes from the last meeting are read (if applicable) with an opportunity to correct. These are often
the Minutes  sent out before the meeting so participants have the opportunity to review them and note any needed
             corrections.

Old Business List any unresolved issues from last time or issues that were "tabled," or left until this meeting.

New Business This is a list of items for discussion and action.

Reports      This is optional and applies if there are subcommittees or groups working on specific, individual
             action items that require reports to the group or committee.

Adjournment This is the official conclusion of the meeting. Note time, date, and place and indicate when the next meeting is scheduled.

For maximum effectiveness, agendas need to be distributed to all participants before the meeting, with enough
time for people to respond and add items that they feel are necessary. Even if agendas aren't required in less
formal team settings, they are often a good idea to implement, as they help make sure that meetings are
productive. See Table 11.5 for a sample meeting agenda.
198 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

                                                    Table 11.5: Sample agenda.
                                  ENGL 210 Team Meeting Agenda
                                  Date:

                                  Place and Time:
                                  Members:

                                    · Updates from each team member (progress) (5 min each)
                                    · Develop work plan for upcoming week (15 min)
                                    · Determine next week meeting time (5 min)
                                    · Work on Milestone 3 together (45 min)
                                    · Matters arising

Meeting Minutes

Minutes record what decisions were made and what important topics were discussed in a meeting. One person
is responsible for recording the events of the meeting and distributing the minutes to each member, usually via
email or a shared cloud folder. That way, no one should forget what tasks they agreed to complete and when.
Minutes help projects stay on task. For instance, when all team members have a record of key decisions and
discussion points, they do not need to repeat the same discussions at future meetings. In another example, if
team members volunteer for a specific task during a meeting, creating and distributing minutes helps everyone
involved remember what they are supposed to do. Table 11.6 contains an example of meeting minutes.
                                                                                   CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 199

                                        Table 11.6. Sample minutes
ENGL 210 Team Meeting Minutes
Thursday Feb. 15, 2016
Cle A035, 3:30-4:45Present: Jamie, Chris, Renee
Regrets: Joe is absent

  · All team members have completed last week's work plan (Joe emailed a report but is out today)
  · In the coming week, we plan to complete the following:

Task                              Who will do it?

1. Interview Facilities Management contact Renee

2. Research bike share programs   (Joe?)

3. Design a survey/questionnaire  Chris

4. Do a site visit                Jamie

· Next meeting: next Thursday Feb 21, after class
· Excellent progress during meeting; Joe will follow up on researching bike share programs.
· Meeting adjourned 4:50

Strategies for Effective Meetings

To promote an efficient, effective group meeting, keep the following strategies in mind:

  · Schedule meetings in Teams, Google Calendar, or a similar program so that every team member receives
      a meeting reminder.

  · Send out the agenda for the current meeting in advance.
  · Send out reminders for the meeting the day before the meeting.
  · Start and end your meetings on time.
  · Assign someone to take notes that can be converted into minutes. Distribute minutes soon after the

      meeting.
  · Refer to the meeting agenda to reinforce time-frames and tasks.
200 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

  · If you are the chair, or leader, of a meeting, keep the discussion on track. Don't hesitate to restate a point
      or ask a question to redirect the attention to the agenda points.

  · Communicate your respect and appreciate for everyone's time and effort.
  · Clearly communicate the time, date, and location for the next meeting.

It may also be useful to consult a source like Robert's Rules of Order to learn more about parliamentary
procedure. Parliamentary procedure is a set of rules and procedures that organizations and groups can use to
run meetings and make decisions.

Work Log

A work log is a common document used in the workplace to keep track of what work is done, by whom, and
how long it took. A work log is helpful for keeping a team on track and ensuring equitable workloads. To
ensure accountability, have each team member sign off on the work log. See Table 11.7 for an example of a
work log.

                    Table 11.7: Sample work log

          Work Log

          Date Task Description Assigned to Status / Date Completed Total Time Spent

                    Team signatures:
                    Name: _____________________________
                    Name: _____________________________
                    Name: _____________________________
                    Name: _____________________________

Task Schedules and Gantt Charts

There are several different types of timelines or schedules that can be used to map out a project schedule. The
simplest are lists of dates and deadlines. More complex projects, in which tasks vary in duration and must be
worked on simultaneously or depending on the completion of other tasks, may benefit more from a Gantt
chart.
                                                           CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 201

Task Schedule

A task schedule allows team members to plan tasks and their subtasks, as well as distribute responsibilities.
Task schedules are often merely tables or checklists. Similar to work logs, task schedules also provide a way of
marking when tasks are finished and of keeping track individuals' various levels of contribution. This schedule
should include all research and writing tasks for a project and might have overlapping due dates for subtasks.

For instance, take a look at Table 11.8, which provides a sample task schedule. This section breaks down
conducting a survey into various subtasks and identifies which team member will complete each subtask. Note
that this task schedule identifies numerical weights for each task. These contribution values indicate the relative
difficulty, complexity, and time consumption of each task. The task schedule is meant to be a living document
that keeps every team member on the same page regarding internal deadlines, the responsibilities of team
members, and how far the project has progressed.

                                     Table 11.8: Sample Task Schedule

Due    Task Team Member                                                Contribution  Status
Date                                                                   Weight
10/2   Create survey questions.                            Mark        4             Done
10/3                                                                   2
10/4   Test survey.                                        Brian and   1             Done
10/5                                                       Mark        3
                                                                                     Done
10/18  Revise and proofread survey.                        Cathy       4             In
                                                                                     progress
10/20  Distribute survey.                                  Sarah       3

       Close survey and collate answers.                   Sarah and
                                                           Brian
       Analyze answers and synthesize with other research
       results.                                            Cathy

Gantt Chart

Gantt charts are another way of visually depicting task timelines within a project. They are created using tables.
Typically, the columns represent units of time such as weeks, days, or even months, depending on the duration
of the project. Each row represents a specific task or sub-task, presented in order of anticipated completion.
Complex Gantt charts may also depict subtasks within other tasks, as well as how tasks are dependent on each
other.

Gantt charts are useful tools when planning complex and interdependent tasks. They are also useful for
breaking larger tasks into subtasks. More complex Gantt charts may indicate a team member's task
responsibility and other details. Gantt charts may be created by using Excel or Google Sheets, by using the table
202 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

creation option in a word processor, or by using programs and software specifically intended for creating Gantt
charts.
Consider the following simple example of a Gantt chart in Figure 11.2, which gives the steps in planning an
international trip. The length of the tasks in weeks has been determined by factors such as the average time for
passport renewal. This chart presents a relatively simple outline of tasks. For instance, the task of buying airline
tickets could be broken into multiple steps or subtasks, including looking at specific websites, trying different
days and nearby airports, and so on.

Figure 11.2: Gantt chart for planning an international trip. (Alternative PDF version: Figure 11.4.)

Note: Darker cells indicate completed tasks, while lighter cells indicate tasks yet to be started.
Let's break down the timeline of tasks in the example Gantt chart above.

  · Task One. Several weeks are allotted for renewing a passport, which, under normal circumstances, takes
      6-8 weeks.

  · Task Two. It is possible to determine the destination of the trip even before the passport returns, hence
      that task operating concurrently with passport renewal.

  · Task Three. However, you would need to wait for the passport before applying for a visa. (Depending
      on your destination, obtaining a visa ahead of time may or may not be necessary.)

  · Task Four. Airline tickets might have to wait until the visa is confirmed or may need to be purchased
      before applying for the visa, depending, again, on the destination.

  · Task Five. Since changing flights a few days earlier or later may change ticket prices, and since some
      flights may only operate on certain days of the week, it is best not to book a hotel until after tickets have
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 203

      been bought.
  · Task Six. Finally, the location of the hotel and its proximity to the areas you are interested in would

      strongly determine whether you rented a car, relied on public transportation, budgeted for a Lyft or
      Uber, or walked while visiting.
This Gantt chart also lets viewers know the status of the tasks by using colors and shades purposefully. In
Figure 11.2, the creator uses darker colors for completed tasks and lighter colors for work yet to be completed.
You may also consider using colors or shades to indicate which team member or group is working on a
particular task or if a task is in-progress.
Here, in Figure 11.3, is an example of a more complicated Gantt chart with lines indicating task dependencies
on each other, and organizations and colors depicting how larger stages are broken down into subtasks.

Figure 11.3. Illustration of a more complex Gantt chart. Though the figure is a bit too small to read, the form
of the chart should be relatively clear.

Collaborative writing is often challenging, regardless of the circumstances under which we do it. However, the
information in this section is intended to help you think about more efficient, ethical, and organized ways to do
this work. By making sure everyone has clear roles and responsibilities, keeping track of your progress, meeting
and communicating often, and breaking down large, complex tasks into smaller parts, you can successfully
accomplish any group project, no matter how complex it is.

Design Memos

As you work through project 4, you will be asked to write two design memos - another progress report style
204 | CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL

memorandum. In your design memos, you will be communicating with your instructor about your work on
the major elements of project 4: your grant proposal and your multimodal remix.

Your first design memo should answer the following questions:

  · What are your design plans for the collaborative grant proposal?
  · What is your current progress on the grant proposal, and what do you still need to do?

Your second design memo should answer the following questions:

  · What are your plans for the multimodal remix?
  · What is your current progress on the grant proposal, and what do you still need to do?
  · What is your current progress on the research remix, and what do you still need to do?

For a review of memo genre conventions, please see Chapter 3, "Memo Genre Conventions."

Conclusion

As you work on your grant proposal with your group members, think carefully about how to divide the work.
Every group member has unique skills and interests that can help your group complete the project. The advice
and tools in this chapter will help you to manage your project successfully, but there is no substitute for clear
goals, regular communication, and generous interpretation.

References

Henry, M. Robert and Sarah Corbin Robert. (2011). Robert's Rules of Order Newly Revised, 11th ed. Da Capo
Press.

Last, Suzan and Candice Neveu. (2019). Collaborative Writing Stages, in "Collaborative Writing," Technical
Writing Essentials: Introduction to Professional Communications in Technical Fields. University of Victoria,
BC. Retrieved 7 July 2025, from https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/technicalwriting/. Licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License

Lowry, Paul Benjamin, Aaron M. Curtis, and Michelle René Lowry. (2004). Building a taxonomy and
nomenclature of collaborative writing to improve interdisciplinary research and practice, in Journal of Business
Communication, 41, no. 1: pp. 66-97. Retrieved 7 July 2025, from https://doi.org/10.1177/
0021943603259363.
                                                                                                  CHAPTER 11: CREATE A GRANT PROPOSAL | 205

Matchware, Inc. (2013). MindView-Gantt Chart, Wikimedia Commons. Retrieved 7 July 2025, from
https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:MindView-Gantt_Chart.png.

McCahan, Susan, Phil Anderson, Mark Kortschot, Peter E. Weiss, and Kimberly A. Woodhouse. (2015).
Introduction to Teamwork, in Designing Engineers: an Introductory Text. Wiley.

McMurrey, David. (2025). Online Technical Writing. LibreTexts Humanities. Retrieved 7 July 2025, from
https://human.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Composition/Technical_Composition/
Online_Technical_Writing_(McMurrey).

Pattison, Kalani. (2020). Gantt Chart for Planning an International Trip, in "Designing and Formatting
Proposals," Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication. Texas A&M University. Retrieved 7
July 2025, from https://odp.library.tamu.edu/howdyorhello/chapter/designing-and-formatting-proposals/.

Template Lab. (2020). "16 Free Gantt Chart Templates: Excel, Powerpoint, Word." Retrieved 7 July 2025,
from https://templatelab.com/gantt-chart-templates/.
206 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A
PUBLIC AUDIENCE

   Kat Gray; Ann Fillmore; and Melanie Gagich

Introduction

In addition to your grant proposal, Project 4 asks you to create a multimodal remix of your research materials
that you could present to your audience of stakeholders. This means that you will think beyond presenting
your research to fellow experts or people within the same organization. Instead, you will need to think about
how to communicate your expert research to an audience with stakes in the game - the very people who will
benefit from your project, if it is implemented.

In this chapter, you will learn about the considerations of presenting to a public audience and how this work
changes when you think about how to share your research with nonexpert audiences. Then, you'll learn
principles of multimodal design and a design process for your group for the multimodal remix.

Communicating Research to a Public Audience

To begin thinking about communicating with a public audience, it is important to understand what the
term public means. In many ways, it is more easy to define what a public audience is not: it is not a highly
educated, specialized audience (like academics, or subject matter experts working within organizations or
corporations); it is not an audience within an organization (like a project team inside a company, or a manager,
boss, or shareholder). A general public audience, then, is an audience without specialized knowledge in a topic -
they haven't read the research, done the experiments, or gotten education in a particular field. However, that
doesn't mean such an audience has no interest in research. Think of the ways that you hear about research
in daily life - you might hear from the news or social media that a study shows a certain food to be high in
cholesterol, or that research can show you the most effective way to train to run a marathon.

Jerry Plotnick (2017) argued that public writing "aims to be accessible" and "relevant." In service of these
aims, public writing takes a wide variety of forms, depending on the needs of the audience, the context of
communication, and the reasons the writer wants to write. Public writing is a "broad category that includes a
wide variety of genres: opinion pieces, letters to the editor, blogs, newspaper reports, magazine features, letters
                                                                             CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 207

to elected officials, memoirs, obituaries, and much more" (Plotnick, 2017). Public writing is a powerful tool to
extend research into new spaces, but, like all other types of writing, it takes careful thought and planning.

Academic vs. Public Audiences

Since you are already familiar with academic writing, it may be helpful to define more clearly the differences
between academic and public audiences. Doing so will help you to understand how to move from the more
formal style of your problem primer and grant proposal and into a style more suited for communication with
public audiences.

To people outside an academic audience, academic writing can seem hard to understand and full of jargon;
written in such a way, it's hard for public audiences to understand why academic writing is important. Public
writing offers an opportunity for people writing from the academic (or expert) world to communicate their
knowledge in new ways, for new purposes. As Jenn McClearen (2023) wrote, deciding which register is most
appropriate for your writing means "figur[ing] out who our audiences are in order to determine which style is
best for them."

Academic writing, said McClearen (2023), "speaks to very specific audiences" in a particular scholarly field
or discipline. Academic writing is a process of "citing previous conversations in the literature and connecting
our ideas to theirs" (McClearen, 2023). That is, the work of academic writing is about knowledge creation of
a very particular kind. It is written the way it is because the specialized vocabulary used by academics "ensures
that ideas are communicated to a specialized audience with the utmost clarity and accuracy" (McClearen,
2023). Academic writing, then, is writing that specifically caters to expert audiences with a lot of education and
experience in a field. The choices academic writers make reflect that reality.

Public writing, on the other hand, "uses a language that everyone understands" (McClearen, 2023). Scholars
want to write for the public because it gives them an opportunity to "disseminat[e] knowledge, engag[e]
communities, and advocat[e] for evidence-based policies" thus "ensuring that their research has real-world
relevance and promotes positive social change" (McClearen, 2023). Public writing, in other words, lets
carefully conducted expert research have an influence on the world around us. Kelly Baker, an academic
engaged in public writing since 2007, characterized public audiences as "smart, but not specialists" (n.d.).
However, she wrote, "audiences aren't static," and this means that "[w]riting for a public audience can mean
vastly different things depending on who you want your audience to be and where you publish" (Baker, n.d.).
As with any rhetorical situation, a careful analysis of your audience (or desired audience) can help you find the
right genre, style, and tone.
208 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

Talking to Publics

When you present research to a public audience, you will want to think carefully about how you help your
audience access complex research and understand what to do with that information. Jenn McClearen (2023)
writes that "the accessibility of your work is relative" and has to do with "what your target audience reads,"
"what writing mechanics they are used to," and "their level of familiarity with your topic." Once you have
answers to these concerns, you can "adjust your language and tone accordingly" and create research that
communicates clearly with a public audience. Knowing your audience's expectations helps you meet them
halfway.

When you create presentations for public audiences, you should keep the following tips in mind:

 1. Know your audience. As we will discuss below, the audience you want to reach affects the genre you
      choose for your presentation. Additionally, Plotnick (2017) argued, "[t]he specific genre you're writing
      in will help you to form an image of your audience." That is, genre and audience are closely related -
      together, they influence the choices you make about how to communicate. What do your readers know?
      What do they need to know? What do they want to know?

 2. Tell a story. Jenn McClearen (2023) reminded that presentations are an excellent opportunity to tell an
      engaging story about your research in ways you otherwise would not when writing for academic or
      professional publication. Telling stories allows writers to help a public audience understand the
      implications and impact of research - a story offers the `so what?' that readers often search for when
      attempting to understand academic writing. Thinking carefully about when and how to tell stories in
      public presentations lets you make connections with your audience. As McClearen (2023) wrote,
      "[p]eople are hardwired to connect with stories."

 3. Make clear and concise arguments. Writing that is clear and concise conveys an obvious meaning in as
      few words as needed, without compromising necessary complexity. When presenting research to the
      public, Kelly Baker (n.d.) wrote that you should "make your argument obvious and easy-to-follow."
      This involves "being able to articulate your argument, provide evidence for it, and show readers why it
      matters in clear prose" (Baker, n.d.). It is your job, Baker argued, to teach your reader about your work
      and why it matters.

 4. Don't hedge. In academic writing, it is often very important to hedge our arguments - that is, to make
      qualifications about what we're going to say before we say it. Academic writing asks us to be precise, and
      a hedge is a rhetorical move that lets us, for example, say that while our thesis statement is true in most
      situations, it might be untrue under the following conditions. Academic writing builds an argument
      gradually, through presenting evidence. Public writers, Kelly Baker (n.d.) argued, should "tell us what
      you want to say in clear, precise language."

 5. Use plain language. When you know your audience, you will be able to think carefully about the type
                                                                                CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 209

        of language that will help them to understand your message. Plain language, wrote McClearen (2023),
        usually means "avoiding the use of technical terms and academic jargon." Instead, you should focus on
        paring down the length of your sentences and making your wording more direct. You can learn more
        about plain language at PlainLanguage.Gov.
   6. Set aside academic essay conventions. Because the audience is different for academic essays, academic
        essay conventions are not suitable for thinking through how to communicate with a public audience.
        For example, you don't need a lengthy introduction when you're talking to a public audience - you can
        state your point early and clearly, and move directly into your argument (Plotnick, 2017). You can use
        anecdotes and personal stories. You can use the words "I" and "you" to get the reader to relate more
        directly to your writing. Think about your rhetorical aims, and how the conventions of the genre you
        choose can help you meet those needs.

 What is Multimodal Composition?1

  Since you are required to produce a multimodal document explaining your research to your stakeholders, it
  is helpful to start this phase of the project by thinking about what "multimodal" actually means. The next
  section, then, discusses multimodality and modes of communication, defines important terms, and prepares
  you for the multimodal composition process.

 What Is a Multimodal Text?

  Before moving into a discussion of multimodality and modes of communication, it is important to
  understand the meaning of the word "text" because it is often only associated with writing (or perhaps the
  messages you receive or write on your phone). However, when we use the term "text" in composition courses,
  we often mean it in a very general sense: a piece of communication that can take many forms. For instance, a
  text is a movie, meme, social media post, essay, website, podcast, and the list goes on. In our daily lives, we
  encounter, interact with, and consume many types of texts, and it is important to consider how most texts are
  also multimodal.
  Pamela Takayoshi and Cynthia L. Selfe (2007), two important scholars in writing studies and early advocates
  of multimodal composing, define multimodal texts as "texts that exceed the alphabetical and may include still
  and moving images, animators, color, words, music, and sound" (p. 1). Multimodality is sometimes associated
  with technology and/or digital writing spaces. For example, when you post an image to Instagram, you use

1. Based on Melanie Gagich, "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing," in The Ask: A More Beautiful Question and Ann
  Fillmore, "Multi-Modal Communication: Writing in Five Modes," in Open English @SLCC.
210 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

technology (your phone) to snap a picture, an app to edit or modify the image, and a social media platform
(Instagram) to share it with others. However, creating a multimodal text does not require the use of digital
tools and does not need to be shared in online digital spaces to make it "multimodal." To illustrate, when you
create a collage and post it on your dorm room door, you use existing printed artifacts such as pictures clipped
and pasted (non-digital technologies) from a magazine and share with others by taping it to your door (a non-
digital space). Both examples represent a multimodal text because they include various modes of
communication.

The Five Modes of Communication

In the mid-1990s, a group of scholars gathered in New London, New Hampshire and, based on their
discussions, wrote the influential article, "A Pedagogy of Multiliteracies: Designing Social Futures," published
in 1996. In it, the group advocated for teachers to embrace teaching practices that allow students to draw
from five socially and culturally situated modes, or "way[s] of communicating" (Arola, Sheppard, and Ball 1).
These modes were linguistic, visual, spatial, gestural, and aural. Yet, scholars such as Claire Lauer, another
influential researcher in composition, have argued that the New London Group's definition of modes, while
exceedingly important, can be difficult to grasp. In light of this, below I provide brief definitions of each mode
as well as examples to help you understand the "mode" in "multimodal."

Visual

The visual mode refers to what an audience can see, such as moving and still images, colors, and alphabetical
text size and style. Social media photos (see Figure 1) exemplify the visual mode. The visual mode includes
images, video, color, visual layout, design, font, size, formatting, symbols, visual data (charts, graphs)
animations (like gifs) and more.
                                                                              CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 211

The visual mode helps writers communicate meaning in a way that can be seen by the audience. Sometimes
people must see to believe, and visuals can be helpful and even persuasive. For example, if you want to showcase
how climate change has devastated the arctic ecosystem, you might include a video that shows real-world
footage, like this one by National Geographic. This video is considered a multi-modal text since words, visuals,
and audio are used together for a stronger effect.
212 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
        them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=349#oembed-1

Linguistic

The linguistic mode refers to alphabetic text or spoken word. Its emphasis is on language and how words are
used (verbally or written). The linguistic mode includes written and spoken words, word choice, vocabulary,
grammar, structure, and the organization of sentences and paragraphs.
A traditional five paragraph essay relies on the linguistic mode; however, this mode is also apparent in some
digital texts. Figure 2 shows a student's linguistic text included in their website created to promote game-based
language learning.
                                                                              CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 213

Spatial

The spatial mode refers to how a text deals with space. This also relates to how other modes are arranged,
214 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

organized, emphasized, and contrasted in a text. The spatial mode includes physical arrangement: spacing,
position, organization, proximity, direction, and distance between elements in a text.

Figure 3, an infographic, is an example of the spatial mode in use because it emphasizes certain percentages and
words to achieve its goal. Websites also rely heavily on the spatial mode to communicate meaning. Writers make
strategic rhetorical decisions about how to arrange digital information in a user-friendly way within a mobile
"space." Features like menus, headers, physical layout, and navigation tools (such as links) help the audience to
interact with the site spatially.
          CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 215

Gestural

The gestural mode refers to gesture and movement. This mode is often apparent in delivery of speeches
in the way(s) that speakers move their hands and fix their facial features and in other texts that capture
movement such as videos, movies, and television. The gestural mode includes movement, speed, expression,
body language, facial expression, physical proximity, and interactions between people. Figure 4 shows
Michelle Obama's gestures at a speech she gave in London.
216 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

The gestural mode of communication allows writers to communicate meaning through movement.
Traditionally, this mode was used in face-to-face interaction; however, modern technology allows writers to
                                                                              CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 217

show movement virtually in their work, through video. The gestural mode is often used in combination with
other modes, such as linguistic/alphabetic (written/spoken), spatial (physical arrangement), and aural (sound)
to provide an enhanced sensory experience for the audience.

For example, sign languages use the gestural mode since position of the sign and movement are significant
factors in generating and distinguishing meaning. In this video, look at how the speakers use movements of
the hands, head, face, and body, along with position and speed, to communicate meaning to the audience.
Sign languages are considered multi-modal communication since they combine linguistic/alphabetic text with
movement.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=349#oembed-2

Aural

The aural mode refers to what an audience member can or cannot hear. Music is the most obvious
representation of the aural mode, but an absence of sound (silence) is also aural. The aural mode includes
spoken words, sound, music, volume, rhythm, speed of delivery, pitch, tone of voice, and the use of
silence. Examples of texts that emphasize the aural mode include podcasts, music videos, concerts, television
series, movies, and radio talk shows.

Sound catches people's attention, and writers use the aural mode to bring their words to life. For example, have
you ever listened to a game on the radio? Listen to the way the sportscasters help the audience to experience the
game through sound.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://uark.pressbooks.pub/proftech/?p=349#oembed-3
  218 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

 Designing Your Multimodal Remix2

  A multimodal text combines various modes of communication (hence the combination of the words
  "multiple" and "mode" in the term "multi-modal"). Cheryl E. Ball and Colin Charlton draw from The
  New London Group in their argument that "[a]ny combination of modes makes a multimodal text, and
  all text--every piece of communication a human composes--use more than one mode. Thus, all writing is
  multimodal" (42). However, in some communicative texts, one mode receives more emphasis than the others.
  For example, academia and writing teachers have historically favored the linguistic mode, often seen in the form
  of the written college essay. Yet, when you communicate using an essay, you are actually using three modes
  of communication: linguistic, spatial, and visual. The words represent the linguistic mode (the emphasized
  mode), the margins and spacing characterize the spatial, and the visual mode includes elements like font, font
  size, or the use of bold.

  Combining each mode to create a clear document often involves the writing process (i.e. invention, drafting,
  and revision), and a thoughtful writer will also consider how the final product does or does not address
  an audience. The same process is used when creating a less traditional multimodal text. For instance, when
  creating a text emphasizing the aural mode (e.g. a podcast), you must consider your audience, purpose, and
  context while also organizing and arranging your ideas and content in a coherent and logical way. This process
  parallels the traditional writing process.

  As writers, we make choices. In every situation, we must decide how to best communicate meaning to our
  intended audiences. It is a process of deliberation that involves calculated choices, strategies, and moves. In the
  field of writing/composition, "modality" is a rhetorical decision that you need to consider as you explore how
  to best achieve your intended purpose(s). Below, you will learn a process for multimodal composition that you
  and your group can adapt to suit your project's needs.

 Creating a Multimodal Text

  Now that you know what a multimodal text is, it makes sense to discuss strategies for composing a multimodal
  text. As with writing, multimodal composing is a process and should not only emphasize the final result.
  Therefore, the first three strategies listed below are pre-drafting activities.

   1. Determine your rhetorical situation.

2. Based on Melanie Gagich, "An Introduction to and Strategies for Multimodal Composing," in The Ask: A More Beautiful Question and Ann
  Fillmore, "Multi-Modal Communication: Writing in Five Modes," in Open English @SLCC.
                                                                             CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 219

 2. Review and analyze other multimodal texts.
 3. Gather content, media, and tools.
 4. Cite and attribute information appropriately.
 5. Begin drafting your text.

As with all writing processes, multimodal composition is recursive. That is, as you work on your multimodal
remix, you may revisit different parts of the composing process as needed. You may start drafting, only to find
that you need to go back and do more research on your rhetorical situation. The process is not linear, but
iterative - more like a series of overlapping loops than a straight line.

As writers, you'll need to determine which of the five modes could add value to your work. Be careful not to
add modes just because you think you should. Each mode you use should add meaning to the text. Consider
the opportunities, challenges, and constraints of any writing task and assess and revise your work to meet the
needs of the audience.

Determine Your Rhetorical Situation

When brainstorming about your rhetorical situation, you should consider the purpose of your text (the
message), who you want to read and interact with your text (the audience, your relationship to the message and
audience (the author), the type of text you want to create (the genre), and where you want to distribute it (the
medium. Descriptions of each of the five components of the rhetorical situation are offered below.

The Message

The message relates to your purpose, and you might ask yourself, what am I trying to accomplish? You should
try to make the message as clear and specific as possible. Let's say you want to create a website focused on
donating to charity. An unclear message might be "getting more people in the United States to donate to
charities." A clearer message is "convincing college freshmen at my university to donate to the ASPCA" because
the audience and purpose are specific rather than broad.

The Audience

There are two types of audiences. An intended audience, who you target in your message, and an unintended
audience, who may stumble upon your text. When determining your message, you want to consider the beliefs,
values, and demographics of your intended audience as well as the likelihood that unintended audiences will
interact with your text. Using the example above, college freshmen at your university are the intended audience,
and teachers, parents, and/or students from other universities represent unintended audience members. It
might be helpful to approach audience using the concept of "discourse communities," or "a group of people,
220 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

members of a community, who share a common interest and who use the same language, or discourse, as
they talk and write about that interest" (National Council of Teachers of English). You can read more about
discourse communities in Dan Melzer's essay, "You'll Never Write Alone Again: Understanding Discourse
Communities."

The Author

You are the author and should consider your relationship to the message and audience. As an author, you bring
explicit (obvious) and/or implicit (not obvious) biases to your message, so it is important to recognize how
these might affect it and your audience. Also, you may be targeting an audience you are familiar with (perhaps
you are also a college freshman) or not (perhaps you are a graduate student). It is important to think about how
your familiarity with your audience might affect your message.

The Genre

Genre is a tricky term and can mean different things to different scholars, teachers, and students (Dirk 250).
In the context of multimodal composing, genre refers to a type of text that has genre conventions, or audience
expectations. For example, if I am creating a website (the genre), an audience would expect the following
conventions: an easy-to-navigate toolbar, functional tabs, hyperlinks, and images. Yet, when thinking about
genre, it is more useful to think specifically. If I am creating a website for horror film fans (the specific
genre), then the audience would expect the following (more specific) genre conventions: references, images,
and sounds associated with horror films, directors, actors, actresses, monsters, and villains. They would also
expect color and font choices to align with the genre--it is likely that the color baby blue would not be well-
received.

The Medium

While genre is the type of text you want to create, the medium refers to where you will distribute it. Classic
media (plural for medium) includes distribution via radio, newspapers, magazines, and television; however,
new media is defined by a text's online distribution. Importantly, medium refers to where you will distribute
your text but not how. The how refers to the technology tools you'll use to create the text and possibly to
distribute it. For example, to create a podcast, you might use your smartphone (a tool) to record, a free sound
editor like Audacity (another tool) to edit it, and Soundcloud (a tool and the medium) to distribute it.

     Rhetorical Situation Questions to Consider
                                                                              CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 221

          · Does the rhetorical situation call for a certain mode? Or, do you have some creative freedom
             in how you present your ideas or make your argument?

          · How does a certain mode affect the way your audience will receive or experience the
             message? What are the advantages and disadvantages of using a certain mode for this
             particular writing task?

          · How could you combine modes? Which modes would enhance your message or help you to
             better get your point(s) across?

          · Do you possess the technological skills necessary to effectively use a specific mode? Will you
             need to learn additional skills in order to create your work? If so, how can you best learn
             these skills in the given time frame?

Review and Analyze Other Multimodal Texts

Now that you have brainstormed your rhetorical situation and determined the type of text you want to create,
it is time to begin finding other texts representative of your topic and genre. In their textbook, Writer/Designer:
A Guide to Making Multimodal Projects, Arola, Sheppard, and Ball argue that "[o]ne of the best ways to begin
thinking about a multimodal project is to see what has already been said about a topic you are interested in . . .
as well as how other authors have designed their texts on that topic . . . " (40). This is excellent advice. I suggest
that you find at least one text you think is an exceptional example and one text you feel is lacking in some way.
After you find these texts, you can conduct a brief analysis by responding to the following questions:

 1. What is the author's message?
 2. Who are they addressing? How can you tell?
 3. What type of text did they create? What genre conventions do you see?
 4. How was the text distributed? In what ways does it relate to the target audience?
 5. What modes of communication are they using? Which are they emphasizing? Do these decisions

      support the message and/or appropriately target their audience?
 6. What do you like about the multimodal text?
 7. What, in your opinion, needs work?

If you answer these questions, you have given yourself important information to consider as you plan your own
work.
222 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

Gather Content, Media, and Tools

Once you have determined your rhetorical situation and examined other multimodal texts, you should begin
gathering information and materials. I have categorized this process into three components: content, visual and
aural materials, and technology tools.

Conduct Content Research

A multimodal text should include content (pieces of information that support your message), which means
you will need to conduct some research - or, ideally, use research you have already completed for your problem
primer and grant proposal projects. Be sure to consult with your instructor about the types of research
most suitable for your group's project. For example, my student created a website and videos discussing the
similarities between American music and K-pop (see Figure 6). Her content research includes a scholarly
article from the journal World Englishes and a popular article from Billboard.com.
                                                                             CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 223

Collect Visual and Aural Materials

In addition to textual information, you should also collect images, sounds, videos, animations, memes, etc. you
want to include in your multimodal text. For instance, Figure 6 demonstrates some of the pre-draft materials
my student collected: openly licensed images of a teacher and chalkboard, a video they created using Animator,
and K-Pop music to play on a loop.

Explore Openly Licensed Materials

When searching for visual and aural materials, you want to consider using openly licensed materials. According
to YearOfOpen.org, open licenses are "a set of conditions applied to an original work that grant permission
for anyone to make use of that work as long as they follow the conditions of the license" ("What are Open
Licenses"). A well-known and commonly used example of an open license are Creative Commons licenses,
identified by CC. Creative Commons licenses provide the creator or author with a copyright, ensuring that
they receive credit for their work, while also allowing "others to copy, distribute, and make uses of their work
- at least non-commercially" ("About the Licenses"). Essentially, if a work has one of the four basic creative
commons licenses (see Figure 7), then a creator/ author can use the licensed item in their own creative texts.
224 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

There are various websites such as CC Search, Free Music Archive (FMA), or Digital Public Library of
America (DPLA) where you can find openly licensed work. You may also set filters on Flickr or Google Images
to locate openly licensed work.

Collect and Evaluate Technology Tools

It is important to collect and evaluate the technology tools you need to create your multimodal text prior to
drafting it. As stated previously, the technology tool helps you create the final text and might also help you
distribute it. The easiest way to determine the technology tools that you need is to create a list of all of the
features you want to include in your text. Once you create the list, research where to find the tools either
online or at your university. Be aware that some tools may not be free (although they may come with a free
trial period), but you can use software available on your computer or university computers such as iMovie or
Windows Movie Maker. Or you can find freeware, software available for free online, such as Audacity (for
sound editing), Canva (for infographic and/or image creation), or Blender (for video creation). Once you have
created your list and found some tools, spend some time testing each one while keeping track of which is the
most user-friendly and helps you achieve your composing goals.

Citing and Attributing Your Content

After researching content and collecting materials, think about how you will give rhetorically appropriate
credit to authors or organizations whose work you have referenced or included. For instance, if you create
a video, you should provide credits at the end rather than a Works Cited page, or if you design a website,
you should include hyperlinks to outside sources rather than MLA in-text citations because this makes more
sense, given the genre. For multimodal texts that rely on the aural mode (e.g. podcasts), you can use verbal
attributions, or verbalize necessary information. When deciding what information is necessary, think about
what you can include to help your audience locate your text, such as author, title, and website. For example,
the phrase, "According to Mandi Goodsett, in her PowerPoint `Creative Commons Licenses' found on the library
website, a student has control over their online presence," offers the audience key information to help them find
the source.

When citing openly licensed images, videos, sounds, animations, screenshots, etc., it is important to provide
an attribution. According to the CC Wiki, an appropriate attribution should include the title, author, source
(hyperlinked to the original website), and license (hyperlinked to the license information). Figure 8 represents
example of an inappropriate attribution and Figure 9 an ideal one.
                                                                             CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 225

Figure 8. An example of an inappropriate attribution that lacks title, clear author, source link, and license.
(Image was created by the author using "Creative Commons Licensing" by Mandi Goodsett licensed under
CC BY 4.0)
226 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

Begin Drafting Your Text

Drafting your text should include outlining or mapping your project. This could take the form of writing all
of the text you want to include in an outline if you have a word-heavy multimodal text like a website, drawing
your design if you are creating a poster or commercial, or writing a script if you are creating a podcast or video.
Of course, you can combine any of these outlining methods or come up with your own, but thinking about
what you want to do before you do it will make your final text much stronger and coherent.

Conclusion

In Project 4, you've been asked to communicate the results of your research project to two very different
audiences: an audience of experts (the UArk Cares Foundation advisory board) and a public, nonexpert
audience (your stakeholders). Thinking through how to communicate the same information to different
audiences is a valuable rhetorical skill - and one that will hold you in good stead in your professional life.
Regardless of the type of work you do, you will often have to communicate information about your projects
                                                                             CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE | 227

to audiences with a variety of interest in and experience with your area of expertise. Communicating with
a team member is different from communicating with a boss. Communicating with a boss is different from
communicating with the public, through a document like a product recall. In other words, technical
communicators must be adept at analyzing rhetorical situations, understanding their communication options,
and making smart choices that help them communicate their message.

References

"About the Licenses." (n.d.). CreativeCommons.org, Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/.

Arola, Kristin L., Jennifer Sheppard, and Cheryl E. Ball. (2014). Writer/Designer: A Guide to Making
Multimodal Projects. Bedford/St. Martin.

Baker, Kelly. (n.d.). Writing for a public audience. Cold takes. Retrieved 10 July 2025, from
https://www.kellyjbaker.com/writing-for-a-public-audience/.

Ball, Cheryl E. and Colin Charlton. (2015). "All Writing is Multimodal." In Naming What we Know:
Threshold Concepts of Writing Studies, edited by Linda Adler-Kassner and Elizabeth Wardle, Utah State
University Press, pp. 42-43.

CC Wiki. "Best practices for attribution." (n.d.) Wiki.CreativeCommons.org. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
https://wiki.creativecommons.org/wiki/Best_practices_for_attribution.

Dirk, Kerry. (2010). "Navigating Genres." WAC Clearinghouse. In Writing Spaces: Readings on Writing,
vol. 1, pp. 249-262. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://wac.colostate.edu/books/writingspaces1/
dirk-navigating-genres.pdf.

Great Big Story. (2017). Spoken Without Words: Poetry with ASL Slam. YouTube. Retrieved 18 July 2025,
from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dmsqXwnqIw4.

Lauer, Claire. (2014). "Contending with Terms: `Multimodal' and `Multimedia' in the Academic and Public
Spheres." Multimodal Composition: A Critical Sourcebook, edited by Claire Lutkewitte, Bedford/St.Martin's,
pp. 22-41.

McClearen, Jenn. (2023). Academic vs public writing. Publish not perish. Retrieved 10 July 2025, from
https://www.publishnotperish.net/p/academic-vs-public-writing.
228 | CHAPTER 12: REMIX RESEARCH FOR A PUBLIC AUDIENCE

McClearen, Jenn. (2023). How to write for a public audience. Publish not perish. Retrieved 10 July 2025, from
https://www.publishnotperish.net/p/how-to-write-for-public-audiences.

Melzer, Dan. (2019). "You'll Never Write Alone Again: Understanding Discourse Communities." WAC
Clearinghouse. In Writing Spaces: Readings on Writings, vol. 3. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
https://writingspaces.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/melzer-understanding-discourse-
communities-1.pdf.

National Council of Teachers of English. (2012). "Discourse Community." NCTE.org. Retrieved 18 July

2025,  from                  https://secure.ncte.org/library/nctefiles/resources/journals/ccc/0641-sep2012/

ccc0641posterdiscourse.pdf.

National Geographic. (2017). Heart-Wrenching Video: Starving Polar Bear on Iceless Land. YouTube.
Retrieved 18 July, 2025 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_JhaVNJb3ag.

The New London Group. "A Pedagogy of Multiliteracies: Designing Social Futures." (1995). Harvard
Educational Review, vol. 66, no.1. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://eric.ed.gov/?id=EJ519304.

Payson High TV. (2016). Sports Broadcast Audio Entry. YouTube. Retrieved 18 July, 2025, from
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GEKHVp4LTTw&.

Plotnick, Jerry. (2017). Writing for the public. University of Toronto Writing Advice. Retrieved 10 July 2025,
from https://advice.writing.utoronto.ca/types-of-writing/public-writing/.

Takayoshi, Pamela and Cynthia L. Selfe. (2007). "Thinking about Multimodality." Multimodal Composition:
Resources for Teachers, edited by Cynthia L. Selfe, Hampton Press, Inc., pp. 1-12.

"What are Open Licenses." YearOfOpen.org. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://www.yearofopen.org/what-
are-open-licenses/.
                                                                                                 CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER | 229

 CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL
 LETTER

    Kat Gray; Dawn Atkinson; David McMurrey; Annemarie Hamlin; Chris Rubio;
    Michele DeSilva; Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt; Matt McKinney; and Kalani
    Pattison

 Introduction

  To complete Project 4, you will write one final document with your group: a transmittal letter to accompany
  your grant proposal package. Transmittal letters are a common genre of professional correspondence, in which
  writers sum up the contents of a document package and give readers directions about how to interact with
  those materials. Rhetorically, the transmittal letter is an opportunity for you to engage your reader with care by
  introducing your team members, the process of creating your project, and the reasons behind your work.
  Below, you'll learn more about transmittal letters, a subgenre of cover letter designed for a specific purpose: to
  accompany a package of materials (like a report or a grant proposal). The sections below discuss the rhetorical
  situation of writing a transmittal letter, what type of content goes into your cover letter and how to organize
  it, and what type of writing style you should use for transmittal letters. You will also find a sample transmittal
  letter and a template for writing transmittal letters, both intended to help you and your group decide how to
  organize your document.

 Writing a Transmittal Letter1

  A transmittal letter is a communication from you (the document writers) to the recipients (the people who
  requested the document). Essentially, this letter says, "Here is the document we agreed that I would complete
  by a certain date. Briefly, it contains these components and materials. It does not cover these topics or materials.

1. Based on David McMurrey, Annemarie Hamlin, Chris Rubio, Michele DeSilva, Nicole Hagstrom-Schmidt, Matt McKinney, and Kalani Pattison,
  "Front Matter," in Howdy or Hello? Technical and Professional Communication and Dawn Atkinson, "Writing Print Correspondence," in Mindful
  Technical Writing.
230 | CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER

Contact me to let me know your thoughts when you have had a chance to read it." The transmittal letter also
explains the context or the events that brought the report about.

Rhetorical Situation

The rhetorical situation for your transmittal letter is slightly different than the rhetorical situation for the other
documents you have created during this project. Your audience is your professor; the purpose of the cover letter
is, broadly, to orient your instructor to the materials you have submitted for project 4; and your context is that
you are turning in your project and want your reader (your instructor) to have a clear picture of what you have
submitted, and why.

The transmittal letter precedes the rest of your document, even your title page. As a result, it is not counted as
part of your document's page count. The transmittal letter for Project 4 has several purposes:

  · To supply details about the accompanying document: what it is, who it is intended for, and key
      information provided in the document;

  · To account for your (or your team's) process - how you created the grant proposal project and research
      remix, what feedback you received, and how you revised, based on that feedback;

  · To offer answers to readers' potential questions - anticipate beforehand what they might ask;
  · To provide the writers' contact information.

Letter Contents & Organization

As with other types of correspondence you've written this semester, transmittal letters follow an introduction,
body, and conclusion format, although these sections may also be expanded as needed. If you decide to add
sections, consider using headings to help readers navigate the document.

The contents and organization of a transmittal letter are:

  · First paragraph. Provides details about your group project. What is your project? What documents
      have you included? What information do you provide in your documents? Give a brief overview of your
      project's organization.

  · Middle paragraphs. Discuss the process you and your team used to produce your project. You should
      create paragraphs addressing the following topics, at least:
          Why did you choose this topic? Who are you hoping to help?
          What process did you and your team use to create both the grant proposal and the multimodal
            remix? How was each team member involved?
                                                                                               CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER | 231

          What feedback did you receive on your documents? How did you revise your project based on that
            feedback?

  · Final paragraph. Encourages the reader to get in touch if there are questions, comments, or concerns.
      It closes with a gesture of goodwill, expressing hope that the reader finds the document satisfactory, and
      maintaining an ongoing professional relationship with the reader.

As with any other element in a report, you may have to modify the contents of this letter (or memo) for
specific situations. For example, you might want to add another paragraph listing questions you'd like readers
to consider as they review the report. Figure 13.1 shows what this might look like.

In the template of the letter of transmittal that follows in Figure 13.2 notice the standard business-letter
format. If you write an internal report, use the memorandum format instead.

Example Transmittal Letter

The example transmittal letter in this section contains the characteristics discussed above. Review the letter for
an example of what transmittal letter content might look and sound like. Pay particular attention to how the
writer uses his professional persona to communicate with the reader.

You can note the following characteristics in Figure 13.1, below:

  · Standard letter formatting: This letter makes use of business letter formatting, starting with
      the inside address (containing the letter writer's address, followed by the date, followed by the recipient's
      address). Then, the letter uses a salutation to great the reader before beginning the letter in earnest. The
      letter closes with a complimentary close and a signature, which includes the writer's professional title.

  · First paragraph: reminds the reader of the document's topic, gives its title, and reminds the reader that
      she requested the enclosed information.

  · Second paragraph: clearly explains the document's purpose; overviews document topics; previews
      conclusions.

  · Third paragraph: expresses thanks to the reader for engaging with materials; hopes for what the
      document can do; how to request further information.
232 | CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER
                                                                                              CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER | 233

Figure 13.1. An example of a letter of transmittal. (Alternative PDF version: Figure 13.1.)

Transmittal Letter Template

The template below gives your group an outline to use for the transmittal letter's format and contents. Unlike
the example letter above, this model uses five paragraphs - expanding the middle section of the letter from one
paragraph to three. The number of paragraphs your transmittal letter includes is up to you - but you should
organize the letter in a way that makes sense. Like any letter, make sure that each paragraph has one clear main
idea, and build from there.

Be aware that for Project 4, your transmittal letter takes place of your revision note. It therefore contains
some of the same information - specifically, it should contain information about what feedback you received,
and how you used it. You should also consult with your instructor as you create your transmittal letter. Make
sure that you have a clear understanding of what information your instructor would like to see.
234 | CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER

Figure 13.2. Template for letter of transmittal. (Alternative PDF version: Figure 13.2.)

Writing Style

Establish yourself as a competent professional who takes readers' perceptions into account by composing
correspondence that communicates in a constructive manner. The following tips, adapted from Last (2019,
pp. 39-40), specify what a constructive communication approach entails.

  · Write from one adult to another: Aim to communicate respectfully, responsibly, confidently, and
                                                                                          CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER | 235

   cooperatively--as one mature adult to another. Use your professional persona to speak to stakeholders
   and clients, in addition to team members, managers, or executives.
· Be genuine: Articulate reasonable viewpoints that can be backed with concrete evidence. Commit to
   making improvements when errors occur, but think carefully about whether to use I or we in such
   situations. Readers may interpret we in the context of a company memo or letter to mean the company
   as a whole, while I clearly points to the writer.
· Be courteous: Keep the reader foremost in your mind by prioritizing that individual's viewpoint. When
   addressing a specific person in a memo or letter, the words you and your are acceptable and can be used
   to create reader-focused writing, as the examples in the table below (Table 13.1) show.

                          Table 13.1: Writer vs. Reader Centered Writing

Writer Centered                                                             Reader Centered

If I can answer any questions, I will be happy to do so.  If you have any questions, please ask.

We shipped the order this morning.                        Your order was shipped this morning.

I am happy to report...                                   You will be glad to know...

We cannot process your claim because the necessary forms Your claim can be processed as soon as we receive the

have not been completed.                                  necessary forms.

In memo and letter style, aim to use everyday language that target readers will likely understand without
difficulty. To this end, avoid correspondence clichés - overused sayings and strings of text that are stale, wordy,
and hold little meaning for readers. Instead, select precise words that articulate your exact meaning to
encourage message comprehension. Table 13.2 lists clear, concise wording that can be used in place of
common correspondence clichés.
236 | CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER

        Table 13.2: Alternatives to Common Correspondence Clichés

Cliché                     Alternative

Without further delay      Now

Until such time as         Until

Due to the fact that       Because, since

First and foremost         First, firstly

Last but not least         Lastly, finally

In the event that          If

Despite the fact that      Although

Pursuant to our agreement  As we agreed

In many instances          Often

In the course of           During

In view of the fact that   Because, since

Per our conversation       As we discussed

To whom it may concern:    Dear XXX: (replace with the recipient's name)

Finally, think carefully about your tone. Speak frankly, clearly, honestly, and with empathy for your reader and
what they need to get out of your document. Make sure your purpose is clear early in the letter and help the
reader to understand how to use the information in the letter to help them understand the documents that
follow. Consider your reader to determine the level of formal vs. informal language you should use; it's always
better to err on the side of formality in a professional situation.

Conclusion

In the professional world, a transmittal letter serves as an introduction - to you, to your organization, and to
your project. Transmittal letters are a simple way to make a good first impression by being clear, concise, and
well-organized in the way you communicate information about your documents to your reader. Be clear about
who you are, what you value, and how those things are centered in the work you will present.

References

Last, Suzan. (2019). Technical writing essentials: Introduction to professional communications in the technical
                                                                                              CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER | 237

fields. University of Victoria. License: CC-BY 4.0. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
https://pressbooks.bccampus.ca/technicalwriting/.

Swarts, Jason, Stacey Pigg, Jamie Larsen, Julia Helo Gonzalez, Rebecca De Haas, and Elizabeth Wagner.
(2018). Communication in the Workplace: What Can NC State Students Expect? North Carolina State
University Professional Writing Program, 2018. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://docs.google.com/
document/d/1pMpVbDRWIN6HssQQQ4MeQ6U-oB-sGUrtRswD7feuRB0/
edit#heading=h.n2a3udms5sd5. Licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.
238 | CHAPTER 13: WRITE A TRANSMITTAL LETTER
                                                                                                         PART 4: REFLECTING ON YOUR WORK | 239

PART IV

PART 4: REFLECTING ON YOUR
WORK

The final part of the book contains information about the final project, the Course Reflection Memo. You will
learn about how reflective writing can help you increase your self-efficacy as a learner and technical writer and
reflect on the work you have done during the course.

Part 4 contains the following information:

  · Project 5: Course Reflection Memo: This section contains information about the aims of the final
      reflective project of the course and a description of the information you should include.

  · Chapter 14: Reflective Writing for Technical Communication: This chapter discusses what
      reflective writing is, and how you can use it to help you retain and enhance the technical writing skills
      you've developed in the course.
240 | PART 4: REFLECTING ON YOUR WORK
                                                                                                     PROJECT 5: COURSE REFLECTION MEMO | 241

PROJECT 5: COURSE REFLECTION MEMO

Bringing it all Together

The final project for the course, the course reflection memo, pulls together the work that you've done
throughout the course and asks you to reflect on how that work represents an attempt to meet your goals.
Closing the class with a reflective memo gives you time to think about your skills and consolidate a set of useful
lessons to take with you into other course, and into your professional workplace.

Project #5: Course Reflection Memo

The purpose of this project is to review your work from the semester and to evaluate how you worked
towards your goals. You'll review your Course Goals Memo from the beginning of the semester. Then, you'll
look over your projects, revision letters, and any reflective writing you've done for information about how you
worked towards and met those goals. You will organize your findings in a memo to your instructor.
Completion Requirement: Your Self-Assessment Email should be 500-750 words.

Project Steps

To get started, gather your materials for the major projects, including rough drafts, final drafts, and all feedback
you received in peer review and on Blackboard. If you also wrote work logs or writing journals, have them in a
place where it's easy for you to refer to them.
Next, remind yourself of your personal goals for the semester by rereading your Course Goals Memo from
Week 2.
Then, review your materials for Major Projects 2-4 (Career Documents, Problem Primer, Community
Research Report). As you do this, take notes about how your work on these documents shows work towards
your goals. These notes will help you create the "evidence" for your Course Reflection.
Once you've assembled your materials and made some notes, decide which evidence relates most convincingly
to the goals you set for yourself in this course.
242 | PROJECT 5: COURSE REFLECTION MEMO

Questions for Drafting:

  · How would you evaluate your progress towards your goals this semester? Where did you succeed and
      why? Where did you fall short and why?

  · What actions did you take this semester that helped you meet your goals?
  · What "evidence" from your major projects supports your assessment of each of your goals? For example,

      does your Problem Primer (Project #3) show how you learned to manage time during a research project?
      Does your Community Research Report (Project #4) show that you learned new document design
      skills?
  · What skills will you continue to work on after this course?
  · What skills or information did you learn that will be most helpful for you as you continue in your major
      or career path?
  · What do you know about technical writing now that you didn't know when the semester started?

The next step is to write your course goals in memo format.

Note 1: You can find more information about writing memos in your textbook. Refer again to Chapter 3:
Setting Your Course Goals.

Note 2: Below is a quick checklist of the parts you need in this email, in order. You can use it to help you make
sure you have all the components:

  · Subject (Gives a clear idea of the email contents)
  · Salutation (Dear...)
  · Introduction (Give your name, discuss your goals, preview your conclusions)
  · Goals: (Give each goal you want to talk about its own paragraph and provide evidence from your work

      this semester to show how you met your goal or extended your skills.)
  · Conclusion (talk about your takeaways from the semester)
  · Closing line (Sincerely or Cordially are good choices for formal writing or people you don't know well.

      You could also choose less formal options like "All the best" or "Thanks.")
  · Signature (your name or initials)

Due Dates

Project Stage  Due
Final Draft    [WEEK 15/16]
                            PROJECT 5: COURSE REFLECTION MEMO | 243

Final Submission Checklist

[Give instructions to students on how to format their assignments here.]

· Self-Assessment Email
       I have briefly reviewed the goals I chose for myself in the Course Goals Memo.
       I have evaluated my success at accomplishing each goal, using evidence from the major projects I
         did this semester.
       I have used memo formatting.
  244 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

 CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR
 TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

    Kat Gray and Dawn Atkinson

 Introduction

  The final project for this class returns to the memo genre and asks you to reflect on your experience doing the
  work of the class. The course reflection memo is an opportunity to think about the goals you have set and how
  the work you have done over the semester helped you to meet those goals. This document is an opportunity to
  talk about where you've succeeded, where you've struggled, and what lessons you can take away from the class.
  In this chapter, you'll learn about what reflective writing is and how reflection helps you to become a self-
  regulated learner. Then, you'll read about some activities you can do to help you prepare for writing your
  course reflection memo.

 What Is Reflective Writing?1

  Reflection is an element of writing that is easy to forget to make time for. When we finish a writing project,
  we're often on a deadline, and we probably have another project to start on. However, stopping to reflect on
  your work can help you to improve your technical writing process for the future. As Carmen Nobel (2014)
  wrote, reflection increases self-efficacy - that is, reflection helps us understand the decisions we make when we
  write and feel more confident about the next writing project we undertake.
  As an introduction to the importance of reflecting on performance, read an article entitled "Reflecting on
  Work Improves Job Performance" (Nobel, 2014). Afterwards, work with a small team to complete the
  following tasks based on your understanding of the reading.

   1. Identify the main point of the article.
   2. Identify the evidence used to support the main point.

1. Based on Dawn Atkinson, "Reflecting on Performance," in Mindful Technical Writing.
                                                         CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION | 245

 3. Discuss whether you agree with the main point, and supply explanations for your answers.
 4. Discuss how the article applies to a student's academic work in college.
 5. Present your group's findings in a brief, informal presentation to the class.

Self-Regulated Learners Reflect on Performance

When people reflect on their performance on a task or series of tasks, they focus on things they have done
previously--by taking a close, honest look at personal beliefs, actions, and expectations--with the aim of
improving future endeavors. To better understand how reflecting on performance might be applied in an
academic setting, read the following case study and the information that accompanies it, which are adapted
from the Supporting and Advancing Geoscience Education at Two-Year Colleges project (SAGE 2YC, 2017).

     Case Study: Tina's Understanding of Her Efforts in College

     As a first-generation college student and single mother, Tina strives for a better life for herself and
     her daughter. She knows that a college education will set her on a path to a rewarding livelihood,
     but juggling college, work, and family puts many different demands on her time. Tina is dedicated
     to her studies, and she dutifully highlights her textbook readings and spends long hours preparing
     her first writing assignment the day before it is due. Nevertheless, she earns a mediocre grade on
     the writing assignment and afterwards thinks to herself, I guess I'm not cut out for college after all.
     I work so hard, but I still don't have what it takes to earn the high grades I need.

Although Tina feels discouraged, by redirecting her time and energy to more effective ways of tackling
assignments, she can likely bring about a more rewarding academic experience, which, in turn, can boost her
motivation and feelings of self-efficacy (her belief in her capacity to achieve goals). This statement is likewise
true for all students. Key to making progress is learning how to reflect on one's own processes, a step that is
integral to the cycle of self-regulated learning illustrated in Figure 14.1.
246 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

                        Figure 14.1. Phases of the self-regulated learning cycle (Kirk, 2017)
In the cyclical process of self-regulated learning, a student plans for a task, monitors his or her performance,
and then reflects on the outcome. The cycle then repeats as the student uses the reflection to adjust and prepare
for the next task. We will now take a closer look at how to implement steps in the cycle.

Phase 1: Plan, Set Goals, and Lay Out Strategies

Before you begin working on a task for a class, establish a plan for completing it so that you can be efficient
with your time and effort. The following prompts can help you develop a plan.

  · Analyze the learning task. Is it a task you have done before, or is it something new? Does it build on a
      homework or in-class activity you completed in the past? How much time will it take? How much focus
      will you need?

  · Set goals. How will you structure the task? What are the intermediate checkpoints and sub-goals? For
                                                         CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION | 247

      example, can you complete an outline with two weeks to go and then a rough draft one week prior to the
      due date? That plan would likely allow you time to seek out extra help as needed.
  · Plan strategies. Will you need resources from the library, and how can you go about finding them? Will
      you need to book appointments with a writing tutor and your instructor? Given your needs, when
      should you get started on the task?
  · Set expectations for the outcome. Given how much time you have available, your strengths and
      weaknesses, and your current standing in the course, what type of outcome would you like?
  · Work out how to proceed if obstacles arise. For example, if you do not understand some of the
      assignment directions, plan to ask the instructor for clarification during office hours.

Phase 2: Use Strategies and Monitor Performance

In this phase, proceed with your plan. Because you have already created the plan, you can now focus exclusively
on carrying it out. Here are some key points to consider as you work through this phase.

  · Think carefully about the actions you take and their effectiveness. For example, you might think, when I
      studied in a quiet location in the library, I completed the reading more quickly than when I read at home.
      Record the observations in a notebook for future reference. Some instructors require students to write
      reflective assignments, and your record of observations may be useful for that type of assignment.

  · Monitor progress on your goals and sub-goals.
  · To help you with this work, consider using the Work Log discussed in Chapter 11. This simple

      document can help you keep track of how much work you've done and what type; you can also edit the
      log to include any notes that help you monitor or evaluate your performance.

Phase 3: Reflect on Performance

Reflect on the outcome of your efforts: in other words, think about how you did on a particular assignment,
why you earned the score you did, and how you can use the knowledge to improve future outcomes. Take into
account the following points while reflecting.

  · Compare your performance to your main and sub-goals rather than comparing it to other students'
      performance. Reflection requires looking inward for answers rather than looking at how others did.

  · Consider the effectiveness of your plan. Did it produce the outcomes you aimed for? If not, what
      changes will you make to a plan for a future assignment? How did your timeline for achieving sub-goals
      work out? What changes would you make to a similar timeline in future?

  · Consider the effectiveness of the individual strategies you outlined as part of your plan. Did you
      implement the strategies? Did you select appropriate strategies? If not, what other strategies can you try
  248 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

        next time?
     · Use your thoughts about your performance to plan for a future task. How will you adapt your

        approaches to planning, using strategies, managing time, and monitoring your performance?

  Again, the phases outlined here are cyclical, meaning that they should continue during a semester and
  throughout your academic career as you refine your approaches to assignments. Writing is a skill, and skills
  can be developed with work. For the work to be maximally productive, a writer needs to consider the tactics
  he or she uses when preparing assignments and how those tactics might be modified when preparing future
  assignments to produce different results. In other words, the writer needs to reflect on performance.

 Creating a Course Reflection Memo2

  A performance reflection usually asks you to do the following:

   1. Discuss what you did and why.
   2. Reveal the results of your actions.
   3. Identify what you learned as a result of the experience.
   4. Articulate how you will apply what you learned to future experiences.

  Notice that the list is numbered, which indicates that the steps proceed in a sequential order. In other words,
  to establish context for the reader's benefit, you must first discuss what you did before writing about how you
  will apply the knowledge gained through the experience to future endeavors.

  To create your course reflection memo, you'll need to think through the work you've done for each of the
  projects in this course along with the feedback you've received over the course of the class and the goals you
  set in the course goals memo. Below, you'll find three activities designed to help you do just that. Use these
  activities to generate material for your course reflection memo.

 Activity A: Reflect on Your Performance

  Although the list above provides a skeleton outline for writing a reflection on performance, you may also use
  pre-writing strategies to build momentum for your memo, to assemble connections between your thoughts
  and what the assignment asks you to do. To begin compiling thoughts about the assignment, read through

2. Based on Dawn Atkinson, "Reflecting on Performance," in Mindful Technical Writing.
                                                         CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION | 249

your notes about the actions you took and the effectiveness of the results (see "Phase 2: Use Strategies and
Monitor Performance"). Afterwards, try a free-writing activity to see what further ideas come to mind about
the assignment.

The following directions for free-writing are adapted from Wilfrid Laurier University (n.d., "Free-Writing
Activity").

 1. Set a timer for three minutes.
 2. Write freely and honestly about your performance until the timer buzzes.
 3. Review what you have written.
 4. Underline keywords or ideas that might require further exploration or thinking.
 5. Set the timer for another three minutes.
 6. Write freely and honestly about the keywords or ideas that you underlined until the timer buzzes.
 7. Review what you have written.
 8. Think about how you might use the free-writing notes to reflect on performance in your assignment.
 9. Disregard extraneous or off-topic information from your free-write when producing your draft.

Activity B: Review Your Goals

To understand your work during the course in the proper context, it's important to review the goals you set
when you started the course this semester. Access your course goals memo and reread what you hoped to
accomplish during the course. In the space below, write down each of your course goals.

Then, review the projects you have completed over the course of the semester. As you look through your work,
write down any evidence you find that shows how you have worked on each of your goals. This information
will give you a basis to discuss what you have achieved from working on your technical writing skills during the
class.
250 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

 Goal 1:
 Evidence:

 Goal 2:
 Evidence:

 Goal 3:
 Evidence:

 Goal 4:
 Evidence:
                                                          CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION | 251

Activity C: Review Your Writing Assignment Feedback

Reflect on your performance in this writing course by revisiting your assignment feedback to identify positive
aspects of your documents and areas for improvement.
252 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

 What positive aspects of your past assignments have you identified in your feedback?
 Aspect 1:

 Aspect 2:

 Aspect 3:

 What areas for improvement have you identified in the feedback you have received this semester?
 Area 1:
         CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION | 253

Area 2:

Area 3:

Once you have compiled some initial ideas for the assignment through free-writing, you may also decide to
create an outline to formalize plans for your paper. Use the first set of numbered steps in this section as a
starting point for an outline.

Conclusion

Your course reflection memo is the last project in the course, and it gives you time to rethink the work you've
done over the semester. As this chapter indicates, reflection is a critical technical communication skill, so taking
time to do so is important - reflection helps you integrate the lessons you have learned so that you can improve
your writing process in the future. That is to say, whatever you learn in this course, you can extend to any
course or professional writing situation you face in the future. From here, you can continually improve your
writing and design skills, as well as the processes you developed to execute projects. Happy writing!
254 | CHAPTER 14: REFLECTIVE WRITING FOR TECHNICAL COMMUNICATION

References

Kirk, Karin. (2017). The cycle of self-regulated learning [Figure]. Supporting and Advancing Geoscience
   Education at Two-Year Colleges. License: CC-BY-SA 3.0. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
   https://serc.carleton.edu/sage2yc/self_regulated/what.html.

Nobel, Carmen. (2014). Reflecting on work improves job performance. Harvard Business School Working
   Knowledge. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from https://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/reflecting-on-work-improves-job-
   performance

SAGE 2YC. (2017). What is self-regulated learning?. License: CC-BY-SA 3.0. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from
   https://serc.carleton.edu/sage2yc/self_regulated/what.html.

Wilfrid Laurier University. (n.d.). Reflective writing, section D: Writing a reflection. WriteOnline.ca. License:
   CC-BY-NC. Retrieved 18 July 2025, from http://writeonline.ca/reflective-essay.php?content=section4.
