Writing for Digital Media
Writing for Digital Media

              CARA MILLER

                             PALNI OPEN PRESS
                        INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA
Writing for Digital Media by Cara Miller is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
Contents

Publisher's Note                                        vii

Part I. Critical Literacy

1. Introduction                                         3

2. The Myth of the Digital Panacea                      42

3. Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"         83

4. Surveillance Capitalism                              111

5. Privileged Spaces                                    142

6. Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of  179

Digital Spaces

Part II. Rhetorical Literacy

7. The Everyday Function of Rhetoric                    215

8. Rhetoric as a Social Tool                            240

9. Rhetoric in the Digital Realm                        261

10. Multimodality                                       305

11. Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn                   332

Part III. Functional Literacy

12. Best Practices for Digital Writing                  365

13. Writing the Genres of the Web                       388

14. Basic Design Principles                             425

15. Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO                 454
16. Accessibility and Inclusion  484

17. Remix Culture and Copyright  508

18. Editing Your Work            538

19. Final Thoughts               572

Contributors                     577
Publisher's Note

This textbook was peer-reviewed, copyedited, and published
through the Private Academic Library Network of Indiana (PALNI)
PALSave Textbook Creation Grants Program. For more information
about the PALSave: PALNI Affordable Learning Program, visit the
PALSave website.

            Use the left-hand contents menu to navigate, or the green
bar at the bottom of the page to page forward and back.

            If you have comments, suggestions, or corrections for this
textbook, please send them to palsave@palni.edu.

                                                                            Publisher's Note | vii
viii | Publisher's Note
PART I

CRITICAL LITERACY

                                                                               Critical Literacy | 1
2 | Critical Literacy
1. Introduction

We'll begin our exploration into writing for digital media with a
fundamental premise that is both obvious and profound: Digital
media is ubiquitous. Something that is ubiquitous is everywhere,
all the time. Constant. Its prevalence in our lives has deep and
enduring consequences, though it's easy to become desensitized
and overlook what those consequences might be. Our devices--our
cell phones, smart watches, digital assistants (e.g., Echo Dots),
laptops, iPads, smart TVs--are ubiquitous. For many of us, there isn't
a single moment of the day when our cell phone isn't within arm's
reach so that we can quickly, if not compulsively, check our email,
respond to a text message, scroll through social media, read the
latest news updates, and so on.

            Certainly, we are in the digital age. Reports vary depending
on demographics, but many studies, including this onefrom Forbes,
estimate that the average American spends nearly seven hours a
day on some form of digital media (Koetsier, "Global"). This Forbes
article describes our usage as "consumption," which underscores
the idea that we are perpetually compelled to engage in digital
spaces and that we internalize those digital interactions as we form
ideas about what is valuable or normal or true. So much of what
we know about the world, from history to current events to every
other subject imaginable, comes from the internet in some form.
It not only provides information that helps shape our worldviews,
beliefs, and identities, but it mediates most of our communication
with other people, and it facilitates many of our daily activities,
from ordering food to paying bills to finding the fastest route to
our next destination. The word "consumption" also highlights the
commercial aspect of digital media. Not only is digital content a
commodity, but users themselves have become commodities as
organizations compete for more views, likes, shares, click-throughs,
and subscribers.

                                                                                   Introduction | 3
            It's no wonder that digital literacy has become such an
important topic. In this book, digital literacy is defined as the ability
to engage with digital spaces in meaningful, productive, and ethical
ways to achieve personal, professional, or civic goals. It includes the
strategies we use to find and evaluate information. It also includes
our ability to share information and respond to others thoughtfully,
strategically, and respectfully. In other words, digital literacy is
more than knowing how. Yes, it's important to know how to publish
a website or how to create a social media post. However, it's equally
important to know why you are making certain choices and to what
effect. Of particular importance are the ethical consequences of
those choices. While many digital writers and designers leverage
their rhetorical skills effectively in order to manipulate, dismiss,
confuse, and control their audience, this textbook emphasizes
digital literacy as an opportunity to develop a deeper awareness
of complex power structures and social injustices that are often
ignored and to challenge the status quo.

            The most recent student learning standards published by
the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE)
articulate the goals of digital literacy quite well. In acknowledging
how important it is to prepare students "to thrive in a constantly
evolving technological landscape," ISTE identifies seven core
objectives:

 1. Empowered Learner: Students leverage technology to take an
      active role in choosing, achieving, and demonstrating
      competency in their learning goals.

2. Digital Citizen: Students recognize the rights; responsibilities;
      and opportunities of living, learning, and working in an
      interconnected digital world, and they act and model in ways
      that are safe, legal, and ethical.

3. Knowledge Constructor: Students critically curate a variety of
      resources using digital tools to construct knowledge, produce
      creative artifacts, and make meaningful learning experiences
      for themselves and others.

4 | Introduction
4. Innovative Designer: Students use a variety of technologies
     within a design process to identify and solve problems by
     creating new, useful, or imaginative solutions.

5. Computational Thinker: Students develop and employ
     strategies for understanding and solving problems in ways that
     leverage the power of technological methods to develop and
     test solutions.

6. Creative Communicator: Students communicate clearly and
     express themselves creatively for a variety of purposes using
     the platforms, tools, styles, formats, and digital media
     appropriate to their goals.

7. Global Collaborator: Students use digital tools to broaden
     their perspectives and enrich their learning by collaborating
     with others and working effectively in teams locally and
     globally. (International Society for Technology in Education)
                                                                                       Digital
                                                                                       Literacy
                                                                                       Graph, by
                                                                                       Cara Miller
                                                                                       (CC BY)

                                                                                  Introduction | 5
            These standards underscore the deep critical thinking,
developed from a strong sense of social ethics and personal values,
that true digital literacy entails. And these skills have never been
so important. In the midst of the COVID-19 pandemic, for instance,
everything shifted to the digital realm--classes, jobs, church
attendance, doctor appointments, grocery shopping, conversations
with family and friends. Digital media became our lifeline to the
outside world and helped us maintain some sense of normalcy.
Social media platforms exploded with chatter from people who
were desperate to make connections with other people and to gain
perspective on the ongoing crisis. While some of these interactions
were positive, strengthening a sense of community and belonging,
many were not. Fueled by the political and financial agendas of
powerful media and commercial organizations, confusion,
misinformation, conflict, and ultimately division have permeated
social media. So many posts are hateful. So many people are
unwilling (unable?) to listen to perspectives different from their
own. Way too many people automatically accept or reject
information that either coincides with or contradicts what they
already believe--what they want to believe.

            Recently, Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide
Web, wrote an open letter about the "sources of dysfunction" on the
web. He says, "The fight for the web is one of the most important
causes of our time," advocating for the need to protect human
rights, equal access, and the open marketplace of ideas and social
progress that the web was designed to provide. It follows, then,
that true digital literacy is about much more than scrolling, surfing,
liking, posting selfies, gaining followers, influencing buying habits,
and spreading your opinions with the intent to shut other people
down. It's also not about being as active as possible on as many
platforms as possible. In fact, given the ubiquitous nature of digital
media, intentionality and selectivity are crucial. True digital literacy
is about meaningful and thoughtful engagement that has a positive
impact on you as well as the communities of which you are a part.

            Writing for Digital Media was written with these lofty ideals

6 | Introduction
in mind. This first chapter focuses on the historical shift from legacy
media to digital media, which gave rise to active participation and
personalization by and for everyday citizens, who experienced
significantly more control over their media experiences. Even more
significant were the fundamental changes to communication
patterns and social interactions. The second part of the chapter
sets up the remainder of the textbook by describing the overall
framework of the remaining chapters and how that framework
relates to the definition of digital literacy discussed above.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the history of digital media and how it
             quickly evolved to transform our daily lives.

          Compare the original intent of the World Wide Web
             to the current reality of privatization and commercial
             enterprise.

          Consider the trade-offs as technologies have
             developed to afford greater access to and
             participation in a growing marketplace of ideas.

          Recognize the ways that powerful organizations
             have sought to control the flow of public information
             throughout history.

          Compare the differences in audience engagement
             between traditional media and digital media.

          Understand the organizational structure of the
             textbook and how different forms of literacy create a
             more holistic and flexible approach to digital writing.

                                                                                   Introduction | 7
The History of Digital Media

A brief history lesson is in order to contextualize our digital media
use and the opportunities it affords. It's actually a pretty short
history given that the World Wide Web, which precipitated the
mass adoption of digital media, is little more than 30 years old.
On the other hand, in that short period of time, it has grown at
an astronomical rate. According to Broadband Search, 5.25 billion
people worldwide are currently connected to the internet, which
represents 66.2% of the world's population, and that number grows
by the millions every year. In fact, the percentage of online users
grew by 1,355% from 2020 to 2022. The site goes on with statistics
about the millions of people who are active on social media, who
write blogs, who utilize video streaming services, and who shop
online. Perhaps even more significant is the sharp increase in
remote working (Saad and Wigert) and remote learning (National
Center for Education Statistics) in the U.S., along with the recent
spike in e-commerce that continues to claim a higher percentage of
our total retail sales every year (U.S. Department of Commerce).

            It's not an exaggeration by any stretch to say that digital
media is a central component of our daily lives--or that most of the
world would come to a grinding halt without it. Given this reality, it's
even more startling to consider digital media's humble beginning.
Development happened in stages, beginning with the invention of
Colossus in 1944 (National Museum of Computing, "Colossus"). As its
name suggests, Colossus was enormous, approximately the size of a
living room and weighing more than five tons. And in contrast to the
multifunctional, general-purpose devices we have today, Colossus
had one job: to decode encrypted messages between Hitler and
his troops during World War II. It was also incredibly slow: 5,000
characters per second compared with modern computers that
process billions of instructions per second (Copeland).

8 | Introduction
                                                                                        Colossus, by
                                                                                        author
                                                                                        unknown
                                                                                        (CC0)

            What made Colossus digital was the way that it processed
and stored information using Boolean logic. Though it didn't have
software to direct its operations like today's digital devices, it did
have a series of switches and plugs that worked much the same way
to create binary values (positive and nonpositive) that told it what to
do and could be expanded to create complex functions. Of course,
in this early stage as digital technology became faster and held
more memory capacity, its use was strictly limited to governmental
purposes. In fact, the very existence of Colossus was kept secret
until 1975 so that it could remain a secret weapon of the military
(National Museum of Computing, "Colossus Decrypts").

            The internet was also developed as a tool for the U.S.
military, this time as a mechanism of defense during the Cold War
(History.com). Out of growing concerns for what might happen if
the Soviet Union figured out how to shut down our telephone
system--the crux of long-distance communication at the
time--ARPAnet was created in 1965 to enable government
computers to share information. Developed by electrical engineers
and mathematicians at the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA), ARPAnet was special because it used "packet
switching" to break down information into chunks of data that

                                                                                   Introduction | 9
would have unique routing paths to their destination. This made
it much less vulnerable to interception or enemy attack. However,
development was fairly slow. It wasn't until 1969 that the first
message was sent from one (gigantic) computer to another. The
word "login" was sent as a test, but only "lo" made it through before
the system crashed. Eventually, electronic mail became one of the
most important functions of ARPAnet.

            Another challenge was figuring out how to grow the
network. In fact, there wasn't one singular network. ARPAnet, with
its handful of computers, became one among several other mini-
networks. As the number of packet-switching networks with
differing configurations grew and tried to connect to one another,
it became increasingly difficult to integrate them into one seamless
communication system. As a result, Transmission Control Protocol
/ Internet Protocol (TCP/IP) was developed in the late 1970s by
Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn, often referred to as the "fathers of the
internet" (Nott). TCP/IP was--and still is--the fundamental language
that allowed networks with different configurations to
communicate, effectively bringing everything together under the
umbrella of one global network.

            Despite its growing capabilities, the use of the internet
was restricted to government officials, military personnel, and
university professors throughout the 1980s. The National Science
Foundation developed the Computer Science Network (CSNET) for
university computer scientists across the country, and as the need
for faster communication amid increasing traffic arose, NSFNET
was developed in 1986 as the "backbone" of an internet
infrastructure that would later support widespread use (National
Science Foundation, "A Brief History"). The most popular online
communications at the time were email, discussion groups (1979)
(Encyclopedia Britannica, "USENET"), Internet Relay Chat (IRC;
1988) (Dominquez), and text-based games (i.e., Multi-User
Dungeons [MUDs] and MUD Object-Oriented games [MOOs]).

            In other words, functionality as well as access was still fairly
limited throughout the 1980s, but all of that changed in 1991 with

10 | Introduction
the advent of the World Wide Web by Tim Berners-Lee. The web
allowed use of the internet to go beyond simply sending information
from one computer to another. Users could now post and retrieve
information that was intended for mass consumption across the
web. The web became a mechanism for sharing information among
all participants, and with the release of the first popular web
browser (Mosaic, later called Netscape) in 1993, the web became
accessible for public use (Andreessen). From that moment on, the
number of participants in as well as the varying uses of the internet
grew exponentially, which precipitated the rapid advancement of
digital media devices and platforms that have transformed our
everyday lives.

Commercialization of the Internet

If the development of the internet was central to the advancement
of digital media, so too was the commercialization of the internet as
companies found ways to capitalize on its capabilities for financial
gain. This continues to be an issue of debate as large corporations
continually pioneer technological advances in order to privatize
their services and extend their commercial reach (Goodman). On
the one hand, these commercial firms paved the way for mass
adoption of the internet and the digital innovations that are
fundamental to our personal and professional activities. But on the
other hand, the increasing commercialization of the internet has
shifted its underlying purpose--from information sharing and
collaboration to targeted marketing, clickbait, and commodification
of all goods and services. Users themselves have become
commodities in the fight to capture attention and increase CTRs
(click-through rates) (Hess).

            When the National Science Foundation (NSF) developed
NSFNET, its purpose was to further the advancement of education
and research, not commercial enterprise (Legal Information

                                                                                   Introduction | 11
Institute). In fact, the use of NSFNET for commercial purposes was
banned. It was free for academic institutions to share and access
information. The NSF also paid for domain names so that it was free
for users to register a website. But as the network grew, extending
to university libraries, public schools, small-town libraries, and
eventually individual households, it became more difficult for the
NSF to keep up with the growing demand, and private companies
battled for control. Commercialization occurred in stages
throughout the 1990s (National Science Foundation, "A Brief
History"), which was marked by several pivotal changes:

   "The World" emerged as the first commercial internet service
      provider (ISP; 1989). Though its dial-up service was incredibly
      slow by today's standards, the number of customers multiplied
      (Schuster).

   The NSF lifted the ban that prevented the commercial use of
      the internet (1991). Private industries could now use the
      internet for business and commercial purposes. More
      commercial ISPs became available, including CompuServe, The
      Source, and America Online (AOL).

   Tim Berners-Lee created the World Wide Web (1991), which is
      now commonly known as Web 1.0 because it focused on
      providing information to users, but pages were static and
      didn't allow for much user participation. He later advocated for
      widespread public use of the web by relinquishing proprietary
      rights to the code he created (1993) (World Wide Web
      Foundation). The World Wide Web was the first internet
      browser, making it possible to search for specific information.
      Other browsers, including Netscape Navigator and Microsoft's
      Internet Explorer, improved the internet's functionality and
      prompted increased growth.

   The NSF solicited bids from private companies to manage
      nonmilitary domain registrations (1993). Network Solutions,
      Inc. was awarded the five-year contract, and under their
      management, the number of commercial domains grew rapidly,

12 | Introduction
   increasing from 7,500 domain names in 1993 to more than two
   million at the end of their contract in 1998. In 1995, the NSF
   began charging a fee for domain registration.
 NSFNET was decommissioned (1995), which allowed for
   greater public access as private companies made their internet
   services available (National Science Foundation, "The
   Internet"). The NSF officially and completely discontinued any
   direct control it had over the management of the internet
   (1998).
 Technological advances throughout the 1990s and early 2000s
   made the internet much faster and more versatile. Broadband
   services included DSL (Digital Subscriber Line), cable internet,
   and fiber optic lines, which transferred increasing amounts of
   data that could travel around the world at the speed of light
   (Encyclopedia Britannica, "DSL").
 Google began in 1998 as a search engine and soon offered
   other services, including email, analytical tools, maps,
   advertising programs, and a mobile operating system (Google).
   Of particular importance was the algorithm Google used to
   rank web pages in order of relevance and credibility (Star).
   Soon, companies were paying for ads and also "optimizing"
   their websites to ensure more prominent placement.
 Mobile internet technology became more advanced with the
   introduction of the 2G cellular network (1991), which allowed
   users to access media content and communicate via text
   message (SMS) and multimedia message (MMS). The iPhone 2G
   was released in 2007, but it was quickly replaced as 3G, 4G, and
   5G technology developed, offering higher speeds, more data
   transfer, higher-quality streaming, and more functionality
   (Eadicicco).
 Web 2.0 was introduced (2004) with a focus on user-generated
   content and increased interaction among users (Encyclopedia
   Britannica, "Web 2.0"). Social media platforms like MySpace
   (launched in 2003), Facebook (2004), YouTube (2005), and X
   (2006; formerly known as Twitter) became increasingly

                                                                                Introduction | 13
      popular. However, increased user participation also resulted in
      more marketing opportunities as well as analytical features
      that allowed companies to collect information about specific
      behaviors and buying patterns.

            Of course, that was just the beginning. In the last two
decades, advancing technologies have made it possible to capture
people's attention at all times of the day and night, even as they
move from place to place. A recent article from the Pew Research
Center reports that 85% of Americans own a smartphone, a number
that is up significantly from just 35% in 2011 ("Mobile Fact Sheet").
What's more, people's digital media usage has more than doubled,
as evidenced by the chart below by Our World In Data. While people
averaged less than three hours a day of digital media usage in 2008,
they averaged well above six hours a day by 2018. That number
rose above seven hours in 2022, according to Insider Intelligence
(Cramer-Flood). More time spent on digital media means more
opportunities for companies to advertise to potential consumers,
which is why they put so much money into targeted marketing,
omnichannel messaging, optimizing their websites, sending push
notifications, and tracking users' online behaviors and buying
habits. They want to tap into the digital economy, which rose to
a record-breaking $1.09 trillion in 2022 (Koetsier, "E-Commerce
Retail").

14 | Introduction
                                                                                        Daily Hours
                                                                                        Spend with
                                                                                        Digital
                                                                                        Media,
                                                                                        United
                                                                                        States, by
                                                                                        Our World in
                                                                                        Data (CC BY)

            As companies increasingly used digital spaces to compete
for people's attention (and money), several trends emerged in the
2010s:

   Social media marketing. While just 5% of the adult population
      used social media in 2005, today more than 72% use some sort
      of social media (Pew Research Center, "Social Media"). In fact,
      about half of Americans use social media as their primary
      source of news information (Pew Research Center, "News
      Consumption"). Social media has also become an important
      tool for social activists (consider the Arab Spring [Hempel] or
      the 2019 protests in Hong Kong [Shao], for instance),
      humanitarian campaigns (e.g., the war in Ukraine [Spotlite]),
      and political campaigns (Wharton). Most prominent are
      businesses that use social media to interact with customers
      and advertise their latest products and services. According to a
      recent Forbes article, 77% of small businesses use social media
      regularly (Wong). Many companies use social media as their
      primary method of marketing, believing that it is the most
      effective way to reach their target audience (Cision).

   Influencers. Increasingly, businesses hire influencers to

                                                                                  Introduction | 15
      engage with potential customers because they already have a
      large number of social media followers and can leverage those
      connections to influence people's buying habits. They test
      products and make recommendations, and while it might seem
      that these people have the consumer's best interest at heart,
      the reality is sometimes a little different. "On the consumer
      side, the relationship between influencers and consumers is
      based on perceived closeness, authenticity, and trust,"
      according to Michaelsen et al., who go on to discuss the
      potentially negative impact of influencers on consumers,
      particularly more vulnerable populations such as children or
      consumers with low education. Their study found several
      negative characteristics of influencer marketing, including
      "lack of transparency and unclear disclosure, lack of separation
      between advertising and content misleading messages, and
      targeting vulnerable consumer groups" (Michaelsen et al. 10).
      While in some instances it's considered unlawful for an
      influencer to endorse specific products without fully disclosing
      that they are being paid to do so--see the anti-touting
      provision (Section 17b) of the Securities Act (U.S. Securities and
      Exchange Commission, "Securities") and the recent charges
      against Kim Kardashian for using social media to endorse an
      investment opportunity (U.S. Securities and Exchange
      Commission, "SEC Charges")--influencers often don't fully
      disclose their financial incentives.
   App culture and push notifications. You're probably familiar
      with Apple's catchphrase "There's an app for that," which
      debuted in a 2009 commercial advertising iPhone's latest
      capabilities. Since then, app culture has exploded with
      entertainment, educational, and lifestyle applications, which
      provide quick and easy access to a variety of activities and
      information. They also allow for notifications to be pushed out
      to users, often prompting them to take action to open the
      application, visit the website, or take advantage of a new
      product or promotional opportunity. While the Pew Research

16 | Introduction
   Center reported in 2010 that fewer than half (43%) of cell
   phone users had apps on their phones ("The Rise of Apps
   Culture"), more recent data suggest that the average cell phone
   user has 40 apps installed on their phone and consistently
   accesses 18 of those apps (Kataria).
 Gig economy. With more websites, applications, and channels
   of communication, more businesses and freelancers have
   emerged in the "gig economy," which relies mostly on short-
   term and contract employees who value their independence to
   accept or decline jobs as they see fit but who also must
   "produce or perish" (Petriglieri et al.). In 2015, Hillary Clinton
   forecasted the "exciting" economic opportunities and new
   innovations that stemmed from the gig economy (qtd. in
   Sundararajan), but some people point out that on-demand
   businesses like Uber, Airbnb, Etsy, and TaskRabbit are the true
   beneficiaries, making money off the labor exchange without
   having to provide consistent salaries or benefits: "There's a risk
   we might devolve into a society in which the on-demand many
   end up serving the privileged few" (Sundararajan).
 IoT and big data. The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the
   emergence of objects and systems that use wireless internet
   connections to send and receive data, often through the
   convenience of your phone (Fruhlinger). Think about all of the
   devices that have emerged in the last 10 years with the word
   "smart" in front of them--smart watches, smart TVs, smart
   refrigerators, smart door locks, smart thermostats, smart
   vacuums. A 2019 article in Priceonomics put it like this:

       The growth of Internet of Things in terms of number of
       devices, revenue generated, and data produced has been
       stunning, but most predictions expect that growth to
       accelerate. The number of connected devices is expected to
       grow to 50 billion in 2020 (from 8.7 billion in 2012) and the
       annual revenue from IoT sales is forecast to hit $1.6 trillion
       by 2025 (from just $200 billion today). (Team Recurrency)

                                                                                Introduction | 17
             The article goes on to discuss the astronomical amount
          of data (otherwise known as big data) collected by these
          devices--upward of 4.4 zettabytes in 2020--which is used
          to track user behaviors and trends, understand consumer
          needs, make product upgrades, and essentially market more
          relevant products and services to customers. While this
          might seem like a benefit in many ways, there are concerns
          about how closely IoT devices allow large corporations and
          government entities to track people's behavior. Josh
          Fruhlinger used the recent example of a map released by
          X-Mode (O'Sullivan) in 2020 that was designed to track the
          location of spring breakers as they left Fort Lauderdale. The
          purpose was to predict the spread of COVID-19, but it also
          demonstrated "just how closely IoT devices can track us"
          (Fruhlinger).

   User tracking. While we're on the topic of user tracking, it's
      another trend that emerged in the 2010s. Although Urchin was
      an analytics business that formed in the early days of the web
      (1995), it wasn't bought out by Google to become Google
      Analytics until 2005, and there weren't sophisticated tracking
      tools until 2014, when Google released Universal Analytics,
      which could track individual users across multiple devices and
      platforms (Visualwebz). Once more, the benefit is a more
      enjoyable user experience, though there are significant
      concerns about user tracking, data security, and the use of
      data to not only predict but also compel purchasing decisions
      (Zuboff).

   Artificial intelligence. You might be surprised to learn that
      artificial intelligence (AI) dates back to the 1950s as technology
      advanced allowing computers to more easily store information
      and use algorithms to complete tasks (Anyoha). However, it
      wasn't until the 2010s that AI became commonplace through
      Alexa devices, GPS, talk-to-text applications, and so on. Most
      of us encounter AI devices multiple times throughout the day,

18 | Introduction
      and our use of those devices (and the data collected as a result)
      is used in turn to train the AI to become smarter and better at
      what it does. Many IoT devices use AI to simulate human
      intelligence and complete tasks. This is called "machine
      learning," which David Grossman describes as "exciting and
      somewhat terrifying" given this potential for complex
      functionality. Peskoe-Yang explains that as we use AI in our
      daily lives, "AI is tasked not only with finding the answers to
      questions about data sets, but with finding the questions
      themselves; successful deep learning applications require vast
      amounts of data and the time and computational power to
      self-test over and over again." While recent AI technologies like
      ChatGPT have created some exciting opportunities, there are
      concerns about the performance accuracy of ChatGPT (Chen
      et al.) and the ethical implications of relying on AI devices
      fueled by biased algorithms (UNESCO).
   Scams and security breaches. Let's not forget about those
      scammers, hackers, and phishers who are also hoping to profit
      from advanced technologies and all the user data out there.
      While viruses and other types of malware became a concern in
      the early 2000s, cybercrime became much more profound and
      sophisticated in the 2010s as criminals developed "multi-vector
      attacks and social engineering" (Chadd). Expensive data
      breaches have affected not only large corporations and
      government entities but also individual users, which is why
      cybersecurity has become such an important (and lucrative)
      field (Fortune Business Insights).

            We now live in a world where the quality of life seems to
hinge on the speed of our internet connection as billions of people
spend hours every day streaming their favorite shows, scrolling
through social media, and browsing Amazon merchandise. User
activities are tracked and assessed for the purposes of providing
more targeted, personalized ads and creating a more positive user
experience that perpetuates increasing dependence on digital

                                                                                  Introduction | 19
technologies. In so many ways, the commercialization of the
internet ushered in the digital age that has provided tangible
benefits in communication, entertainment, collaboration, access to
information, and countless daily conveniences. But at what cost?
According to Business Insider, 90% of the information we consume
is controlled by a handful of powerful corporations (Lutz). Increased
surveillance, misuse of personal data, cyberbullying, addiction,
burnout, and self-indulgence are equally prevalent. These are issues
that we will examine more closely in the first section of the
textbook, which focuses on writing and digital media from a critical
perspective.

     Acronyms from this Chapter

20 | Introduction
   Acron  Full Name    Description
ym

   ARPAn     Advanced     The first public packet-switched
et        Research     network, created by DARPA in 1965.
          Projects
          Agency
          Network

DARPA        Defense      Research agency that is part of
          Advanced     the United States Department of
          Research     Defense. It developed ARPAnet.
          Projects
          Agency

   CSNE      Computer     Network developed in the 1980s
T         Science      by the Computer Science Network
          Network      for university computer scientists
                       across the country.

                                       The number of times an ad
CTR click- receives a "click" to see more through rate information divided by the number

                                    of views.

          digital      A collection of technologies that

DSL       subscriber   transmit digital data over the

          line         telephone line.

                                       The network of devices that
IoT Internet of connect to the internet and can Things exchange data with other devices

                                    and systems over the internet.

IRC Internet Text-based chat system for Relay Chat instant messaging.

          internet     Company that provides internet

ISP       service      access.

          provider

                                        Introduction | 21
   ISTE     Internatio     "A passionate community of
         nal Society    global educators who believe in the
   MOO   for            power of technology to transform
   MUD   Technology     teaching and learning" (ISTE,
   NSF   in Education   "About").

   NSFN     MUD            Online virtual reality system in
ET       Object-        which players are connected at the
         Oriented       same time.
   TCP/
IP          Multi-User  A multiplayer online space.
         Dungeon

            National       A government agency that
         Science        supports research and education in
         Foundation     science and engineering.

            National       Network developed by the
         Science        National Science Foundation in
         Foundation     1986 as the "backbone" of an
         Network        internet infrastructure.

            Transmissi     A standardized set of rules for
         on Control     delivering data across a digital
         Protocol /     network.
         Internet
         Protocol

The Shift to Participatory Media

One last historical shift is especially relevant to the scope of this
book: that from traditional media, in which audiences took a passive
role in their media consumption, to digital media, in which users are
actively searching for the information they want and contributing to
the pool of information with their own posts, shares, and comments.
While this is such common practice in our current daily lives that

22 | Introduction
it hardly seems remarkable, it's particularly significant when we
consider the larger historical context of censorship, in which
institutions with centralized authority--such as the Catholic church
in the fourteenth century (Mark) or the American government
during the colonial period (Lokey)--controlled the flow of
information to the masses. In fact, the invention of the Gutenberg
Press in 1445 and the subsequent increase in literacy rates (Ormond)
was considered a threat to the centralized authority of the church
because people had more direct access to information and could
read and interpret that information for themselves--and form their
own opinions. You probably already know that literacy is a powerful
tool for personal and intellectual growth, independence, and
expression, which is why marginalized groups have historically been
discouraged from reading (e.g., anti-literacy laws for slaves) and
especially from writing about their own experiences and
perspectives (Maddox; Monaghan).

            We could talk endlessly about how information has been
distributed throughout history--penny presses and wire services,
for instance (Illinois University Library), as well as more secretive
and subversive methods (Coleman; Harriet Tubman Historical
Society)--and the social effect this information had, such as yellow
journalism (Ferguson III), muckraking (Schiffrin), civic unrest
(Green), and social movements (Coleman). What seems most
important is that the flow of information had a profound effect
on people's thought patterns and worldviews, and the struggle to
control that flow of information escalated as more people--usually
professional writers--were able to publish their ideas. Further, as
traditional media expanded to include radio and television, the
amount of information people had access to grew exponentially.
Suddenly, people could tune in from the comfort of their living
rooms to watch their favorite show, learn about news events across
the globe, and even hear directly from the president himself.
However, it was a one-way line of communication. People
themselves had very little control over the content that was widely
dispersed for public consumption. They could tune in or not tune

                                                                                 Introduction | 23
in, read the morning paper or not, but it made no difference in the
content itself, and to miss out on the latest news would mean falling
behind in public affairs and being left out of the social discourse.

            Importantly, the limitations of traditional media stemmed
from the technology that was available. Traditional media, also
known as legacy media, included newspapers, books, magazines,
radio, and television--all of which were defined by key
characteristics:

   Intended for a mass audience. The same information was
      available to everyone, without distinction, and people couldn't
      pick and choose the type of information that seemed most
      relevant or interesting to them.

   Limited space. A television or radio broadcast could only fit so
      much information into a 30-minute segment. Newspapers,
      books, and magazines were likewise limited by the amount of
      space available on the page.

   Linear format. No matter the publication, there was always a
      clear beginning and a clear ending, and people consumed the
      information in straightforward, chronological order.

   Fixed. Once something was published, it was permanently set
      on the page or the film. It couldn't be revised.

   Noninteractive. Audience members could only receive
      information. There was no way to participate in the
      conversation.

   Limited access. Because of the limitations already listed, the
      role of producing information was reserved for professionals in
      the industry--journalists, news anchors, actors/actresses,
      novelists. There was very little opportunity for everyday
      people to have their voices heard on a mass scale.

            Obviously, digital media ushered in a new era that
dramatically altered the relationship between everyday citizens and
the flow of information. The emergence of the World Wide Web,
cable television, social media, and an onslaught of digital devices

24 | Introduction
that make it possible for people to easily and quickly access the
internet from almost anywhere has shifted our role from passive to
active. People can actively search for the type of information they
are looking for and cultivate an online repertoire of resources that
fit their interests and perspectives. They can also contribute to the
vast body of information that is available on the internet--without
needing special credentials or authorization. In direct contrast to
the limitations of traditional media, digital media is defined by
qualities that invite user participation:

   Personalized based on online habits, interests, and the ability
      to customize your news feed.

   Unlimited space. The information available online is
      immeasurable and continues to expand.

   Nonlinear formatting as information is increasingly
      hyperlinked and put into chunks that can be viewed in any
      order.

   Fluid. Information posted to the internet can easily be
      updated.

   Interactive as people like, share, and comment on the
      information that is posted and can easily post their own
      information.

            In so many ways, we have come full circle from the era
of the Gutenberg Press. As new technologies emerge, they have
completely revolutionized the way that we access information,
which in turn has a deep and pervasive effect on our ways of
thinking, being, and interacting with the world. Once again, as more
voices emerge to share new ideas and perspectives, we often
sacrifice quality for quantity and must question the credibility of
information that is available. And once more, despite the purpose
of the World Wide Web to be a marketplace for ideas and social
progress, we must recognize the continuing (though certainly
evolving) epic battle to control the flow of information and thought
patterns for self-serving purposes.

                                                                                 Introduction | 25
     Activity 1.1

        Review the history of digital media as outlined in this
     chapter and make a list of key dates and events that you
     think are most important in understanding our current
     digital media practices. You might also add events to your
     list by reading sources that are linked in the text or by
     conducting your own research.

        Once you've created your list, create some sort of visual
     representation of the events you've selected (a timeline, for
     instance, or a web). You can draw your visual
     representation. Or, ideally, you can use Canva, Photoshop,
     or some other design application of your choice to create a
     graphic that is informative, easy to understand, and visually
     appealing.

        You will share your visual and explain the choices you
     made.

Looking Ahead: The Framework for This
Textbook

At first glance, the topic of digital writing seems fairly
straightforward. In fact, it's true in some ways that digital writing
is similar to traditional print media and that some writing skills and
strategies will be similar. However, digital writing is also different
from traditional forms of writing in fundamental ways and,

26 | Introduction
therefore, often requires different strategies and skills, which we'll
explore in-depth throughout this textbook. However, as discussed
in the beginning of this chapter, the goal of this textbook is about
more than how to apply certain strategies in digital spaces, but
also why and to what effect. It's about having a deeper theoretical
and ethical understanding of the communication choices you make,
which will afford you greater intentionality and precision, not just
in the things you write but in your interactions with other people
and in your own literacy practices. To that end, the textbook casts a
wider net to include both practice and theory, challenging readers
to think critically about the opportunities that digital media affords
as well as the challenges it presents to mental health, civil discourse,
social justice, privacy, and so on.

            The book is divided into three sections, mirroring the
organizational structure of Stuart Selber's Multiliteracies for a
Digital Age, which focuses more broadly on computer literacy and
targets writing and communication teachers in higher education.
However, Selber emphasizes the need to extend conversations
about digital literacy far beyond a simple and prescriptive how-to
guide. He writes, "It is clear...that computer literacy programs can
take a rather monolithic and one-dimensional approach, ignoring
the fact that computer technologies are embedded in a wide range
of constitutive contexts, as well as entangled in value systems" (22).
In other words, an effective educational approach to digital literacy
provides critical-thinking tools that can be applied to different
situations and guide a more informed decision-making process
based on the context at hand. In that spirit, this textbook offers a
top-down approach to writing for digital media by examining three
different literacies:

 1. Critical literacy, which challenges readers to think deeply
      about the affordances and constraints of digital media, their
      own practices, and the social ramifications of communication
      that takes place on digital platforms. In this first section, the
      word "critical" has two meanings. It relates to critical thinking

                                                                                  Introduction | 27
      about relevant theories that can be used as lenses to examine
      social norms and personal habits of digital media use from a
      variety of perspectives. It also relates to critical theory, which
      focuses on power structures and cultural biases that
      marginalize certain groups of people while privileging others.
      The chapters in this first section are intended to provide
      deeper insights and new ways of thinking about digital media
      use that will inform the rest of the book.
2. Rhetorical literacy, which situates digital media as a
      communication tool that mediates between writers and their
      audiences, helping them to convey important ideas and
      perspectives as clearly as possible. All communication is about
      forging an understanding. Rhetoric is the study of how
      language (both verbal and nonverbal) is used in that endeavor,
      paying special attention to how a message is crafted by a
      speaker to engage a specific audience to fulfill key purpose(s)
      in a particular situation. This section of the book focuses on
      rhetorical considerations and strategies that make a message
      successful, particularly given the range of digital platforms and
      tools that are available.
3. Functional literacy, which is the nuts and bolts of digital
      writing, providing guidelines, best practices, and design
      strategies for a variety of genres. The last section also gives
      important information about content strategy, search engine
      optimization, copyright laws, accessibility considerations, and
      basic editing rules. In essence, this is the how-to part of the
      textbook that builds from the theoretical and rhetorical
      considerations of the previous sections.

            If you are familiar with Selber's work, you might notice
that this organization of sections is different from his as he begins
with functional and then moves on to critical and then rhetorical.
This book begins with critical literacy (arguably the most complex
and theoretical) followed by rhetorical literacy because having this
type of deeper awareness and reflection should be foundational

28 | Introduction
in guiding the specific writing choices you make, bringing certain
issues into focus and informing strategies that will align with your
values and resonate more deeply with your audience.

            Obviously, digital media is always evolving. The historical
shifts outlined in this first chapter are evidence of how quickly
digital media has emerged to transform our daily lives. And there's
no telling what digital innovations will arise in the years to come.
The goal of this textbook is to provide a foundation of intellectual
processes and rhetorical considerations that are flexible and easily
adapted to a variety of circumstances, so that as new technologies
evolve, so will you.

     Discussion Questions

         1. Reflect on your own digital media practices. What
             types of reading and writing do you do most often?
             How would your life be different without digital
             media?

        2. Review the list of learning standards published by
             the International Society for Technology in Education
             (ISTE). Can you come up with specific examples of
             each objective? How would you rank your own skills
             in each category?

        3. Summarize the primary concerns outlined by Tim
             Berners-Lee in his open letter. In your opinion, which
             ones seem the most detrimental? Why? Are there
             other concerns about the state of the World Wide
             Web that you would add to the list?

        4. What do you find most surprising about the history
             of digital media and the ways that technologies have

                                                                                 Introduction | 29
             evolved?
        5. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the

             commercialization of the internet.
        6. Give some examples of how commercialization and

             privatization affect your own digital experiences.
         7. How are the social and intellectual effects of the

             printing press similar to those of digital media?
        8. How and why have powerful organizations

             throughout history controlled the flow of public
             information? What is your reaction to claims that
             powerful corporations control the vast majority of
             information available?
        9. Summarize the three types of literacies that form
             the textbook's framework. Why is it beneficial to
             study digital writing using this top-down approach?

     Sources

                  Anyoha, Rockwell. "The History of Artificial
               Intelligence." SITNBoston, 2017,
               https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2017/history-
               artificial-intelligence/.

                  Andreessen, Marc. "Mosaic: The First Global Web
               Browser." LivingInternet.com, 20 Feb. 1993,
               https://www.livinginternet.com/w/wi_mosaic.htm.

                  Apple. "iPhone 3G Commercial: `There's an App for

30 | Introduction
That' 2009." YouTube, 4 Feb. 2009,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szrsfeyLzyg.

   Berners-Lee, Tim. "30 Years On, What's Next
#ForTheWeb?" Web Foundation, 12 Mar. 2019,
https://webfoundation.org/2019/03/web-
birthday-30/.

   BroadbandSearch. "Key Internet Statistics to
Know in 2022 (Including Mobile)." Broadband Search,
2022, https://www.broadbandsearch.net/blog/
internet-statistics.

   Chadd, Katie. "The History of Cybercrime and
Cybersecurity, 1940-2020." Cybercrime Magazine, 30
Nov. 2020, https://cybersecurityventures.com/the-
history-of-cybercrime-and-
cybersecurity-1940-2020/.

   Chen, Lingjao, et al. "How Is ChatGPT's Behavior
Changing over Time?" Arxiv.org, 1 Aug. 2023,
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09009.

   Cision. "Small Businesses Value Social Media over
All Other Digital Marketing Channels." Cision PR
Newswire, 21 Mar. 2022.

   Coleman, Colette. "How Literacy Became a
Powerful Weapon in the Fight to End Slavery."
History.com, 11 July 2023, https://www.history.com/
news/nat-turner-rebellion-literacy-slavery.

   Copeland, B. J. "Colossus Computer." Encyclopedia
Britannica, 16 Aug. 2017,
https://www.britannica.com/technology/
Colossus-computer.

   Cramer-Flood, Ethan. "US Time Spent with Media

                                                                 Introduction | 31
               Forecast 2023: A Slight Decline Overall, Even as CTV
               Time Surges, and Digital Video Finally Overtakes TV."
               Business Insider, 11 July 2023,
               https://www.insiderintelligence.com/content/us-
               time-spent-with-media-forecast-2023.

                  Dominquez, Amanda. "Internet Relay Chat."
               NYU.edu, n.d., https://kimon.hosting.nyu.edu/
               physical-electrical-digital/items/show/1363.

                  Eadicicco, Lisa. "This Is Why the iPhone Upended
               the Tech Industry." Time, 29 June 2017,
               https://time.com/4837176/iphone-10th-
               anniversary/.

                  Encyclopedia Britannica. "DSL Networking
               Technology." Encyclopedia Britannica, 16 Nov. 2021,
               https://www.britannica.com/technology/DSL.

                  ------. "USENET: Internet Discussion Network."
               Encyclopedia Britannica, 17 May 2021,
               https://www.britannica.com/technology/USENET.

                  ------. "Web 2.0 Internet." Encyclopedia Britannica,
               7 Sept. 2017, https://www.britannica.com/topic/
               Web-20.

                  Ferguson III, Cleveland. "Yellow Journalism." The
               First Amendment Encyclopedia, 2009,
               https://www.mtsu.edu/first-amendment/article/
               1253/yellow-
               journalism#:~:text=Yellow%20journalism%20usually
               %20refers%20to,unconventional%20techniques%20
               of%20their%20rival.

                  Fortune Business Insights. "Cybersecurity Market
               Size, Share, and Covid19 Impact Analysis..." Fortune

32 | Introduction
Business Insights, n.d.,
https://www.fortunebusinessinsights.com/
industry-reports/cyber-security-market-101165.

   Fruhlinger, Josh. "What Is IoT? The Internet of
Things Explained." Network World, 7 Aug. 2022,
https://www.networkworld.com/article/3207535/
what-is-iot-the-internet-of-things-explained.html.

   Goodman, Carly. "Commercialization Brought the
Internet to the Masses. It Also Gave Us Spam."
Washington Post, 4 Aug. 2017,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/made-
by-history/wp/2017/08/04/commercialization-
brought-the-internet-to-the-masses-it-also-gave-
us-spam/.

   Google. "From the Garage to the Googleplex."
Google, https://about.google/our-
story/#:~:text=In%20August%201998%2C%20Sun%
20co,was%20officially%20born.

   Green, Adam. "Yellow Journalism: The `Fake News'
of the 19th Century." The Public Domain Review, 21
Feb. 2017, https://publicdomainreview.org/
collection/yellow-journalism-the-fake-news-of-
the-19th-century.

   Grossman, David. "How Machine Learning Lets
Robots Teach Themselves." Popular Mechanics, 19
Dec. 2017, https://www.popularmechanics.com/
technology/robots/a14457503/how-machine-
learning-lets-robots-teach-themselves/.

   Harriet Tubman Historical Society. "Songs of the
Underground Railroad." Harriet Tubman Historical

                                                                Introduction | 33
               Society, n.d., http://www.harriet-tubman.org/
               songs-of-the-underground-railroad/.

                  Hempel, Jessi. "Social Media Made the Arab
               Spring, But Couldn't Save It." Wired, 26 Jan. 2016,
               https://www.wired.com/2016/01/social-media-
               made-the-arab-spring-but-couldnt-save-it/.

                  Hess, Amanda. "How Privacy Became a
               Commodity for the Rich and Powerful." New York
               Times, 9 May 2017, https://www.nytimes.com/2017/
               05/09/magazine/how-privacy-became-a-
               commodity-for-the-rich-and-powerful.html.

                  History.com. "The Invention of the Internet."
               History.com, 28 Oct. 2019,
               https://www.history.com/topics/inventions/
               invention-of-the-
               internet#:~:text=The%20internet%20got%20its%20
               start,share%20data%20with%20one%20another.

                  Illinois University Library. "American Newspapers,
               1800-1860: City Newspapers." Illinois University
               Library, https://www.library.illinois.edu/hpnl/
               tutorials/antebellum-newspapers-city/.

                  International Society for Technology in Education.
               "About." ISTE.org, 2022, https://www.iste.org/
               about/about-iste.

                  ------. "ISTE Standards: Students." ISTE.org, 2022,
               https://www.iste.org/standards/iste-standards-
               for-students.

                  Kataria, Maitrik. "App Usage Statistics 2022 That'll
               Surprise You (Updated)." Simform, 4 Jan. 2023,

34 | Introduction
https://www.simform.com/blog/the-state-of-
mobile-app-usage/.

   Koetsier, John. "E-Commerce Retail Just Passed $1
Trillion for the First Time Ever." Forbes, 29 Jan. 2023,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnkoetsier/2023/
01/28/e-commerce-retail-just-passed-1-trillion-
for-the-first-time-ever/?sh=bff541a36df2.

   Koetsier, John. "Global Online Content
Consumption Doubled in 2020." Forbes, 26 Sept.
2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/johnkoetsier/
2020/09/26/global-online-content-consumption-
doubled-in-2020/?sh=d429c9e2fdeb.

   Legal Information Institute. "42 U.S. Code 
1862--Functions." Cornell Law School,
https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/42/
1862.

   Lokey, Fiona. "The History of Censorship in
America." M-A Chronicle, 5 Oct. 2016,
https://machronicle.com/the-history-of-
censorship-in-america/.

   Louise, Nickie. "These 6 Corporations Control
90% of the Media Outlets in America: The Illusion of
Choice and Objectivity." Tech.com, 18 Sept. 2020,
https://techstartups.com/2020/09/18/
6-corporations-control-90-media-america-illusion-
choice-objectivity-2020/.

   Lutz, Ashley. "These 6 Corporations Control 90%
of the Media in America." Business Insider, 14 June
2012, https://www.businessinsider.com/
these-6-corporations-control-90-of-the-media-in-
america-2012-6.

                                                                Introduction | 35
                  Maddox, Carliss. "Literacy by Any Means
               Necessary: The History of Anti-Literacy Laws in the
               U.S." Oakland Literacy Coalition, 12 Jan. 2022,
               https://oaklandliteracycoalition.org/literacy-by-
               any-means-necessary-the-history-of-anti-literacy-
               laws-in-the-u-
               s/#:~:text=Anti%2Dliteracy%20laws%20made%20it,
               color%20to%20read%20or%20write.

                  Mark, Joshua. "Index of Prohibited Books."
               WorldHistory.org, 21 June 2022,
               https://www.worldhistory.org/article/2018/index-
               of-prohibited-books/.

                  Michaelsen, Frithjof, et al. "The Impact of
               Influencers on Advertising and Consumer
               Protection in the Single Market." Policy Department
               for Economic, Scientific and Quality of Life Policies,
               Feb. 2022, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/
               RegData/etudes/STUD/2022/703350/
               IPOL_STU(2022)703350_EN.pdf.

                  Monaghan, E. Jennifer. "Reading for the Enslaved,
               Writing for the Free: Reflections on Liberty and
               Literacy." James Russell Wiggins Lecture in the
               History of the Book in American Culture, Antiquarian
               Society, 6 Nov. 1998,
               https://www.americanantiquarian.org/
               proceedings/44525153.pdf.

                  National Center for Education Statistics. "Fast
               Facts: Distance Learning." Institute of Educational
               Practices, 2022, https://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/
               display.asp?id=80.

                  National Museum of Computing. "Colossus."

36 | Introduction
Tnmoc.org, 2022, https://www.tnmoc.org/
colossus#:~:text=Colossus%2C%20however%2C%2
0was%20the%20first,Manchester%20Small%20Scal
e%20Experimental%20Machine.

   ------. "Colossus Decrypts to be Revealed After 75
Years." Tnmoc.org, 19 Feb. 2019,
https://www.tnmoc.org/news-releases/2019/2/5/
colossus-decrypts-to-be-revealed-
after-75-years#:~:text=The%20full%20impact%20of
%20Colossus,of%20such%20complexity%20using%
20valves.

   National Science Foundation. "A Brief History of
NSF and the Internet." NSF.gov, 13 Aug. 2003,
https://www.nsf.gov/news/
news_summ.jsp?cntn_id=103050.

   ------. "The Internet--Nifty 50." NSF.gov, 2000,
https://www.nsf.gov/about/history/nifty50/
theinternet.jsp#:~:text=Internet%20
expansion,expansion%20in%20that%20very%20mo
nth.

   Nott, George. "Father of the Internet Vint Cerf:
IPv4 Was Never Production Version."
Computerworld.com, 2 July 2018,
https://www2.computerworld.com.au/article/
643174/father-internet-vint-cerf-ipv4-never-
production-version/.

   Ormond, Cullen. "The Creation of the Printing
Press." UNG University Press, 18 July 2017,
https://blog.ung.edu/press/the-creation-of-the-
printing-press/.

   O'Sullivan, Donie. "How the Cell Phones of Spring

                                                                Introduction | 37
               Breakers Who Flouted Coronavirus Warnings Were
               Tracked." CNN Business, 4 Apr. 2020,
               https://www.cnn.com/2020/04/04/tech/
               location-tracking-florida-coronavirus/index.html.

                  Our World In Data. "Daily Hours Spent with Digital
               Media." Wikimedia Commons, 2020,
               https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/
               File:Daily_hours_spent_with_digital_media,_OWI
               D.svg.

                  Petriglieri, Gianpiero, et al. "Thriving in the Gig
               Economy." Harvard Business Review, Mar.-Apr. 2018,
               https://hbr.org/2018/03/thriving-in-the-gig-
               economy.

                  Pew Research Center. "Mobile Fact Sheet." Pew
               Research, 7 Apr. 2021,
               https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact-
               sheet/mobile/.

                  ------. "News Consumption across Social Media in
               2021." Pew Research, 20 Sept. 2021,
               https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2021/
               09/20/news-consumption-across-social-media-
               in-2021/.

                  ------. "Social Media Fact Sheet." Pew Research, 8
               Apr. 2021, https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/
               fact-sheet/social-media/.

                  ------. "The Rise in Apps Culture." Pew Research, 14
               Sept. 2010, https://www.pewresearch.org/
               internet/2010/09/14/the-rise-of-apps-culture/.

                  Saad, Lydia, and Ben Wigert. "Remote Work
               Persisting and Trending Permanent." Gallup, 13 Oct.

38 | Introduction
2021, https://news.gallup.com/poll/355907/
remote-work-persisting-trending-permanent.aspx.

   Selber, Stuart. Multiliteracies for a Digital Age.
Southern Illinois University Press, 2004.

   Schiffrin, Anya. "Muckraking." Oxford
Bibliographies, 24 July 2018,
https://www.oxfordbibliographies.com/view/
document/obo-9780199756841/
obo-9780199756841-0211.xml.

   Schuster, Jenna. "A Brief History of Internet
Service Providers." Internet Archive, 10 June 2016,
https://web.archive.org/web/20190428045452/
https://www.exede.com/blog/brief-history-
internet-service-providers/.

   Shao, Grace. "Social Media Has Become a
Battleground in Hong Kong's Protests." CNBC, 16
Aug. 2016, https://www.cnbc.com/2019/08/16/
social-media-has-become-a-battleground-in-hong-
kongs-protests.html.

   Spotlite. "How Social Media Has Helped the
Ukraine Humanitarian Crisis." Spotlite, 2021,
https://gospotlite.com/blog/social-media-helped-
in-the-ukraine-humanitarian-crisis.

   Star, Danny. "An Abbreviated History Of SEO and
What It Tells Us about SEO's Future Role." Forbes, 28
Feb. 2020, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbesagencycouncil/2020/02/28/an-abbreviated-
history-of-seo-and-what-it-tells-us-about-seos-
future-role/?sh=40575c6d11ef.

   Sundararajan, Arun. "The Gig Economy' Is Coming.

                                                                Introduction | 39
               What Will It Mean for Work?" The Guardian, 26 July
               2015, https://www.theguardian.com/
               commentisfree/2015/jul/26/will-we-get-by-gig-
               economy.

                  Team Recurrency. "The IoT Data Explosion: How
               Big is the IoT Data Market?" Priceonomics, 9 Jan.
               2019, https://priceonomics.com/the-iot-data-
               explosion-how-big-is-the-iot-data/.

                  UNESCO. "Artificial Intelligence: Examples of
               Ethical Dilemmas." UNESCO, 21 Apr. 2023,
               https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/
               recommendation-ethics/
               cases#:~:text=AI%20is%20not%20neutral%3A%20AI
               ,Rights%20and%20other%20fundamental%20values
               .

                  U.S. Department of Commerce. "Quarterly Retail
               E-Commerce Sales: 1st Quarter 2022." Census.gov, 19
               May 2022, https://www.census.gov/retail/mrts/
               www/data/pdf/ec_current.pdf.

                  U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. "SEC
               Charges Kim Kardashian for Unlawfully Touting
               Crypto Security." Securities and Exchange
               Commission, 2022, https://www.sec.gov/news/
               press-release/2022-183.

                  ------. "Securities Act of 1933." Securities and
               Exchange Commission, 24 Jan 2023,
               https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/
               COMPS-1884/pdf/COMPS-1884.pdf.

                  Visualwebz. "History of Google Analytics."
               Medium, 1 Dec. 2021,

40 | Introduction
https://seattlewebsitedesign.medium.com/history-
of-google-analytics-f b7b23b6dee0.

   Wharton Staff. "How Social Media is Shaping
Political Campaigns." Knowledge at Wharton, 17 Aug.
2020, https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/
podcast/knowledge-at-wharton-podcast/how-
social-media-is-shaping-political-campaigns/.

   Wong, Belle. "Top Social Media Statistics and
Trends of 2023." Forbes, 18 May 2023,
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/business/social-
media-statistics/.

   World Wide Web Foundation. "History of the
Web." Web Foundation, https://webfoundation.org/
about/vision/history-of-the-web/.

   Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance
Capitalism. Profile Books, 2019.

                                                                 Introduction | 41
2. The Myth of the Digital

Panacea

It may seem counterintuitive for a textbook focused on writing and
digital media to take a critical look at digital media and the way it
functions in our lives, but that's what this section of the textbook
does, beginning with this chapter that challenges the myth of the
digital panacea. As discussed in the first chapter, the goal of the
textbook as a whole is to foster personal awareness and purpose
when it comes to the ways that you engage with digital texts. That
means leveraging all of the tools at your disposal, coupled with
a profound insight into the advantages and limitations of digital
communication, so that you can communicate effectively in any
context. Sometimes that will mean using digital platforms to send
and receive information, and sometimes it won't because the reality
is that digital media isn't a cure-all for the challenges we face. It
doesn't automatically make our message clearer or better received.
In fact, there will always be instances where you can't beat a face-
to-face conversation or a handwritten letter. You have to think
critically about the context at hand and all of the communications
tools that are available to you.

            The digital panacea is the opposite. It's an uncritical way of
using digital media with the underlying assumption that it is always
automatically better. It's a utopian viewpoint that considers digital
technology to be a sign of social progress--as if that progress is
inherent in the technology itself and not the way we use it. It's a
mindset that persists in almost every sector of society--health care,
journalism, education, business. Some employers believe that digital
technology will automatically improve productivity and customer
satisfaction. Some viewers believe that the news media is
automatically more credible because videos and commentary can
be posted in real time. The digital panacea is especially prevalent in

42 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
the education sector, where some school boards and administrators
believe that the more technology that is available, the more children
will be engaged, the more they will learn, and the more we can
remediate deficiencies for those who have fallen behind. In fact,
more young children than ever before have their own tablets and
are spending increasing amounts of time in front of a screen every
day (Kamenetz). This doesn't automatically make them smarter or
help with their development. In fact, it's often a hindrance when you
consider things like increased anxiety, addiction, disinhibitions, and
declining reading scores--all things that are discussed more fully in
this chapter.

            Of course, on the other side of the utopian perspective is
the dystopian viewpoint, promoted by people who tend to think
that digital technology is inherently bad. They are the ones quick
to point out the addictive qualities of digital media, the lack of
in-person interaction, the ways we are increasingly distracted by
our devices. From this perspective, digital media is responsible for
the erosion of social values and personal freedoms. Similar to the
utopian perspective, the people with a dystopian viewpoint focus
on qualities they believe are inherent in digital technologies, often
ignoring the influence of personal decisions about usage.

            While both perspectives have valid points, they both miss
the point about critical thinking and the power we have to make
choices about how digital technology is used. This chapter
examines both the positive and negative outcomes of digital media
use and ends with a practical guide for how you can think critically
about and engage meaningfully with digital technology. Though this
chapter doesn't focus exclusively on digital writing, the hope is
that it will offer big-picture perspectives about digital media use in
general, and that the theories and best practices offered here can be
adapted and applied to specific situations, including those related
to digital writing.

                                                      The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 43
     Learning Objectives

          Learn what it means to think critically about digital
             technologies and their effects.

          Examine the positive effects and digital media on
             our personal, educational, professional, and civic
             lives.

          Examine the more negative effects of digital media
             on our social, emotional, and cognitive health.

          Understand the complexities of our digital media
             use, considering the "both/and" perspective of its
             effects.

          Learn to examine your own digital media practices
             from a critical perspective, understanding your
             underlying objectives, assessing the positive and
             negative habits you have, and considering
             adjustments you can make for your own and others'
             well-being.

The Good: Benefits and Opportunities for
Progress

Let's start with the good. Without question, digital media has
afforded opportunities for some amazing achievements, and in so
many ways, it has had a tangible positive effect on our lives. Don't
mistake "critical" for "negative." A critical look at digital media would
absolutely recognize the opportunities it affords--those that have

44 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
been actualized as well as those that (for now) have only been
imagined. Indeed, a critical perspective would think realistically and
creatively about the benefits of digital media, often evaluating
traditional uses and communication strategies and also thinking
outside of the box to forge new ways of thinking and doing
(Anderson and Rainie). Let's look at some examples.

                                                                                        Group
                                                                                        Discussion
                                                                                        As A Picture
                                                                                        For Clipart,
                                                                                        by
                                                                                        PIXY#ORG
                                                                                        (CC
                                                                                        BY-NC-ND
                                                                                        4.0)

Personal

Probably the most obvious benefits of digital media are the
improvements to our personal lives--our personal relationships, our
free time, our home projects and personal budgets. It might be hard
to believe, but people used to sit down for extended periods of time
in order to pay bills, write checks, and balance their checkbooks.
They had to take the time to put checks in envelopes, write the
address and return address on each one, lick the flap, place the
stamp, and then physically take their checks out to the mailbox.
It was a tedious and time-consuming process, and it's just one
example of how digital media has made our lives easier. Many
people have autopay set up to automatically pay their monthly bills.
In other instances, it's quick to go to a vendor's website and pay
online. We can look at our bank apps anytime to see our current
balance. Something that used to take hours now takes almost no
time at all.

                                                      The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 45
            Here's another one for you: finding information used to be
difficult. To research a topic meant that you had to physically go to
the library and look for relevant information using a card catalog
or by scrolling through microfilm. Let's say you identify a book
from the card catalog that seems worthwhile. You'd have to write
down that call number, go look for the book in the stacks, and then
actually read the book to get the information you wanted. Maybe
there'd be an index with the specific information listed that you are
looking for, so you could quickly flip to the page, but then again,
maybe not. You might have to check out the book, bring it home
so you could read through it more carefully, and then remember to
return it to the library before its due date. It's hard to believe that
anybody went through all that time and trouble, isn't it? With our
handheld digital devices, nearly any type of information we might
want to know is accessible instantly. In fact, we're usually inundated
with thousands of results for one simple search, but even then
Google has made it easier to pinpoint the exact information we are
looking for by highlighting snippets from relevant web pages. Or if
even that is too much work, you can always just ask your question
to Alexa, who will search the internet for you.

            The examples are endless, but here are a few more ways
digital media has enhanced our personal lives:

   Communication options. There is a spectrum of convenient
      communication platforms that allow us to maintain
      relationships and to communicate at varying attention levels.
      For instance, FaceTime requires our full attention, and it
      captures the rich details of facial expressions and vocal
      inflection that enhance a message and provide a greater sense
      of intimacy. On the other hand, texts, emails, and social media
      direct messaging require very little attention. We can quickly
      send a message without disrupting other tasks, and we can
      manage multiple conversations at a time.

   Social connection. Similar to the above example, social media
      platforms provide a sense of connection to friends, family, and

46 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
   acquaintances. It's much easier to scroll through your feed in
   order to keep up with people's lives than it is to make phone
   calls to everyone every day. Social media has significantly
   enlarged our social circle and made it easier to support one
   another through times of crisis and celebration.
 Documentation of key moments. Built-in cameras on our
   phones and other handheld devices make it easy to take still
   photos or videos of events both big and small. With phone
   storage, cloud-based storage, social media archives, and online
   photo books, we can retrieve and share these memorable
   moments. We are able to capture much more of our daily lives
   than ever before.
 DIY projects. YouTube and Pinterest have brought about the
   popularity of do-it-yourself projects, allowing people to
   explore new hobbies and do home renovations on their own.
 Dating. Social media and a host of dating apps make it much
   easier to meet people who align with your interests and get to
   know them casually and remotely before ever seeing them in
   person.
 Entertainment. Streaming services let us curate a list of music,
   podcasts, movies, and shows based on our interests and past
   selections. Similarly, we can access more books than ever with
   apps that allow us to purchase/download a digital copy.
 Banking. Mobile banking apps allow us to view our current
   balance, pay bills, and make immediate transactions.
 Transportation. Applications like Waze and Google Maps track
   our location to give up-to-the-minute directions to help us get
   where we want to go and to navigate around accidents,
   construction delays, and other challenges.
 News. We get news updates throughout the day so that we can
   keep up with the latest news from anywhere.
 Shopping. Ads are personalized to fit our interests, and online
   shopping makes it easy to shop for groceries, clothes,
   electronics, appliances, and other merchandise--literally
   anything--from the comfort of home. We can also track the

                                                    The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 47
      progress of our packages in real time to find out when they will
      arrive.
   Remote access. As more smart appliances emerge, it's
      increasingly common to control them from our handheld
      devices. This includes heating and cooling systems, security
      systems, overhead garage doors, and a host of other appliances
      that can be managed from a remote location.
   Health monitoring. Digital devices allow us to track the
      number of steps we take in a day along with other important
      information such as heart rate, blood pressure, and even
      posture. This gives people more access to their own health
      information and empowers them to make more positive
      choices. It's also easy to share this information with a
      physician, who can offer medical care based on a more
      complete picture of a person's health.

Educational

Another obvious sector of our lives that has been enhanced by
digital media is education. As already discussed, this isn't an
uncritical celebration of all ed tech, nor is it an argument that
digital technology can ever replace the personal care and skilled
instruction of teachers. However, as we've seen in recent years,
particularly at the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, digital media
is a useful tool that can be extremely beneficial when used in
conjunction with smart lesson planning and individualized
instruction. Obviously, the experiences of both teachers and
students varied tremendously during the pandemic. While some
schools were already offering instruction either partially or fully
online and had already worked out many of the kinks, others were
forced to shift abruptly to a virtual learning format, and they
struggled with things like stable Wi-Fi, student access to digital

48 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
devices, Zoom fatigue, homework overload, confusion regarding
class concepts or instructor feedback, and feelings of isolation.

            However, at the end of the 2020 school year, following the
shift to virtual learning, many students expressed mostly positive
feelings about their online experiences. For instance, this article
from Inside Higher Ed reports that when asked whether they agree
or disagree with the statement "I could learn at least as much as
I did in face-to-face meetings," the average response on a seven-
point scale was 4.89, indicating that they agreed that online
education was effective, but there were some things that could be
improved (Lederman). Similarly, this study out of Hong Kong points
to several educational advantages of virtual learning, including
safety, convenience, flexibility, and greater access to resources
(Dung).

            Because of the pandemic, our reliance on education
technology has grown tremendously. In March 2020, UNESCO
reported that 1.3 billion students (80% of students worldwide) were
affected by school closures during the pandemic and that "all
countries are scaling up distance education modalities based on
different mixes of technologies" (Chang & Yano). Even as schools
have reopened to once again allow face-to-face learning, education
technology has continued to expand ("Ed Tech"), and more
instructors are utilizing a hybrid approach that leverages the
benefits of digital media (Seeley). Though not all populations have
benefited equally from the advances in education technology (see
"The Bad and the Ugly" below), there have been some positive
effects on student learning as a result of digital media:

   Remote coursework. Courses can be completely or partially
      online. In fact, entire degree programs are built around online
      courses that are designed to give students flexibility, so they
      can make progress toward their diploma or degree while also
      working or taking care of their families. Students can take
      courses from universities hundreds of miles away. They can
      travel while keeping up with coursework. Or they can stay

                                                      The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 49
      home to recover from illness without falling behind.
   Independent and flexible learning. Online learning

      management systems like Canvas and Moodle provide a space
      where professors can communicate with students about
      assignments, provide additional resources, and post grades. So
      students have a way to access information and take more
      control of their own learning. There are also platforms like
      Coursera or Skillshare that allow subscribers to learn a variety
      of topics completely online and at their own pace.
   Access to resources. Teachers can put important course
      resources--syllabi, rubrics, assignment sheets, study guides,
      instructional videos--online for students to access on their
      own time. This helps students take ownership of their own
      learning and review important materials that will help them be
      successful in class.
   Enhanced participation. Many online learning platforms also
      have discussion boards, which give every student an equal
      opportunity to participate in course discussions. This can be
      useful for remote learning as well as in-class discussions,
      where some students are less likely to speak up.
   Collaboration. With digital platforms like Google Workspace,
      students can collaborate in real time on the same document.
      They can also teleconference while they work on the
      document together, or they can leave comments for one
      another to be addressed later. Many teleconferencing tools,
      such as Zoom or Kaltura, allow students to be put into
      breakout groups so they can work together during class time.
   Organization. Another benefit of cloud-based platforms is that
      documents are continuously saved--so students can't "lose" a
      document they were working on, and they can always revert
      back to a previous version. The capability to create folders and
      subfolders is also an important advantage of digital media that
      helps with organization and overall workflow.
   Engagement. So many of the digital tools and applications that
      teachers use as part of their lessons or as part of student

50 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
      homework are meant to engage their interest (Hesse). Videos,
      slides, games, and other interactive tools make it easier to
      present information in a way that will fit different learning
      styles, capture students' attention, and provide opportunities
      for students to practice important skills and concepts.
   Online tutoring. Students who need additional help outside of
      the classroom can send and receive emails, post a comment on
      Canvas, or teleconference with their instructor or a tutor.
   Job training. More recently, digital technology has evolved to
      allow instructors to provide remote labs for students in
      nursing, engineering, and other STEM courses (Pegasus
      Innovation Lab). From the convenience of home, students can
      access industry-grade equipment to perform experiments and
      measurements. Virtual reality tools have also been used to help
      train doctors and surgeons in a low-stakes environment. A
      recent study indicates that surgeons who are trained with VR
      software perform better than surgeons trained using more
      traditional methods (Blumstein).

Professional

Digital media has also had a significant impact on people's
professional lives as well as the ways in which professional
organizations conduct business. Many of the personal and
educational benefits we've already listed also apply to the
professional realm. For instance, just as students have access to
remote learning options, the advancements in digital technology
have provided more opportunities for professionals to work
remotely. In fact, following the pandemic, when so many businesses
had to switch to a remote model in order to survive, many have
continued to offer fully or partially remote positions because they
provide flexibility that is conducive to a healthier work-life balance
and facilitate higher levels of productivity (New Jersey Institute

                                                       The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 51
of Technology). Similarly, digital tools have provided more
opportunities for collaboration and communication, often
streamlining workflow and allowing for more participation from
colleagues and clients. Another similarity is the way that digital
media has expanded the job market. Though many positions are
still fully in-person, requiring employees to live nearby, remote
positions allow employees to work for a company from anywhere
in the world, which means they have more job options and more
control over their preferred work environment.

            Let's focus on the benefits of digital technology that are
specific to the professional realm:

   Job hunting. People don't look at the want ads in the
      newspaper anymore. It's much easier to find a variety of
      relevant job postings on company websites, social media, and
      employment websites like Indeed or Zip Recruiter. With these
      specialized services, you can put in the type of job you are
      looking for in addition to other search parameters and then
      scroll through a long list of results. Often, these services will
      send email alerts when new relevant jobs have been posted.
      And they make it easy to upload your rsum and/or fill out an
      application for the job(s) of your choice. It's a win-win for both
      employees and employers, who can connect with more people
      and increase their chances of finding the right fit. The use of
      digital media to search for prospective jobs has also increased
      the odds of an employee leaving their employer for one that
      seems more beneficial (Bizzi).

   Networking. With professional networking apps like LinkedIn
      as well as online webinars, certifications, and conferences,
      individuals can quickly grow their professional network of
      acquaintances throughout an industry, which helps them
      acquire resources, expert advice, job recommendations, and
      more. It's also easier to develop your rsum through some of
      these online experiences and to leverage online resources
      (such as LinkedIn or your own professional website) to

52 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
   enhance your own visibility to other professionals and
   potential employers in your field.
 Training. In addition to online certifications and videos
   sponsored by experts in your industry, job training has also
   expanded to include online training manuals, short email
   updates, videos, and even interactive tools that streamline the
   process, engage employees, and increase employee
   understanding and follow-through.
 Communication. It's obviously easier to send your coworker a
   quick text than it is to walk to her office down the hall. It's also
   much faster to send the president of your company a well-
   worded email with progress updates, questions, or concerns
   than it is to call his or her secretary and try to schedule an
   appointment. Digital media has streamlined the
   communication process and in many ways has helped flatten
   hierarchies that used to make collaboration and
   communication more difficult.
 Organization. Not only can you send emails, participate in
   instant message chats, or teleconference with your colleagues
   and clients in order to get work done and foster stronger social
   connections, but digital media has also made it possible to
   access things like health insurance information, time sheets,
   pay stubs, time-off request forms, company policies, and so on.
   In fact, many organizations have their own mobile app where
   these resources and more can be easily organized and
   accessed.
 Marketing. As discussed in the first chapter about
   commercialization, digital media has had a significant impact
   on a company's ability to market directly to target audiences
   and to identify new markets where they might expand. Though
   there is more competition, it's also more effective and often
   cheaper to advertise on social media or to cultivate an email
   list of potential customers who have expressed an interest in a
   particular product or service. Also, while the role of marketing
   experts and content strategists is more important than ever,

                                                    The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 53
      it's also more common for other employees throughout an
      organization to participate in branding and social media
      marketing.
   Market expansion. Finally, digital technology has provided
      more opportunity for market growth as companies use digital
      platforms to reach potential customers in other areas. With
      the right infrastructure in place, they can also use digital
      platforms to provide enhanced customer service, facilitate
      online ordering, track package shipments, and store
      customers' buying histories and preferences for future
      marketing.

Civic

One final--but maybe the most important--area to consider when it
comes to the benefits of digital media relates to civic engagement.
Lots of recent examples come to mind in which relief organizations
were able to rally immediate and substantive support for people in
the midst of crisis. For instance, at the time of this writing, CARE.org
is actively raising money for humanitarian crises in Ukraine, South
Sudan, Afghanistan, and Yemen; for earthquake victims in Haiti; for
Hurricane Ida victims in the U.S.; for Syrian and Burmese refugees;
for people in Somalia suffering from food insecurity; and more. With
a few clicks, people can read updates about these tragedies, build
empathy for people who are suffering, and donate money to aid in
relief efforts. Similar organizations include TechSoup, Idealist.org,
and Kiva.org.

            Obviously, as we will explore later in this chapter, there is
an "ugly" side to civic engagement, and it usually revolves around
political division. However, at its core, politics isn't really about
taking sides. It's about communication, cooperation, and problem-
solving in order to function as a community--whether at the local,
state, national, or global level. It means being open to understanding

54 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
the needs of other people in your community and taking on a
participatory role to help meet those needs. In that case, digital
media has become an essential part of the process to facilitate
public awareness and support for a variety of important issues we
wouldn't have known about otherwise.

            Clay Shirky is a strong advocate for the potential of digital
media to help in the fight against injustices of all kinds. In his book
Cognitive Surplus, he argues that following educational and
industrial advancements, people have spent less time working and
far more time watching television--a national average of two
hundred billion hours each year (10). That's the "surplus" where the
book got its name. However, the good news, according to Shirky,
is that people are increasingly using digital media platforms for
productive purposes, including social justice and civic philanthropy.
He cites fundraising efforts for disabled youth, websites (including
the ones listed above) that focus on development and relief efforts,
coordinated efforts to pick up trash on the street, online
communities of patients who can connect with and support other
people with the same illness, and a Facebook campaign to support
women's rights in southwestern India in the face of fundamentalism
and oppression. Such profound opportunities exist when we see
the potential of digital media beyond personal entertainment and
satisfaction:

   Increased awareness of social issues around the world
   Heightened sense of empathy for people in crisis, particularly

      through pictures, videos, testimonials, and so on
   More capabilities to organize support and relief efforts
   Increased financial participation as well as other forms of

      support from people around the world
   Greater sense of community and goodwill
   More resources that make a tangible difference in people's

      lives

            As a brief conclusion to this section on the benefits of

                                                      The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 55
digital media, it should be clear that technology has so much
potential to free up our time, foster deeper relationships, enhance
our learning and productivity, and engage in civic activities that
make a difference in our communities. On a fundamental level,
digital media has a profound influence on who we can be and what
we can do, and depending on how and why we leverage these
technologies, the difference can be extremely positive.

The Bad and the Ugly: The Downsides of
Digital Spaces

But. Realistically, there is always a "but" when it comes to digital
media because the reality doesn't usually match the ideal. For every
benefit listed in the previous section, we could flip it on its head
to expose the negative consequences. Digital media allows for more
civic engagement? It also provides a space for people to argue,
spouting their own perspectives and priorities without listening to
others. It allows for more engaging educational tools? It also pulls
students' attention away when they should be listening in class.
It facilitates more social connections? It also hinders in-person
communication and often brings about feelings of isolation when we
scroll through other people's social media posts. And so on.

            This section is not intended to be exhaustive. It would
take a whole separate textbook to tease out all of the negative
implications of digital media and its pervasiveness in our everyday
lives. Anyway, as already stated, the point of having a critical
perspective isn't to be negative. The point is to have a fuller
understanding of both the advantages and disadvantages so that
you can make informed decisions about--and potentially put limits
on--your own digital media use. To that end, we'll look broadly in
this section at three important areas where unrestricted, imprudent

56 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
use can have the most damaging effects: social, emotional, and
cognitive.

Social

It's ironic that social media and so many other platforms that are
intended to help us forge new connections, maintain relationships,
and participate in larger civic activities and conversations could do
so much damage in those very same areas. In this instance, the
word "social" is about more than your "social life," the people that
you spend time with, or that part of your personality that makes
you want to (or not want to) interact with other people. In this
context, "social" is about the way that relationships are organized
in society--how we are taught to interact with other people and
how those interactions become central in our lived experiences.
For instance, learning is largely a social process--it's built around
your interactions with your parents, your teachers, and your peers,
and without those relationships, you wouldn't learn. By the same
token, all communication is inherently social; it takes place between
people with the shared goal of reaching a common understanding.
Digital media is a communication tool, which means it's largely a
social tool. It mediates our interactions with other people, and while
it often enhances those interactions and our abilities to relate to
other people, sometimes it makes things worse.

   Distractions. An obvious place to start might be the fact that
      many people become so dependent on their phones or iPads as
      forms of entertainment or distractions during their downtime
      that they can't tear themselves away during in-person
      conversations or activities that merit their full attention.
      Maybe you've been to dinner with someone who spent half of
      the meal looking at their phone, which hindered any
      conversation you might have had. People do the same thing

                                                       The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 57
      during class, walking down the street, standing in line at the
      grocery store, during commercial breaks, and even while
      driving. The habit of being constantly engaged with our phones
      prevents us from engaging meaningfully in things that are
      happening right in front of us. Instead of enriching our social
      interactions, our reliance on digital media depletes them.
   Posturing. Certainly, the argument can be made that all of our
      social interactions are performances and that we are
      constantly constructing (and reconstructing) our identities. We
      could also debate postmodern theories about the very
      existence of a core identity and whether any of us have a "true"
      core self. The point is that social media and other web-based
      platforms can further complicate--or even subvert--our
      identities. We spend so much time curating the perfect
      pictures of ourselves online--in a new bathing suit, at a fun or
      picturesque vacation spot, with our smiling family, or at the
      table with a gourmet meal in front of us--that we sometimes
      lose sight of or fail to appreciate the complex reality. For
      instance, we probably all know people online who constantly
      post selfies, and they aren't usually candid, spontaneous
      photos. Chances are a single photo was carefully staged and
      that it took several minutes and several versions of the picture
      before they captured the "right" one. And even then, they
      probably put a filter over the photo to make their skin brighter
      or their eyes bigger--to cover up any potential flaws. Their
      profile presents a false identity, and while their posts might be
      impressive, they don't enhance social connectedness. Quite
      the opposite, they create barriers designed to shield parts of
      ourselves and our lived experiences so people won't really get
      to know us. What's more, so much energy and focus often goes
      into constructing our ideal selves online that it gets harder to
      distinguish what's "real."
   Oversharing. In contrast to the point above, sometimes people
      don't spend enough time filtering the content they put online.
      Much of their feed is inappropriate and off-putting because

58 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
   they divulge too much personal information, they give too
   many political opinions that create tension, or they post jokes
   that are crude and offensive. Once more, the result of
   oversharing online isn't usually deeper relationships. It creates
   dissociations as their online "friends" block their feed or
   unfriend them altogether.
 Narrow-mindedness. Despite the fact that digital media has
   created more access than ever before to different perspectives
   and experiences, the reality is that instead of being sensitive to
   and reflective of other viewpoints that might expand their own
   ways of seeing and thinking, many people become more
   entrenched in their own opinions. In some ways, this is a
   consequence of personalization and the recommendation
   algorithms designed to "learn" what type of content people like
   and provide "super curated content" that fits those
   preferences and will therefore keep people online for longer
   periods of time (Farrar). Much of their online experience
   becomes an echo chamber in which their own viewpoints are
   constantly validated as more accurate and more virtuous. They
   learn to view opposing opinions as "wrong" and refuse to
   engage. In fact, Farrar points out that recommendation
   algorithms "can also spread misinformation, disinformation
   and propaganda.... Content that is emotionally charged tends
   to go viral because a lot of users engage with the content.
   There are also reports that users get sucked into radicalization
   rabbit holes as algorithms serve up more and more extreme
   content."
 Uncivil discourse. On a related note, though digital media
   provides the opportunity for productive dialogue about
   important issues, that's often not what happens. As noted
   above, some people refuse to meaningfully engage, which
   means that instead of trying to understand new perspectives,
   they often use online platforms to push their own opinions
   (backed by "credible" news sources that align with their
   political perspectives). Meanwhile, they are dismissive of and

                                                    The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 59
      downright hateful toward other people, which is a common
      online phenomenon called the disinhibition effect, in which
      "people self-disclose or act out more frequently or intensely"
      when they are online (Suler). This might also be a good place to
      mention common occurrences like social media shaming,
      cyberbullying, trolling to intentionally create discord
      (GCFGlobal), and even creating "bot-driven" social media
      accounts that "manipulate" voters with "animosity-stoking
      messages" (Baraniuk). None of these practices are about
      mutual understanding or social justice. They are intended to
      diminish other people while solidifying our own social standing
      and self-validation.
   Predatory behaviors. We can't explore the dark side of digital
      media without recognizing the dangers that lurk online.
      Wreaking havoc on our sense of "community" are the hackers,
      stalkers, identity thieves, scammers, child predators, and
      human traffickers who have truly malicious intentions and can
      leverage the affordances of digital media to harm other people.
      Our digital experiences are always laced with concerns for
      privacy and security because of the dangers that exist.
   Inequalities. Finally, despite predictions that digital media
      would promote equality for various minority groups who, in
      theory, can participate equally in digital spaces where their
      voices can be heard, digital media has largely reinforced the
      status quo. For one thing, the digital divide continues to be a
      significant problem in which populations of a lower
      socioeconomic status don't have constant access to digital
      devices (van Dijk). As a result of this inexperience, they don't
      have the digital literacies that are necessary to navigate the
      digital realm and participate meaningfully in online spaces.
      What's more, the pervasiveness of online echo chambers that
      separate people into like-minded groups based on similarities
      in political perspective, class, race, ethnicity, and so on has
      reinforced the status quo in online spaces by limiting people's
      social network and therefore limiting their access to resources

60 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
      and opportunities (Dong et al.). There's also the reality that
      while we're all being monitored on a daily basis by algorithms
      trained to predict our behavior and "control access to
      resources" (Eubanks 10), the algorithms themselves are biased,
      often perpetuating social inequalities: "Marginalized groups
      face higher levels of data collection when they access public
      benefits, walk through highly policed neighborhoods, enter the
      health-care system, or cross national borders. The data acts to
      reinforce their marginality when it is used to target them for
      suspicion and extra scrutiny" (Eubanks 11). Cade Metz makes a
      similar point in a New York Times article about AI machines
      created by and for dominant groups that further marginalize
      women and people of color.

Emotional

In conjunction with the negative social effects of digital media listed
above, many studies have demonstrated that overexposure to
certain types of content on digital media can have negative
emotional effects. Again, it's all about context. More positive
experiences on digital media can have positive emotional effects,
but it's probably easy to overlook the significant emotional effects
that come from our more negative experiences.

   Addiction. It's easy to see how habit-forming things like social
      media and video games can be when usage goes unchecked. In
      2018, the World Health Organization listed digital gaming
      disorder as a medical condition. Other studies have compared
      the addictiveness of social media and iPhone use to that of
      cigarettes, drugs, and gambling. A recent blog article by
      Harvard University explains that, like other addictive
      behaviors, positive digital media experiences trigger the
      release of dopamine, a chemical in our brain that invokes

                                                       The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 61
      feelings of pleasure and motivates us to repeat certain
      behaviors (Haynes). Over time, a "reward pathway" forms. The
      neurons in our brain respond more quickly and intensely to a
      specific stimulus. According to the Harvard article, "Every
      notification, whether it's a text message, a `like' on Instagram,
      or a Facebook notification, has the potential to be a positive
      social stimulus and dopamine influx." It's the reason people
      check their phones so often, struggle to delay responding to a
      text, spend hours focused on a screen, and get so upset when
      they are apart from their devices (Hernandez and Howerton).
      What's more, it's by design that users react this way
      (Andersson).
   Feelings of isolation. For many people, the more time they
      spend on social media, the more isolated and disconnected
      they feel. A recent study found that young adults ages 19-32
      experienced deeper feelings of isolation when they had higher
      levels of social media use (Primack et al.). This might be
      because they were interacting with people online and in fairly
      superficial ways instead of having enriched in-person
      interactions. Additionally, feelings of isolation can stem from
      scrolling through pictures of other people's seemingly perfect
      lives and thinking our own lives pale in comparison.
   Anxiety/depression. The blog post by the Harvard research
      technician referenced above estimates that on average, all of
      the tapping and swiping that we do with our electronic devices
      adds up to 2,600 touches per day (Hernandez and Howerton).
      In conjunction with the compulsion to constantly be on our
      phones so that we can respond to the latest message, watch
      the latest viral video, and generally be "in the loop" comes a
      higher level of anxiety. Anxiety also increases as a result of our
      shift in perspective when we use digital media, focusing more
      on how other people will perceive us and constantly seeking
      their positive evaluation (Annoni et al.). This leads to
      nervousness, fear of disapproval, and hostility from others.
      There are also connections between digital media use and

62 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
      problems sleeping (Ellis) as well as other mental health
      problems like depression and lower levels of self-esteem
      (Miller). This is particularly true for people who constantly
      encounter negative content online or for victims of
      cyberbullying.
   Work-life balance difficulties. While digital media has made
      many of our professional tasks easier through handheld
      devices and cloud-based systems, it has also made it more
      difficult to set clear boundaries between "work" and "home"
      (Ciolfi and Lockley). Through email, texts, and social media, we
      are in constant connection with colleagues from work as well
      as our family and friends, but it's exhausting and debilitating to
      be available all the time to everyone. It's also more difficult to
      get out of "work mode" when we come home, which can lead
      to fatigue, burnout, and stress.
   Other addictive behaviors. We've already mentioned the
      addiction to digital media itself, but another negative aspect of
      digital media is that it facilitates other addictive behaviors,
      such as pornography (Love et al.) and gambling (Kruger)
      addictions. While a person could certainly engage in these
      behaviors without digital technology, handheld devices and
      laptops make these activities much more accessible, leading to
      an increase in the prevalence and severity of these types of
      addictions.

Cognitive

Obviously, the negative effects we've listed above are cause for
concern, but there's also something uniquely terrifying about the
ways digital technology has affected our cognition--the ways that
we perceive, process, and respond to information. Some recent
studies have used neuroimaging to demonstrate that the very
structure of our brains has changed, leading to a decline in cognitive

                                                      The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 63
function. For instance, a six-week study of participants in online
roleplaying found that gamers who disengaged from the real world
to focus on virtual gameplay had a significant decline in the gray
matter in their orbitofrontal cortex, the part of the brain that helps
with sensory integration, participation in learning, impulse control,
and decision-making (Zhou et al.)--after just six weeks! Though the
cognitive effects of digital media are complex, and research is
continuing, some of the negative effects of frequent use, especially
in young children whose brains are still forming, are startling.

   Diminished attention span. With so many digital technologies
      and online platforms, combined with our own tendencies to
      multitask across multiple devices, respond instantly to
      notifications, skim web pages, and follow hyperlinks, research
      shows that our attention spans are diminishing (Purcell et al.).
      We struggle to stay focused on a single task, switching from
      one digital task to another every 19 seconds on average
      (Yeykelis et al.). A meta-analysis of 41 studies demonstrates a
      significant reduction in cognitive ability because of media
      multitasking (Firth et al.). Over time, people are more easily
      distracted and less able to concentrate for extended periods of
      time or think deeply about a topic. Similarly, we are less likely
      to engage with longer, more complicated texts, more likely to
      skim instead of read, and less engaged by ideas that are
      represented in alphabetic text than by pictures, sounds, and
      videos. One longitudinal study has found a direct connection
      between attentional deficits in younger adolescents and
      multitasking activities on electronic devices (Baumgartner et
      al.). Other experts question whether the increase in digital
      media has resulted in lower reading scores (Sparks). There are
      also the indirect effects of devices that take time away from
      homework, class engagement, and social activities.

   Decline in memory. No longer do we need to memorize
      information about history, geography, math, and so on.
      Information is constantly accessible at the click of a button,

64 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
   which means that we are far more reliant on digital devices to
   store this information instead of our own brains. For instance,
   this study by Sparrow et al. found that because of Google and
   other search engines, people are more likely to remember
   where to find the information they need than the actual
   information. It's a form of "cognitive offloading" that some
   might argue frees up intellectual space for other tasks and
   ideas, though it seems just as likely that our collective memory
   about information that at one time was considered
   foundational to our lived experience is quickly eroding. A more
   recent study shows that while many people are adept at
   finding information online, we are less likely to commit the
   information to long-term memory when we use digital devices
   (Dong and Potenza). What's more, the practice of searching the
   internet for answers becomes habit-forming, so we are more
   likely to ask Google when we are confronted with a challenge
   than think it through for ourselves (Wang et al.).
 Developmental delays. Depending on the amount of screen
   time and the content they watch, infants and toddlers can
   experience developmental delays, particularly those associated
   with language acquisition and executive function (Anderson
   and Subrahmanyam).
 Sleep disruptions. Finally, digital media can have a negative
   effect on our sleep because the blue light inhibits the
   production of melatonin, which helps us fall asleep (Gratton).
   Over time, it can disrupt our normal sleep cycles, leading to
   lower quality of sleep and other related problems like fatigue,
   difficulty focusing, difficulty with problem-solving, and so on.

                                                    The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 65
                                                                                        Too Much
                                                                                        Screen Time
                                                                                        Can Cause
                                                                                        Development
                                                                                        al Delays, by
                                                                                        Lars
                                                                                        Plougmann
                                                                                        (CC-BY-SA)

            It's worth pointing out that not all studies confirm the
negative cognitive effects of digital media. Some, like this one, show
that the correlation between social media use and cognition is
insignificant (Lara and Bokoch). Other studies, like this one, point to
positive effects of gaming and other online activities on intelligence
(Sauce et al.). The point of this section is that not all digital media
experiences are positive and that overexposure to digital
technology can have a variety of negative effects. It's important to
be intentional to understand our goals when we engage with digital
media, evaluate the effects, and set healthy boundaries. We focus on
how you can engage critically with digital technologies in the next
section.

     Activity 2.1

        The information presented in the previous two sections
     really only brushes the surface of the potentially positive
     and negative effects of digital media on our lives. Review
     these lists again, and either on your own or as part of a

66 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
     group, see what items you might be able to add to the list.
     These might be based on your own personal experiences or
     additional research that you have done.

        For each negative effect listed--both here in the chapter
     and on the list of items you created--consider ways to
     mitigate these negative effects. What specific things can we
     do? This might include personal choices and limitations as
     well as public policies and educational/professional
     practices.

Setting Your Own Goals and Boundaries

Hopefully, it's clear that digital media affords incredible
opportunities that benefit our personal and professional lives as
well as society as a whole, but those benefits aren't automatic nor
unqualified. If we are not intentional about our practices, digital
media can have significant negative consequences. This last section
of the chapter is about setting your own intentions. While there
are some general guidelines when it comes to digital media use, it's
really up to you as an individual to understand your purpose(s) when
you engage with digital media, reflect on the various effects, and
maintain healthy boundaries.

            Below is a list of factors that are fundamental to the ways
that you engage with digital media. Each one has a profound
impact--either positive or negative--on your own social/emotional
health as well as the health of the people with whom you engage.
Each one offers the opportunity for you to think critically about
your personal goals and social ethics so that you can make positive
choices in all the digital spaces you navigate.

                                                       The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 67
   Big-Picture Goals

        Identify your purpose(s). When you engage in digital
            media, whether you are receiving or sending information,
            you always have a purpose. Is it to get specific
            information? To make social connections? To network
            with other professionals? To market your business? To
            relax and enjoy a show or a video game with your friends?
            Take time to reflect on what your objectives are when you
            engage in digital media activities.

        Identify positive experiences. Based on the objectives you
            identified above, which ones do you feel are generally
            successful? Why? What are some of the unexpected
            benefits you've experienced?

        Identify negative experiences. Now consider the objectives
            that aren't being fully met based on your current practice.
            Why do you think that is? What are some of the negative
            consequences you hadn't expected? What are some
            adjustments you can make to diminish these negative
            outcomes?

        Set time limits. This one is tricky, since so much of our
            work lives (and school lives) take place in the digital realm.
            Sometimes it's difficult to control how much screen time
            we get when we are expected to engage in digital activities
            for work and school. Additionally, like this Time article
            suggests, the type of content you consume online is just
            as, if not more, important than the amount of time you
            spend online (Serrano). However, considering the addictive
            nature of digital media and the negative emotional, social,
            and cognitive effects discussed in the previous section, it's
            a good idea to limit your screen time, particularly when it
            comes to personal use (e.g., scrolling your social media
            feed or binging Netflix). See if you can identify a
            reasonable time limit per day or per week that allows you
            to enjoy these activities while still making room for other
            types of activities.

68 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
      Set timing limits. This is a bit different than the last one
         about limiting the amount of time you spend in front of a
         screen. This is about timing--establishing situations when
         it is appropriate and beneficial to be on digital media (e.g.,
         when you are doing homework or relaxing after dinner)
         and when it is inappropriate (e.g., during dinner with your
         family or while you are driving). This category also
         requires you to be discerning about which types of digital
         media are appropriate in different contexts. While you are
         doing your homework, it's completely appropriate for you
         to use Google Drive or some other homework app that has
         been assigned. It's not the time to respond to a bunch of
         texts, check your TikTok feed, or watch Netflix. This
         category is about having discipline to limit certain types of
         digital media activities when they distract you from your
         key focus/purpose.

 Content You Consume

      Make a list of the digital spaces where you receive
         information--websites, social media apps, and maybe even
         texts and emails that you receive from businesses and
         news organizations.

      What types of digital content do you consume regularly?
      Which types of content and digital spaces have a positive

         effect because they help you reach key objectives or they
         create positive feelings and connections?
      Which types of content and digital spaces have a negative
         effect because they distract you from key objectives or
         they are detrimental to your social/emotional health in
         some way?
      How can you eliminate the negative content? Admittedly,
         it might not always be possible to disassociate from
         content that inspires negative feelings. For instance,
         homework can be stressful, but it wouldn't be beneficial if
         you stopped paying attention to emails from your
         professor or the assignment listings in Canvas. However,

                                                    The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 69
            there are probably places where you can make a break.
            Unsubscribe to spam emails that fill up your inbox. Break
            away from social media groups that are toxic in some way.
            And maybe take a second look at the news feed you
            subscribe to or the friends on your social media who are
            consistently negative.
        How can you balance the information you receive?
            Particularly when it comes to news articles, blog posts,
            and even scientific studies, we tend to accept what we
            read online as fact. However, as we'll discuss in the next
            chapter, there is always another side to every issue. Do
            you research the information you receive online to verify it
            from more than one credible source? Is the information
            you receive balanced and accepting of different
            viewpoints? Do you purposely engage with people who
            have different experiences and perspectives than you so
            that you can challenge your own biases?
   Content You Share

        Make a list of all of the digital spaces where you share
            information--websites and social media apps as well as
            texts and email, if applicable. Also include places where
            you regularly make comments on other people's posts.

        What types of content do you regularly share? Work- or
            school-related information? Posts about family and
            personal experiences? How-to videos?

        What types of information do you share that have a
            positive effect on yourself and others? Consider the type
            of content as well as the tone that you use. Which
            messages help you meet the underlying objectives you
            listed above? Which ones demonstrate respect and care
            for people both inside and outside of your audience?

        What types of information do you share that have a
            negative effect on yourself and others? This is where you
            have to take an honest look at your recent messages and
            consider whether they align with your underlying digital

70 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
            media goals and personal ethics or whether they
            undermine those things because you are uncivil,
            disrespectful, or careless toward people both inside and
            outside of your audience.
        How can you eliminate the content you share that has a
            negative effect, either on your own reputation and mental
            health or on the well-being of others? Maybe consider first
            what might trigger some of your more negative messages
            and what might be a healthier, more productive way to
            resolve those issues. In some cases, it might help to
            disconnect completely from digital spaces that have
            become toxic.
        How can you be even more thoughtful about the messages
            that you share? This might have to do with verifying "facts"
            by multiple credible sources, or it might be more about
            being considerate of people whose experiences and
            perspectives are different from yours.

            Probably the most important part of engaging critically
with digital media is to reflect honestly and deeply about your own
practices, to consistently assess your experiences and outcomes,
and to be willing to make effective adjustments and set healthy
boundaries. It's also important to take a "both/and" approach to
digital media. It's not entirely good, and it's not entirely bad. It's
complex, imbued with both positive and negative effects that can't
be easily untangled. But you should still try, and you should consider
what it might look like for you to embrace an approach to digital
media that is both critically sensitive and appropriately moderate.
Though it might seem insignificant in comparison to some of the
negative consequences mentioned earlier, gaining control over your
own practices will have a big impact on you and set a positive
example for those with whom you come in contact.

                                                       The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 71
     Activity 2.2

        Review the list of questions above, reflect on your own
     experiences and practices, and jot down some answers
     based on your initial impressions/reactions.

        Then spend a few days (or maybe longer) tracking your
     digital experiences, including the digital spaces that you
     visit, your purpose, the amount of time that you spend on a
     screen each day, the types of content that you consume,
     the types of content that you share, and your feelings about
     these experiences and their effects.

        This type of self-study is a great way to clearly see what
     your digital habits are and which practices might be
     problematic. At the end of the study, compare your data
     with your initial reactions and write a reflection about what
     surprises you and what types of changes you could make to
     create more positive digital media experiences.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is the myth of the digital panacea? What are
             some examples of this mindset, and why is it
             problematic?

        2. This chapter explained that critical doesn't mean

72 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
      negative. What does it mean to think critically about
      our digital media use?
 3. The section about "The Good" effects of digital
      media begins with a couple of examples of how
      specific practices have changed--and become more
      efficient--as a result of digital media. What other
      examples can you think of? Is it always better to be
      more efficient? Explain.
 4. For you personally, which benefits of digital media
      (either from the list in the chapter or that you created
      on your own) are most significant? Explain.
 5. For many people, the COVID-19 pandemic altered
      the way that they interacted with other people
      through digital technology. Reflect on your own
      experiences, including both the positive and negative
      effects.
 6. According to the chapter, what does "posturing"
      mean when it comes to social media? How can this
      have a negative effect on both the person posting and
      the people who see these types of posts?
 7. What are the differences (if any) between
      promoting a false, overly positive image of ourselves
      online and managing our reputation and the content
      that we post in positive and responsible ways?
 8. How would you define a digital space that is
      "toxic"? What does it look like?
 9. The end of this chapter advocates a "both/and"
      perspective of digital media. What does that mean?
      What examples can you think of?
10. What is an echo chamber? In what ways might it
      have a negative personal effect?
11. Some research has shown that media companies

                                              The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 73
             purposely leverage the addictive qualities of digital
             media to increase people's screen time and their own
             advertising revenue. Is that ethical? Should there be
             more regulations in place to protect people's mental
             and cognitive health?

     Sources

                  Anderson, Daniel R., and Kaveri Subrahmanyam.
               "Digital Screen Media and Cognitive Development."
               Pediatrics, vol. 140, supplement no. 2, S57-S61, Nov.
               2017, https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1758C.

                  Anderson, Janna, and Lee Rainie. "The Positives of
               Digital Life." Pew Research Center, 3 July 2018,
               https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2018/07/
               03/the-positives-of-digital-life/.

                  Andersson, Hilary. "Social Media Apps Are
               `Deliberately' Addictive to Users." BBC Panorama, 4
               July 2018. https://www.bbc.com/news/
               technology-44640959.

                  Annoni, Anna Maria, et al. "The Relationship
               between Social Anxiety, Smartphone Use,
               Dispositional Trust, and Problematic Smartphone
               Use: A Moderated Mediation Model." International
               Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health,

74 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
vol. 18, no. 5, p. 2452. 2 Mar. 2021, https://doi.org/
10.3390/ijerph18052452.

   Baraniuk, Chris. "How Twitter Bots Help Fuel
Political Feuds." Scientific American, 27 Mar. 2018,
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-
twitter-bots-help-fuel-political-feuds/.

   Baumgartner, Susanne E., et al. "The Relationship
between Media Multitasking and Attention Problems
in Adolescents: Results of Two Longitudinal Studies."
Human Communication Research, vol. 44, no. 1, Jan.
2018, pp. 3-30, https://doi.org/10.1093/hcre.12111.

   Bizzi, Lorenzo. "Employees Who Use Social Media
for Work Are More Engaged--but Also More Likely
to Leave Their Jobs." Harvard Business Review, 17
May 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/05/employees-
who-use-social-media-for-work-are-more-
engaged-but-also-more-likely-to-leave-their-jobs.

   Blumstein, Gideon. "Research: How Virtual Reality
Can Help Train Surgeons." Harvard Business Review,
16 Oct. 2019, https://hbr.org/2019/10/research-
how-virtual-reality-can-help-train-surgeons.

   Care.org. https://www.care.org/.

   Chang, Gwang Chol, and Satoko Yano. "How Are
Countries Addressing the Covid-19 Challenges in
Education? A Snapshot of Policy Measures." UNESCO
Clearinghouse, 25 Mar. 2020,
https://gcedclearinghouse.org/news/how-are-
countries-addressing-covid-19-challenges-
education-snapshot-policy-measures.

   Campaglia, Giovanni Luca, and Filippo Menczer.

                                     The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 75
               "Biases Make People Vulnerable to Misinformation
               Spread by Social Media." Scientific American, 21 June
               2018, https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/
               biases-make-people-vulnerable-to-misinformation-
               spread-by-social-media/.

                  Ciolfi, Luigina, and Eleanor Lockley. "From Work
               to Life and Back Again: Examining the Digitally-
               Mediated Work/Life Practices of a Group of
               Knowledge Workers." Computer Supported
               Cooperative Work, vol. 28, 4 May 2017, pp. 803-839,
               https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-018-9315-3.

                  Dong, Guangheng, and Marc N. Potenza.
               "Behavioural and Brain Responses in Response to
               Internet Searches and Memory." European Journal of
               Neuroscience, vol. 42, no. 8, Oct. 2015, pp. 2546-2554,
               https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.13039.

                  Dong, Xiaowen, et al. "Segregated Interactions in
               Urban and Online Space." EPJ Data Science, vol. 9,
               no. 20, 2020, https://link.springer.com/content/
               pdf/10.1140/epjds/s13688-020-00238-7.

                  Dung, Doan Thi Hue. "The Advantages and
               Disadvantages of Virtual Learning." IOSR Journal of
               Research & Method in Education, vol. 10, no. 3, June
               2020, pp. 45-48, https://www.iosrjournals.org/iosr-
               jrme/papers/Vol-10%20Issue-3/Series-5/
               H1003054548.pdf.

                  "Ed Tech Use Continues Growth Beyond the Peak
               of the Pandemic." The Journal, 9 Sept. 2021,
               https://thejournal.com/articles/2021/09/09/ed-
               tech-use-accelerates-beyond-the-peak-of-the-
               pandemic.aspx.

76 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
   Ellis, Marie. "Put the Smartphone Down: Social
Media Use and Sleep Disturbances Linked." Medical
News Today, 27 Jan. 2017,
https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/
305665.

   Eubanks, Virginia. Automating Inequality. New
York, St. Martin's Press, 2017.

   Farrar, Lauren. "How Much Do Social Media
Algorithms Influence Your Worldview?" KQED.org, 7
Apr. 2022, https://www.kqed.org/education/
535751/how-much-do-social-media-algorithms-
influence-your-worldview.

   Firth, Joseph, et al. "The `Online Brain': How the
Internet May Be Changing Our Cognition." World
Psychiatry, vol. 18, no. 2, June 2019, pp. 119-129,
https://doi.org/10.1002/wps.20617.

   GCFGlobal. "What Is Trolling?" GCFGlobal.org, n.d.,
https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/thenow/what-is-
trolling/1/.

   Gratton, Matt. "Blue in the Face: The Effects of
Blue Light on Sleep." Society of Behavioral Medicine,
2022, https://www.sbm.org/healthy-living/blue-
in-the-face-the-effects-of-blue-light-on-sleep.

   Haynes, Trevor. "Dopamine, Smartphones & You. A
Battle for Your Time." Harvard University, 1 May
2018, https://sitn.hms.harvard.edu/flash/2018/
dopamine-smartphones-battle-time/.

   Herasimenka, Aliaksandr. "New Research
Uncovers How Misinformation Groups Make Money
Online." Oxford Internet Institute, 19 Jan. 2023,

                                     The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 77
               https://www.oii.ox.ac.uk/news-events/news/new-
               research-uncovers-how-misinformation-groups-
               make-money-online/.

                  Hernandez, Monica, and Matt Howerton. "Student
               Shoves Cedar Hill Teach in Class over Cell Phone."
               WFAA, 9 May 2018, https://www.wfaa.com/article/
               news/education/student-shoves-cedar-hill-
               teacher-in-class-over-cell-phone/287-550539367.

                  Hesse, Laura. "The Effects of Blended on K-12th
               Grade Students." Graduate Research Papers 116,
               https://scholarworks.uni.edu/grp/116/.

                  Idealist.org. https://www.idealist.org/en.
                  Jones, Rodney H, and Christoph A. Hafner.
               Understanding Digital Literacies: A Practical
               Introduction. London, Routledge, 2012.
                  Kamenetz, Anya. "Young Children Are Spending
               Much More Time in Front of Small Screens." NPR.org,
               19 Oct. 2017, https://www.npr.org/sections/ed/
               2017/10/19/558178851/young-children-are-
               spending-much-more-time-in-front-of-small-
               screens.
                  Kiva.org. https://www.kiva.org/.
                  Kleinman, Zoe. "How the Internet Is Changing
               Language." BBC News, 16 Aug. 2010,
               https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-10971949.
                  Kruger, Daniel. "Social Media Copies Gambling
               Methods `to Create Psychological Cravings.'"
               Institute for Healthcare Policy & Innovation, 8 May
               2018, https://ihpi.umich.edu/news/social-media-

78 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
copies-gambling-methods-create-psychological-
cravings.

   Lara, Rachel S., and Rebecca Bokoch. "Cognitive
Functioning and Social Media: Has Technology
Changed Us?" Acta Psychologica, vol. 221, Nov. 2021,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2021.103429.

   Lederman, Doug. "How College Students Viewed
This Spring's Remote Learning." Inside Higher Ed, 20
May 2020, https://www.insidehighered.com/
digital-learning/article/2020/05/20/student-
view-springs-shift-remote-learning.

   Love, Todd, et al. "Neuroscience of Internet
Pornography Addiction: A Review and Update."
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 5, no. 3, 18 Sept. 2015, pp.
388-433, https://doi.org/10.3390/bs5030388.

   Metz, Cade. "Who Is Making Sure the A.I.
Machines Aren't Racist?" The New York Times, 23
June 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/15/
technology/artificial-intelligence-google-
bias.html#:~:text=Buolamwini%20and%20Ms.,31%20
percent%20of%20the%20time.

   Miller, Caroline. "Does Social Media Case
Depression?" Child Mind Institute, 14 Ap. 2022,
https://childmind.org/article/is-social-media-use-
causing-
depression/#:~:text=In%20several%20studies%2C
%20teenage%20and,who%20spent%20the%20least
%20time.

   New Jersey Institute of Technology. "Benefits of
Remote Work." NJIT.edu, n.d., https://hr.njit.edu/
benefits-remote-

                                     The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 79
               work#:~:text=Remote%20and%20flexible%20sched
               ules%20not,decreased%20turnover%2C%20and%20
               reduced%20absenteeism.

                  Pegasus Innovation Lab. "Virtual and Remote
               Labs." University of Central Florida, n.d.,
               https://digitallearning.ucf.edu/ilab/remote-labs/.

                  Primack, Brian A., et al. "Social Media Use and
               Perceived Social Isolation Among Young Adults in
               the U.S." American Journal of Preventive Medicine,
               vol. 51, no. 1, 1 July 2017, pp. 1-8,
               https://www.ajpmonline.org/article/
               S0749-3797(17)30016-8/fulltext.

                  Purcell, Kristen, et al. "How Teens Do Research in
               the Digital World." Pew Internet & American Life
               Project, 1 Nov. 2012,
               https://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED537513.

                  Sauce, Bruno, et al. "The Impact of Digital Media
               on Children's Intelligence While Controlling for
               Genetic Differences in Cognition and
               Socioeconomic Background." Scientific Reports, vol.
               12, 2022, https://doi.org/10.1038/
               s41598-022-11341-2.

                  Seeley, David. "Hybrid Learning Is Here to Stay,
               Says AT&T's 2021 Future of School Report."
               DallasInnovates.com, 20 May 2021,
               https://dallasinnovates.com/hybrid-learning-is-
               here-to-stay-says-atts-2021-future-of-school-
               report/.

                  Serrano, Jamie Friedlander. "Experts Can't Agree
               on How Much Screen Time Is Too Much for Adults."

80 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
Time, 9 May 2022, https://time.com/6174510/how-
much-screen-time-is-too-much/.

   Shirky, Clay. Cognitive Surplus: How Technology
Makes Consumers Into Collaborators. New York,
Penguin Books, 2011.

   Sparks, Sarah D. "Screen Time Up as Reading
Scores Drop. Is There A Link?" Education Week, 8
Nov. 2019, https://www.edweek.org/teaching-
learning/screen-time-up-as-reading-scores-drop-
is-there-a-link/2019/11.

   Sparrow, Betsy, et al. "Google Effects on Memory:
Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at
our Fingertips." Science, vol. 333, no. 6043, 14 July
2011, pp. 776-778, https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.1207745.

   Suler, Jonn. "The Online Disinhibition Effect."
CyberPsychology & Behavior, vol. 7, no. 3, 28 July
2004, pp. 321-326, https://www.liebertpub.com/
doi/abs/10.1089/1094931041291295.

   TechSoup. https://www.techsoup.org/.

   van Dijk, Jan A. G. M. "Digital Divide: Impact of
Access." The International Encyclopedia of Media
Ethics, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781118783764.wbieme0043.

   Vosoughi, Soroush, et al. "The Spread of True and
False News Online." Science, vol. 350, no. 6380, 9
Mar. 2018, pp. 1146-1151, https://www.science.org/
doi/10.1126/science.aap9559.

   Wang, Yifan, et al. "Short-Term Internet Search
Makes People Rely on Search Engines When Facing

                                     The Myth of the Digital Panacea | 81
               Unknown Issues." PLoS One, vol. 12, no. 4, 25 Apr.
               2017, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0176325.

                  Wills, Matthew. "The Backfire Effect." JSTOR Daily,
               3 Apr. 2017, https://daily.jstor.org/the-backfire-
               effect/.

                  World Health Organization. "Addictive Behaviours:
               Gaming Disorder." World Health Organization, 22
               Oct. 2020, https://www.who.int/news-room/
               questions-and-answers/item/addictive-
               behaviours-gaming-disorder.

                  Yeykelis, Leo, et al. "Multitasking on a Single
               Device: Arousal and the Frequency, Anticipation, and
               Prediction of Switching Between Media Content on
               a Computer." Journal of Communication, vol. 64, no.
               1, Feb. 2014, pp. 167-192, https://academic.oup.com/
               joc/article-abstract/64/1/167/4085996.

                  Zhou, Feng, et al. "Orbitofrontal Gray Matter as
               Marker of Internet Gaming Disorder: Converging
               Evidence from a Cross-Sectional and Prospective
               Longitudinal Study." Addiction Biology, vol. 24, no. 1,
               Jan. 2019, pp. 100-109, https://doi.org/10.1111/
               adb.12570.

82 | The Myth of the Digital Panacea
3. Screens, Spins, and

Perceptions of "Reality"

We are living in the information age, characterized by our digital
communication tools and our constant and instantaneous access
to information. Ironically, that doesn't always mean we're more
informed. Surely, you've learned by now that just because you read
something on the internet doesn't mean it is true. Digital literacy is
largely about learning how to navigate through the infinite amount
of information online--full of agendas, spins, willful ignorance, and
outright lies--to find the answers you're looking for and to discern
what information is credible and what isn't.

            The downside of the web's infinite capacity for information
sharing is just that. It's infinite, and anybody can contribute. There
is no gatekeeper or quality control specialist who makes sure that
information posted on the internet is accurate. A Forbes article
published in 2003 reported that roughly 53% of Americans believe
that the internet is "reliable and accurate" ("For 53%"). Mind you,
that was before the iPhone was invented, before it was common
to have constant access to the internet through our phones and
other handheld devices. Even then, as the article reports, internet
use among average Americans was climbing, while their confidence
in online information was on the decline.

            Now compare those findings with a more recent Gallup poll
from 2018. This survey is a little more complex, as it doesn't lump all
online information into a single category. Instead, it focuses more
specifically on Americans' perception of the news media, reporting
that 62% of respondents believe that much of the news they receive
from traditional sources (television, newspaper, radio) is biased,
inaccurate, and purposely misleading (Jones). Respondents were
even more skeptical of the news they encountered online or on
social media.

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 83
            As the Gallup poll suggests, there are reasons to be wary
of information you encounter online, particularly in our current
political environment in which people are quick to latch onto
articles and studies that seem to validate their existing beliefs while
people on the other side of the aisle are quick to label it as "fake
news" (University of Michigan Library). Even more complex are the
screens and biases that we bring to a message, drawing from
personal experiences and our unique ways of seeing and thinking,
which impact how we interpret that information. As many theorists
argue, the meaning of a message isn't inherent in the text itself;
meaning is always found in the interpretation(s) of the receiver(s),
which may or may not align with the intention of the sender.

            Clearly, discerning "fact" from "fake news" is tricky
business, especially in the digital realm where there is so much
contradictory information, and it's sometimes difficult to know who
authored (or better yet, who sponsored) the information being
presented. In some instances, digital messages lack the rich
details--nonverbal nuances like body language, facial expression,
tone, and so on--that help us interpret a message. At other times,
digital tools make it possible to enhance or completely fabricate
those same details. The goal of this chapter is to dive into some
of those complexities to provide a deeper, more nuanced
understanding of "truth"--both in general and online. We'll also look
at tools you can use to verify the information you encounter online
and to guard yourself against the "fake news" that you might
encounter.

     Learning Objectives

          Consider the existence of multiple realities based

84 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
             on individual experiences and personal lenses for
             seeing the world.
          Understand the limitations of language and the
             importance of listening and seeking to understand
             the perspectives of others.
          Gain insight into how knowledge and our certainty
             of reality develop.
          Gain a deeper understanding of the political spins
             and biases that pervade the news media and provide
             different versions of the truth.
          Consider the prevalence and underlying agendas of
             fake news.
          Consider the dangers of the echo chamber.
          Learn how to distinguish fake news, gauge source
             credibility, and assess your own underlying biases
             and attitudes that might distort the way you receive
             information.

Terministic Screens and Perceptions of
Reality

Have you ever walked away from a conversation with a friend,
feeling like it was a really positive encounter, only to discover later
that your friend was upset by something that was said? It's a
common phenomenon. Here's a more specific example to
demonstrate the point: Let's say you pass one of your friends on
the sidewalk. You're in a rush to get where you're going, so you
don't stop to chat. Instead you give a little wave and say, "I'll talk to
you later!" In your mind, perhaps, that was a positive exchange. You

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 85
acknowledged your friend and made plans to catch up some other
time. But your friend has a different impression. Maybe they just left
a job interview that didn't go well, and they're already feeling down.
Or maybe, their date for tonight just canceled on them, and they're
already feeling rejected. So to your friend, your quick greeting
seemed halfhearted and insincere.

            Misunderstandings are just that easy. Actually, they are
even more prevalent when the message gets more complex and
when we are communicating with people we don't know or who
are different from us in a significant way. That's because all
communication--both verbal and nonverbal--is subject to our
individual interpretation. Every message has a text or a symbol--the
thing that is actually said or the nonverbal cue that is displayed.
In the above example, it's the wave and the phrase, "I'll talk to
you later!" It's the part of the message that you observe that is
clearly true because everyone else can observe it, too. All the other
bystanders on the sidewalk, for instance, would agree that you said,
"I'll talk to you later!" It's a fact. They would also probably agree
that "talk to you later" literally means that you plan to communicate
with your friend again in the future. The denotation, or the literal
meaning of a text or symbol, also tends to be fairly obvious to
everyone involved, though not always.

            Things get tricky when you interpret what is said--the
implied meaning. In other words, the person sending this message
has a purpose, a meaning that they intend for you to receive based
on their selection of symbols. But it is up to you to encode the
message to arrive at that same shared meaning. All too often, we
don't receive information the way that it was intended, and we
arrive at a different meaning. To you, your greeting to your friend
on the street meant "I care about you, but I'm too busy to talk right
now." To your friend, it meant "I don't care about you that much.
You're not a priority." Even more concerning is that if you don't clear
up the misunderstanding, your friend will accept it as fact that you
aren't as good of friends as they thought, and it will probably create
a lot more misunderstandings in the future.

86 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
            A good way to think about the way we interpret information
is a term coined by Kenneth Burke in 1966 called our terministic
screen (Stob). Burke was a philosopher and rhetorical theorist
responsible for developing a deeper understanding of how people
use language and the social effect that usage has. According to
Burke, reality isn't something that is stable or fixed. It's in constant
flux, varying from one person to another depending on their
terministic screen, or the lens they use to process information.
Put another way, your terministic screen is your way of seeing and
thinking about the world, and it develops over time based on a
complicated web of experiences and relationships. In Burke's words,
a terministic screen is "a screen composed of terms through which
humans perceive the world, and that direct attention away from
some interpretations and toward others." Factors such as gender,
sexuality, race, ethnicity, family structure, socioeconomic status,
existing beliefs, and personal biases have a complex and
fundamental effect on the way that we view the world and how we
receive new information.

            Burke also references our use of selection, based on our
terministic screen, when we send and receive information.
Language is always a selection. When we describe an event, for
example, it would be impossible to share every single detail about
that event. We would select details that we think are important
to the meaning of that event, and we would select words that we
think most accurately capture those details. And by default, if we are
selecting details and words to craft a message, we are automatically
deselecting other details and words that don't align with our
perspective. Maybe you've heard people make the argument that
language is never neutral or objective. This is what they mean. All
language is a selection based on individual values and perspectives.

            By the same token, when we receive information, we are
also selecting details we think are most important to the overall
meaning, which is why you and a friend could read the same book
or watch the same movie and come away with different ideas about
the overall theme. The more dissimilar your background is, the more

                                       Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 87
likely it is that you will make different selections and form different
interpretations. It's like that movie What Women Want, in which Mel
Gibson's character is suddenly given the ability to read women's
minds. He is confronted with the stark contrast between how he
and the women around him interpret information based on their
lived experiences and personal values, and over time, he begins
to see things through their lens a little more clearly. Admittedly,
it's an oversimplification of terministic screens, which are complex
accumulations of all of our lived experiences and aspects of our
identities, but it brings home the point about perspective.

            Similar to Burke's concept of terministic screens are two
related theories that will deepen our understanding of
"interpretation"--sociocultural theory and social constructivist
theory. Both theories emphasize the way that meaning is negotiated
as people interact. There isn't one clear meaning that is inherent
in our communication; it's always subject to interpretation based
on a variety of factors. Sociocultural theory relates more to the
social context of a message and how cultural and historical factors
might influence meaning (Mcleod). Lev Vygotsky was particularly
interested in how children develop cognitively through speech,
which mediates activity and organizes information in new and
culturally significant ways. According to Vygotsky, behavior is an
"interweaving" of both the biological reception of external stimuli
and the psychological processing of information through a
sociocultural lens. In other words, communication and how to
interpret meaning are things we learn through relationships with
other people, and often the way that we communicate changes
when we interact with different groups of people--different
discourse communities (University of Central Florida). Jean Lave
and Etienne Wenger emphasize the idea that all learning is
"situated" within complex systems where learning is "relational,"
"negotiated," "dilemma-driven," and informed by "relations of
power" (33, 36).

            Social constructivist theory looks more at the individual
within a social context--how an individual person might interpret

88 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
information based on their unique perspectives, experiences, and
ways of thinking and knowing. Using the social constructivist
framework, "multiple realities" emerge as individuals organize and
reconcile new information with their existing experiences and
beliefs. Learning, therefore, is an active process as "the learner
constructs his or her own knowledge" (Gipps 372). Social
constructivism emphasizes the idea that, while communication is
a collaboration that takes place in a social context, meanings are
ultimately interpreted and internalized by an individual based on
their connections and thought processes (Onore; Probst). There is
still room for individual variations based on personal experiences,
attitudes, and perceptions (Dweck; Powell and Driscoll). So even in
the same social community with a shared communication system,
one person might still interpret a message differently than someone
else. In fact, chances are that two people won't understand the
meaning of a message in exactly the same way.

            How does all of this relate to digital media? Quite simply,
digital media is often what mediates our communication with
people. To "mediate" means to go between two things or to
"facilitate interaction" (Jones and Hafner 2). Jones and Hafner point
out that while we tend to think of a "medium" as being something
like a computer screen or a "mass medium" like a newspaper or
radio, "all human action is in some way mediated" (2, original
emphasis). By this definition, language itself is a medium that links
people together to bring about a shared understanding, but as we've
already discussed, coming to that place of mutual understanding
can be difficult, and that's especially true when messages are
filtered through a screen, which increases the likelihood of
misunderstanding (Sermaxhaj). Texts and emails offer very little
by way of rich detail and contextual cues that would inform our
interpretation of the message (Jones and Hafner). It's hard to know
sometimes if a message is meant to be funny, sarcastic, or angry.
Subtle nuances are often absent or difficult to identify. What's more,
the language of digital media has evolved at a rapid pace--think
about slang terms, SMS abbreviations, memes--which made it even

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 89
harder for some people to fully grasp the meaning of a message
(Kleinmen). Things like font choice, pictures, videos, and charts/
graphs (things that aren't available through spoken communication)
can all be really helpful in adding clarity or depth to the meaning
of a message, particularly when messages are crafted with readers'
perspectives in mind. Even so, it's sometimes difficult to predict
how a message might be misinterpreted or misconstrued, which is
perhaps the biggest takeaway. It's also impossible to pinpoint which
interpretation is "correct." Not every interpretation is equally valid.
We're all at times guilty of jumping to (false) conclusions at times or
harboring biases that distort our perception of a message. However,
nobody can stand outside of their individual perspective to access
the "right" meaning. Communication is about negotiating meaning
through open dialogue and mutual respect. It's just as much about
listening to other people's perspectives as it is sharing your own
(Edwards).

     Activity 3.1

        Make a list of your own terministic screens--the lenses
     through which you interpret information based on your
     own experiences, values, and beliefs. Each one of us has
     multiple screens, perhaps as an older brother, a college
     student, a Christian, a parent, an American, a child of
     divorce, and so on.

        Come up with as many parts of your identity and
     background experiences as you can think of and consider
     how each one influences the way that you attend to and
     interpret information. Which ones are most central to your

90 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
     identity? How do they affect the way that you attend to and
     interpret various situations?

Underlying Agendas and Media Spins

Hopefully, it's clear by now that online communication isn't always
easy. Language is often insufficient as a mediation tool that brings
clarity and mutual understanding. Misunderstandings and
disagreements are bound to happen, and so you might have to
work a little harder to understand someone else's ideas or help
someone else understand your own. What makes everything even
more difficult is the prevalence of misinformation and
disinformation, perpetuated by economic and political agendas and
media spins that add to the confusion and widen the chasm of
political division. In many cases, false news stories and social media
rumors have sparked civil discord and even violence as people get
worked up over events that never happened or didn't happen the
way they were presented (CITS, "The Danger"). Even more
disheartening is that many disinformation campaigns are
intentional misdirections with the sole purpose of making money
(Herasimenka). It's tricky to navigate online spaces and distinguish
fact from fiction, but since media stories and your interactions with
other people surrounding these stories help shape your beliefs,
worldviews, and relationships, having effective digital literacy
means being more discerning about the stories you read and your
reactions to the information you encounter.

            Let's start with a fundamental principle of how knowledge
develops. Obviously, we accrue "knowledge" over time based on
our interactions with the world and the "evidence" that we collect.
Evidence might be our own experiences and the things that we

                                       Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 91
witness firsthand, or as you might have guessed, evidence can also
be secondhand based on what we learn from other
sources--parents, teachers, friends, colleagues, books, news media,
and so on. As we encounter new evidence that either confirms,
contradicts, or extends our existing beliefs, we undergo a cognitive
process of examining the evidence to either accept it as true or
reject it as false. And that knowledge shapes our behaviors in
specific ways. For instance, you (hopefully) brush your teeth every
day (the action) based on the belief that it's good for your teeth
and breath, which is probably based on firsthand experience as
well as information from your parents, your dentist, and so on (the
evidence). You probably never sat down and really investigated your
underlying beliefs about toothpaste; your beliefs developed
subconsciously over time and solidified as you encountered more
consistent evidence.

            The formal term for how knowledge develops over time
is called "epistemology" or the study of knowledge. This entry in
the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy examines the reason or
rationale inherent in the cognitive process of adopting information
as knowledge, also known as "cognitive success" (Steup and Neta).
However, there are potential constraints that could lead to cognitive
failure, in which we don't adopt the information as knowledge,
either because of the evidence itself or because of existing beliefs/
values that contradict the new information. When existing evidence
contradicts existing beliefs, we experience cognitive dissonance, a
mental discomfort resulting from conflicting information (Kerwer
and Rosman). Interestingly, the stronger our prior beliefs or the
more grounded those beliefs are in our personal values, the less
cognitive dissonance we experience because we are so quick to
reject the new evidence. This is also known as the "backfire effect"
as people "double down" on their beliefs even in the face of
contradictory information (Wills).

            Does that sound familiar? It might help to explain why
people are so entrenched in their beliefs, why they are so quick
to adopt information that confirms those beliefs, and why they are

92 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
equally quick to reject anything that conflicts. They haven't gone
through the sometimes painful process of examining their current
beliefs, where they come from, how valid they are, and how this
new information might fit into or even change their beliefs and
behaviors. However, the growing buzz about "fake news" and the
idea that we are living in a "post-truth" era have created more
skepticism among ordinary citizens (Schwarzenegger). However,
most people are overly confident in their ability to detect fake news
while believing that other people are fooled by media spins and
fabrications (Jang and Kim). As Schwarzenegger put it in his study
of media beliefs and personal use, "Users know that it is essential
and socially favorable to be critical of information, but they rarely
invest the energy and motivation to actually criticize it. Moreover,
awareness of the need for information skepticism does not equate
to being competent in critical practices."

            One thing to consider is the inherent connection between
bias and a person's vulnerability to fake news. Otherwise known as
confirmation bias, this happens when information that we receive
lines up with what we already believe--or want to believe. So we are
quick to adopt that information as true. Ciampaglia and Menczer
from Scientific American explain, "The fact that low-credibility
content spreads so quickly and easily suggests that people and the
algorithms behind social media platforms are vulnerable to
manipulation." In fact, often salacious, emotionally charged false
information spreads more rapidly than information that is true
(Vosoughi et al.). Ciampaglia and Menczer go on to identify three
different types of bias that cause people to latch onto fake
information: 1. Cognitive bias, resulting from "tricks" the brain uses
to quickly sift through large amounts of information. The shortcuts
bypass the more logical methods a person might use to decipher the
credibility of a source. 2. Social bias, pertaining to the people we are
around and the way information is filtered through friend groups.
People tend to have a more positive impression of information if it
comes from people in their social circle (another form of the echo
chamber). "This helps explain why so many online conversations

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 93
devolve into `us versus them' confrontations" (Ciampaglia and
Menczer). 3. Algorithm bias, utilizing what social media platforms
and search engines consider to be the most compelling content for
an individual user. However, the authors note, "But in doing so, it
may end up reinforcing the cognitive and social biases of users,
thus making them more vulnerable to manipulation" (Ciampaglia
and Menczer).

            There are obvious reasons to be skeptical of news sources.
Even legitimate news organizations are made up of people with
their own political values and beliefs, and there are external
pressures from government agencies, advertisers, and interest
groups that influence which stories are covered and the angles
that are adopted. Going back to Burke's concept of the terministic
screen, all news stories are made up of selected details and
descriptions. That doesn't necessarily mean that the information
provided is untrue, but it does mean that news stories aren't 100%
objective. They reflect a perspective that highlights certain details
while ignoring others, and these selections always relate to
underlying values and beliefs.

            Then there is the prevalence of misinformation and
disinformation, which create additional layers of confusion and
chaos. The difference is about intent. Misinformation is inaccurate
or misleading in some way, but it's not intentional. Some people
believe the false news stories they read online and promote them
as fact because they are misinformed. They have been misled in
some ways, but they aren't trying to mislead others. Similarly, news
outlets sometimes publish inaccurate information because they fail
to verify the facts. This is particularly true following some sort of
tragedy in which emotional tensions are high and news stations
rush to post a story. Disinformation, on the other hand, is the
intentional distortion of information or outright fabrications, often
for the purpose of inciting panic, anger, or excitement. Tabloids,
for instance, are known for sensationalized stories meant to grab
readers' attention and manipulate their emotions with little regard
for accuracy or balance. Similarly, even reputable news

94 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
organizations utilize sensational tactics to push ratings and political
agendas (Vanacore). Even more scary are organizations that
purposely promote fake news for the purpose of creating chaos and
distractions (PBS News). This article from the Center of Information
Technology and Society (CITS), gives several examples of fake news
stories that have gone viral, demonstrating how easy it is (CITS,
"Where Does"). In fact, Politifact.com, working with Facebook, put
together a list of 330 fake or impostor news sites that either sound
like legitimate news (ABCnews.com.co, for instance) or that target
people whose political orientations make them less likely to
question the information presented (AngryPatriotMovement.com,
for example).

            To make matters worse, there are two things to keep in
mind. First, fact-checking sites exist to provide balanced
information and help to either verify or debunk questionable
information, but these organizations have their limits (CITS,
"Protecting"). We've already established that "truth" isn't fixed or
stable, but beyond that, when looking into the details of a situation,
fact-checkers often have no legitimate source other than the
politician or organization in question. They can verify what the
politician said, but they can't verify the accuracy of that information.
There are also inconsistencies between fact-checking sites when it
comes to standards of truth or the verification process itself.

            Second, even scientific studies, which are considered to be
the standard of credibility and are used as the basis for many of
our beliefs about the world, are prone to error, misinterpretation,
and personal agendas. Though studies are designed intentionally to
reduce bias and increase validity, no study is free from bias. They
are all rooted in selections that the researchers make in terms of
the study of the design, selection of participants, interpretation of
the findings, and the language in reporting those findings. In fact,
people often overlook the rhetorical nature of studies, in which
researchers have a clear stake in promoting their own professional
ethos and the importance of their findings. Furthermore, studies
are all conducted and their results are interpreted by people who

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 95
have their own ways of seeing and thinking about the world. Not
only are news sites often guilty of distorting scientific studies to
suit their own agendas (Woolston), but the studies themselves are
sometimes flawed because they are purposely or inadvertently set
up to reach a specific conclusion (Ioannidis). That's why studies
sometimes contradict one another and why they are often repeated.
The more studies that come to the same conclusion, the more
credible that conclusion becomes.

     Activity 3.2

        Find two or more different news stories reporting on the
     same event. These could be video reports, social media
     posts, or newspaper articles. The more types of sources
     you can collect, the better. Read/watch each one and make
     comparisons about their approach. Consider the details
     that are included as well as the language, both positive and
     negative, used to describe the event. How do these texts
     align? How do they differ? How might readers come away
     with different interpretations of the event based on which
     source they use?

        If possible, see if you can find information about this
     event on a fact-checker site. Allsides.com, Emergent.info,
     FactCheck.org, or Snopes.com are all sites that try to verify
     information and provide balanced perspectives. What do
     these sites say about the event in question?

        Alternatively, you might come up with your own list of
     details about the event that you think would need to be
     verified in some way. You could also come up with a list of
     questions that would help clarify the information you

96 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
     encountered in the articles and/or that would address
     information that seems to be missing.

The Dangers of the Echo Chamber

Given the uncertainty surrounding the information that we
encounter online, it's no wonder people are skeptical. In fact, many
people are so turned off by the prevalence of fake news and political
division that they avoid news media altogether (Edgerly et al.), which
means that they're not informed about current events or issues,
and they aren't participating in the conversations or the solutions.
However, equally problematic are people who retreat to the safety
of like-minded people and the (one-sided) information that
supports their preexisting beliefs (also known as confirmation bias).
As noted above, the more strongly people feel about particular
beliefs, the less likely they are to examine the validity of those
beliefs and to wrestle with conflicting evidence, no matter how
valid it might be. Instead, they reflexively fall back on news sites
and social media groups that validate their perspectives, and they
become further entrenched in their own worldview instead of trying
to understand the worldviews of others, find common ground, and
negotiate solutions that are mutually beneficial.

            In fact, one of the dangers of the echo chamber, besides
the fact that it stifles personal growth, is that it prohibits original
thinking (Pazzanese). Nobody is thinking critically or productively
about the problems that exist, and even if they were, their ideas
would immediately be dismissed because they don't conform to
the group mentality. Instead, it leads to confirmation bias and a
deepening division that encourages people to think only of
themselves. The previous chapter discussed some of the

                                       Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 97
possibilities of civic engagement and progress that digital media
affords. However, all too often, people are sucked into an online
echo chamber that prohibits outward thinking, which can have
devastating effects on public policy, random acts of violence by
extremists, and the lived experiences of marginalized communities.
In fact, Harvard law Professor Cass Sunstein points out the
discrepancy between the ideal that the internet would be a place
that celebrates diverse perspectives in the spirit of democracy and
reality. He cites the "Daily Me," a reference to how the echo chamber
insulates us against other realities and normalizes our indulgence in
personal interests, perspectives, feelings, and so on. (Pazzanese) It's
the opposite of social progress, and without digital literacies that
encourage self-awareness and critical thinking, things will only get
worse.

What Can You Do?

Originally, this section was going to be titled "How to Spot Fake
News," which is a significant aspect of digital literacy and an
important countermeasure against the echo chamber mentality that
actively suppresses information that isn't personally beneficial.
However, like much of the information presented in this chapter
suggests, the problem lies a little deeper than a checklist that you
might use to discern the "credibility" of a source (though there is
one provided below as a starting point). We're all predisposed in
various ways to react positively or negatively to information that
either reinforces or contradicts our existing beliefs. And besides,
lots of credible sources contradict one another on important issues
and seemingly fact-based events. To engage meaningfully with new
information that you encounter--whether online or in person, on
social media or in a scientific journal--first requires a little self-
inventory.

            For instance, when you encounter information that you

98 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
immediately reject as false, take some time to consider why. What
is it specifically about the information that you find untrustworthy?
Can you pinpoint anything in particular about the writer, the news
organization, the details that are presented, the writing style? List
them out, but try to resist the urge to be dismissive or
argumentative. Simply list them out for yourself so you can
interrogate each item. Remember first off that information can be
complex, full of major and minor details. A news article might have
an inaccuracy or even a misspelling, but that doesn't mean the
entire article is false. Some items on your list might be valid reasons
to be skeptical about the information (an underlying agenda, for
instance, or a number of other articles that present conflicting
information), and some aren't (because the author is loyal to a
different political party, for example, or because the author is
different from you in some other fundamental way). The most
dangerous item on your list might be "I don't believe X because I
already know Y." So then, take some time to think more deeply--and
honestly--about that. How do you know Y (whatever fact or belief
that stands in contradiction to the new information presented)?
Where did this information come from and why do you believe
it so fervently? How valid are those experiences or other sources
of information? And is the evidence mutually exclusive? In other
words, is it possible that while your experiences are valid, it might
also be possible that other viewpoints and experiences are also
valid? It's really not about being "right" or unraveling everything you
think you know about the world. It's about thinking critically and
authentically.

            Peter Elbow was an English professor and essayist whose
ideas about teaching writing and subverting authority in the
classroom had a pivotal effect on the composition field. In his
writings in the 1970s and 1980s, he advocated for the "believing
game," which even then wasn't popular, as most people like to play
the "doubting game" (Elbow, "The Believing Game"). In contrast to
our initial gut reactions to challenge something we hear, the
believing game is a call to start out believing what you hear. You

                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 99
would look for the positives in others' ideas and consider first what
it means if they are true. Of course, it doesn't mean that you have
to agree with everything you hear or read, but it does open you
up to engage more openly with other perspectives and to challenge
yourself to see their value. As Elbow said in his 1986 book Embracing
Contradictions: Explorations in Learning and Teaching, "The truth is
often complex and...different people often catch different aspects
of it." When we embrace contradictions, we begin to understand
that "certainty is rarely if ever possible and that we increase the
likelihood of getting things wrong if we succumb to the hunger for
it."

            The challenging part of self-inventory might be when you
have to interrogate your reactions to information that you are
inclined to believe, which you wouldn't normally question at all
because it seems so obviously true. Once again, you'd think about
why. What is it about the author, the publishing organization, the
information itself, the writing style, and so on that makes it seem
credible? What are the underlying beliefs and assumptions that
you have that might predispose you to believe or agree with this
information? Can you pinpoint where those beliefs and assumptions
might come from? What if you didn't hold those underlying beliefs?
What about the article might you question then? Again, it's not
about undoing all of your core beliefs; it's simply an exercise in self-
reflection where you think more critically about where your beliefs
and attitudes come from. It might lead to some adjustments in your
thinking, but the ultimate goal is self-understanding and reasoning
based on logic instead of high emotion. It might also help you see
that there is room for alternative viewpoints that are also logical and
valid.

100 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
                                                                                        How To Spot
                                                                                        Fake News,
                                                                                        by IFLA, on
                                                                                        Wikimedia
                                                                                        Commons
                                                                                        (CC BY 4.0)

            Of course, there are also strategies that you can use to
discern the credibility of a source. A classic acronym that is easy to
remember as you're assessing a source of information is the CRAAP
test:

   Currency: Is the information up to date? Of course, this
      criterion would be applied differently in different situations.
      Some topics like medicine or technology are constantly
      evolving, so it would be crucial to find a source that is current.
      For other topics--historical information, for instance--it might
      be okay, even preferred, to use sources that are a bit older.
                                      Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 101
   Relevance: Is the information relevant to your research
      question? This criterion is probably more useful for students in
      research courses, working to piece together a compelling
      research paper. Too often, students use sources that only
      loosely connect to their topic, resulting in a paper that is
      choppy and hard to follow. The point is to make sure that the
      source you use is focused on the same research question you
      are asking.

   Authority: Who is the person that is providing this
      information? What authority do they have on this topic?
      Something that is written by a credentialed expert in a
      particular field will have more authority on a related topic than
      a journalist or blogger without that specialized knowledge.
      Another thing that relates to authority is the research that the
      source presents. Where are they getting their information, and
      are they providing those sources as hyperlinks or citations?
      Does their own research look sound?

   Accuracy: Is the information accurate? Does it make sense and
      align with other information you've received on this topic? It
      might be a red flag if the information is contrary to everything
      else that you've learned on this topic. Again, you'd look more
      closely at their source of information or the methods they used
      to come to a conclusion (if it's a study, for instance). Remember
      that a single study isn't enough to prove that the conclusion is
      correct. Multiple studies that all arrive at the same conclusion
      have more weight.

   Purpose: What is the intention behind the source? What does
      it want you to think or do? How is it using information to be
      persuasive? At the very least, someone who has gone through
      the trouble of publishing information wants to catch your
      attention and wants you to agree that the topic is important.
      As we'll discuss below, even academic studies have a rhetorical
      purpose beyond simply providing useful information that
      progresses our knowledge in a particular area. It's always
      helpful for you to consider the financial or political motives of

102 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
      a source.

            Though these guidelines don't guarantee that the
information is 100% accurate, they do help you gauge the credibility
of a source. You should also be on the lookout for fake news stories
with these other red flags:

   URLs that are created to look similar to a more established,
      credible news source

   Unique information/events that aren't confirmed on other
      news sites

   Claims that are outlandish and provoke strong emotional
      reactions

            Digital literacy and the quality of your digital writing hinge
on your ability to navigate your way through the endless sea of
online information, to distinguish credible information from fake
news, to engage with other ideas, to understand the complexities
of multiple realities, and to wrestle with your own attitudes and
personal biases that might hold you back from genuine and
productive discourse.

     Activity 3.3

        This section challenges you to consider the beliefs and
     attitudes that you have that provoke you to respond to
     information in certain ways. However, it can be difficult to
     honestly and accurately pinpoint attitudes and values. This
     short chapter in Principles of Social Psychology explains that
     our behaviors always stem from our underlying attitudes
     and beliefs (Jhangiani and Tarry). So to begin to understand

                                     Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 103
     your beliefs and attitudes, it might help to begin with your
     behaviors. Everything that you do is informed by some sort
     of underlying belief. As mentioned earlier in the chapter,
     you brush your teeth because you believe that you won't
     have good dental hygiene if you don't and because you
     value your health.

        What other examples can you come up with? Think of
     some of your ordinary, everyday habits related to your diet,
     your exercise routine (or lack thereof), the tasks at work or
     school that you prioritize, your evening routine, and so on.
     Think about the things that you do and also the things that
     you don't do. The way you spend your time and energy says
     a lot about the things that you believe and value. What do
     your daily activities say about you?

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a terministic screen? How does it influence
             the ways that different people interpret information?

        2. What does it mean that our terministic screens
             guide our selections of information as well as our
             deselections?

        3. What are sociocultural theory and social
             constructivist theory? When it comes to language
             and meaning, how are the two theories similar? How
             are they different? How do these two theories work

104 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
        together to extend your understanding of language
        and communication? How do they connect
        specifically to digital communication?
   4. How does information that conflicts with our
        preexisting beliefs create cognitive dissonance? What
        are people likely to do when they experience
        dissonance?
   5. What is the difference between misinformation and
        disinformation? How do they contribute to confusion
        and division?
   6. What is an echo chamber? Why do people succumb
        to the "Daily Me"? What are some of the dangers of
        this habit?
    7. What is the believing game? How can it be helpful
        when examining key issues?
   8. What are some ways that you can distinguish the
        credibility of a source?
   9. What are some key identifiers of fake news?

Sources

             Burke, Kenneth. Language as Symbolic Action.
          Cambridge University Press, 1966.

             CITS. "The Danger of Fake News." CITS.uscb.edu,
          2022, https://www.cits.ucsb.edu/fake-news/
          danger-social.

                                Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 105
                  ------. "Protecting Ourselves from Fake News:
               Fact-Checkers and Their Limitations." CITS.uscb.edu,
               2022, https://www.cits.ucsb.edu/fake-news/
               protecting-ourselves-fact.

                  ------. "Where Does Fake News Come From?"
               CITS.uscb.edu, 2022, https://cits.ucsb.edu/fake-
               news/where.

                  Confessore, Nicholas. "Cambridge Analytica and
               Facebook: The Scandal and the Fallout So Far." The
               New York Times, 4 Apr. 2018,
               https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/04/us/
               politics/cambridge-analytica-scandal-fallout.html.

                  Dweck, Carol. Mindset: The New Psychology of
               Success. Random House Publishing Group, 2007.

                  Edgerly, Stephanie, et al. "New Media, New
               Relationship to Participation? A Closer Look at
               Youth News Repertoires and Political Participation."
               Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, vol.
               95, no. 1, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1177/
               1077699017706928.

                  Edwards, Renee. "Listening and Message
               Interpretation." International Journal of Listening,
               vol. 25, no. 1, pp. Jan. 2011, pp. 47-65,
               https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
               233145847_Listening_and_Message_Interpretation.

                  Elbow, Peter. "The Believing
               Game--Methodological Believing." The Journal For
               Assembly of Expanded Perspectives on Learning, vol.
               5, Jan. 2008, https://scholarworks.umass.edu/cgi/

106 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
viewcontent.cgi?article=1004&context=eng_faculty
_pubs.

   ------. "Methodological Doubting and Believing:
Contraries in Inquiry," in Embracing Contraries:
Explorations in Learning and Teaching, N.Y., Oxford
University Press, 1986.

   "For 53% Reliable Information, Click Here." Forbes,
31 Jan. 2003, https://www.forbes.com/2003/01/31/
cx_da_0131topnews.html?sh=15b92ae831f3.

   Gipps, Caroline. "Socio-Cultural Aspects of
Assessment." Review of Research in Education, vol.
24, no. 1, Jan 1999, pp. 355-392. https://doi.org/
10.3102/0091732024001355.

   Ioannidis, John A., "Why Most Published Research
Findings Are False." PLOS Medicine, 30 Aug. 2005,
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0020124.

   Jang, Mo, and Joon K. Kim. "Third Person Effects
of Fake News: Fake News Regulation and Media
Literacy Interventions." Computers in Human
Behavior, vol. 80, Mar. 2018, pp. 295-302,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.11.034.

   Jhangiani, Rajiv, and Hammond Tarry. Principles of
Social Psychology. 1st Int. ed., 2022.
https://opentextbc.ca/socialpsychology/chapter/
changing-attitudes-by-changing-behavior/.

   Jones, Jeffrey M. "Americans: Much
Misinformation, Bias, Inaccuracy in News."
Gallup.com, 20 June 2018, https://news.gallup.com/
opinion/gallup/235796/americans-misinformation-
bias-inaccuracy-news.aspx.

                    Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 107
                  Kapnick, Izzy. "Will Democrats Ever Regain
               Ground with South Florida's Cuban Voters?" Miami
               New Times, 9 Nov. 2022,
               https://www.miaminewtimes.com/news/
               republicans-capitalize-on-fear-of-communism-in-
               florida-cuban-communities-15669381.

                  Kerwer, Martin, and Tom Rosman. "Epistemic
               Change and Diverging Information: How Do Prior
               Epistemic Beliefs Affect the Efficacy of Short-Term
               Interventions." Learning and Individual Differences,
               vol. 80, May 2020, https://doi.org/10.1016/
               j.lindif.2020.101886.

                  Lave, Jean, and Etienne Wenger. Situated
               Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
               Cambridge University Press, 1991.

                  Lumen Learning. "Discourse Communities."
               Lumen, n.d., https://courses.lumenlearning.com/
               wm-englishcomp2/chapter/discourse-
               communities/.

                  Mcleod, Saul. "Vygotsky's Sociocultural Theory of
               Cognitive Development." SimplyPsychology.org, 18
               Aug. 2022, https://www.simplypsychology.org/
               vygotsky.html.

                  Onore, Cynthia. "The Student, the Teacher, and
               the Text: Negotiating Meanings through Response
               and Revision." Writing and Response: Theory,
               Practice, and Research, edited by Chris M. Anson,
               National Council of Teachers, 1989, pp. 231-260.

                  O'Sullivan, Donie, and Geneva Sands. "Spread of
               Election Lies in Florida's Spanish-Speaking
               Communities is `Fracturing Democratic Institutions,'

108 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
Advocates Warn." CNN, 5 Nov. 2022,
https://www.cnn.com/2022/11/05/politics/
florida-election-lies-spanish-language/index.html.

   Pazzanese, Christina. "Danger in the Internet Echo
Chamber: To Combat Endless Feeds of One-Sided
Data, Sustain Suggests an `Architecture of
Serendipity.'" Harvard Law Today, 24 Mar. 2017,
https://hls.harvard.edu/today/danger-internet-
echo-chamber/.

   PBS News. "The Long History of Russian
Disinformation Targeting the US." PBS.org, 21 Nov.
2018, https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/the-
long-history-of-russian-disinformation-targeting-
the-u-s.

   Powell, Roger, and Dana Driscoll. "How Mindsets
Shape Response and Learning Transfer: A Case of
Two Graduate Writers." Journal of Response to
Writing, vol. 6, no. 2, 2020, pp. 42-68.
https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/cgi/
viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=journalrw.

   Probst, Robert E. "Transactional Theory and
Response." Writing and Response: Theory, Practice,
and Research, edited by Chris M. Anson, National
Council of Teachers, 1989, pp. 68-79.

   Schwarzenegger, Christian. "Personal
Epistemologies of the Media: Selective Criticality,
Pragmatic Trust, and Competence--Confidence in
Navigating Media Repertoires in the Digital Age."
New Media & Society, 20 Jan. 2020, https://doi.org/
10.1177/1461444819856919.

   Sermaxhaj, Grese. "Online Communication and

                    Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality" | 109
               Misunderstanding." Youth-Time.eu, 18 Mar. 2020,
               https://youth-time.eu/online-communication-and-
               misunderstanding/.

                  Steup, Matthias and Ram Neta. "Epistemology."
               Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020
               Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.),
               https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
               epistemology/#WhatKindThinEnjoCognSucc.

                  Stob, Paul. "`Terministic Screens, Social
               Constructionism, and the Language of Experience:
               Kenneth Burke's Utilization of William James."
               Philosophy & Rhetoric, vol. 41, no. 2, 2008, pp.
               130-152, https://www.jstor.org/stable/
               25655306#metadata_info_tab_contents.

                  University of Michigan Library. "`Fake News,' Lies
               and Propaganda: How to Sort Fact from Fiction."
               UMich.edu, 4 Aug. 2022,
               https://guides.lib.umich.edu/fakenews.

                  Vanacore, Rylan, "Sensationalism in Media."
               Reporter, 12 Nov. 2021, https://reporter.rit.edu/
               news/sensationalism-media.

                  Vygotsky, Lev. Mind in Society: The Development of
               Higher Psychological Processes, edited by Michael
               Cole, Vera John-Steiner, Sylvia Scribner, and Ellen
               Souberman, Harvard University Press, 1978.

                  Woolston, Chris. "Scientist Criticizes Media
               Portrayal of Research." Nature, vol. 523, no. 505, 24
               July 2015, https://www.nature.com/articles/
               523505f.

110 | Screens, Spins, and Perceptions of "Reality"
4. Surveillance Capitalism

Take a second to consider the standard manila folder--not the
folder icons on your computer. We're going old school for just a
moment to consider the actual folder with its simple, clean design
and distinctive color. It has a tab that peeks out on the side so
that you can label the contents of the folder and therefore easily
organize and retrieve information, which is especially helpful if you
have a lot of different types of information spread across multiple
folders.

            It's a pretty simple concept, but information wasn't always
organized this way, and as we'll discuss in this chapter, this type of
data collection isn't always beneficial to everyone. In fact, it seems
fitting that the manila folder is often considered a symbol of
imperialism and oppression. Invented in the United States in the
early nineteenth century, manila paper originally came from a type
of banana tree called acaba, which grew predominantly in the
Philippines. When the United States colonized the Philippines, it
took control of the acaba trade to ensure that it--not the
Filipinos--would profit (Lui). The U.S. used the wood for a variety of
purposes, including manila envelopes and paper.

            In its most basic form, surveillance is about collecting
information about people so it can be easily retrieved and analyzed.
Before filing cabinets were invented in 1890, information was
written in ledger books or in loose bundles of paper, which made
information less accessible because it was difficult to find specific
information. The filing cabinet revolutionized record management
practices by making it possible to quickly retrieve a single document
(Bristow). Soon, filing cabinets were a must in businesses across
the country, and large storage facilities emerged with the singular
purpose of securing large amounts of data. In other words, filing
cabinets became foundational to the way that institutions managed

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 111
systems--and people. They were used to document identities,
relationships, events, and transactions.

            Now think about all of the folders out there somewhere
that contain information about you--medical records, academic
transcripts and other test scores, employment evaluations, bank
information, credit scores, tax records. It's obvious why privacy
has become such an important issue. Everyone has personal
information stored in files across various institutions. Sometimes
we don't even know these files exist. Rarely do we know all of
the information that the files contain or how the information was
collected. It's a form of institutional power because it increases
our visibility (and vulnerability). Individuals are provided
opportunities--or not--based on the information in their files. Data
collection also has the power to control behaviors. Think about
standard employment practices that require workers to clock in
and out, that mandate an annual employee evaluation, that put
surveillance cameras in parking lots and workstations, or that
require random drug testing. These are all ways of monitoring and
managing the behaviors of employees, of creating systems of
rewards and punishments based on the information in a person's
file.

            The digital age of computers, web browsers, and cloud-
based computing and data storage expanded data collection
practices. It's even easier to store and retrieve vast amounts of
personal data. It's also possible to collect all kinds of user
information without the users' explicit knowledge. That's what
"cookies" do. When you visit a website and it requires you to "accept
cookies," a code is embedded in your browser's software that allows
the website to collect information about your online activities and
to recognize your computer when you revisit the site (Google, "How
Google"). Information about your preferences, profile information,
browsing history, past purchases, and even your navigation path
and time spent on individual pages is collected. Cookies also allow
websites to track your activities across the internet, even when you
aren't on that specific website. A robust user profile is developed

112 | Surveillance Capitalism
about you--your interests, activities, and identifying
information--all so that companies can create targeted ads and
online experiences that will increase your chances of buying certain
products and services.

                                                               CCTV
                                                               Surveillance
                                                               Notice, by
                                                               Amityadav8,
                                                               on
                                                               Wikimedia
                                                               Commons
                                                               (CC BY-SA
                                                               3.0)

            The term "surveillance capitalism" refers to this collection
of personal data for the purpose of financial gain or some other
benefit related to power and control. In the introduction of
Surveillance Capitalism, Josh Lauer and Kenneth Lipartito define
surveillance capitalism as a

      broad range of strategies and techniques, both formal and
      informal, that commercial actors--including lenders,
      merchants, employers, managers, service providers, and
      others--deploy to observe, record, predict, and control
      human behavior and relationships. The targets of such
      commercial surveillance typically include clients and
      customers, borrowers and buyers, staff and laborers (free
      and unfree), markets and competitors (5).

            It's a broad definition because surveillance is so prevalent
throughout our daily lives. We're reminded in many parking lots,

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 113
stores, schools, and government buildings that we are being
recorded. Cameras also exist at many intersections and toll booths
to ensure that people follow the rules. Many people have cameras
on their doorbells and inside their homes so they can monitor the
activities of visitors or maybe even their own pets or family
members and prevent negative behaviors. Then there are the
smartphones, smart watches, and GPS apps that track your location
throughout the day. Our Siris, Alexas, and Google Assistants are
listening devices that record our dialogue, which can be reviewed
by tech companies themselves or third-party contractors (Metz).
There is even some fear that our devices are listening to our
conversations when we aren't using them. For instance, this study
examined 81 different Internet of Things devices and found that
many of them surreptitiously transmit information to tech
companies like Netflix, Amazon, and Google, even when the device
isn't being used (Ren et al.).

            Advancements in digital technology have made it easier
than ever for organizations to secretly collect information, which
has created a number of privacy concerns. This chapter explores the
history of surveillance capitalism, identifies common surveillance
practices, and examines how surveillance is often used not only to
predict but also to control human behaviors. The chapter ends with
basic guidelines for protecting your private information.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the history of surveillance and how
             different practices emerged over time as technologies
             became more advanced.

          Understand the connection between surveillance

114 | Surveillance Capitalism
             and power.
          Consider all of the different types of surveillance

             practices and the types of data that organizations are
             able to collect based on our digital devices.
          Learn how commercialization connects with
             surveillance and how companies use surveillance and
             metadata to not only predict but influence behavior.
          Consider why surveillance is such a concern for
             society.
          Learn practical ways to protect your own private
             information.

The History of Surveillance Capitalism

As discussed in the previous section, the practice of compiling
information into personal files has a long history that predates the
advent of digital technology. Surveillance practices have an even
longer, more complex history. Michel Foucault's 1975 book Discipline
and Punish: The Birth of the Prison has had a profound influence
on our understanding of surveillance practices and the social
consequences throughout history. In it, Foucault traces the rise
of the prison system in eighteenth-century Europe. Before prisons
emerged as the standard form of punishment for criminal behavior,
people who were convicted of a crime were typically subjected to
some sort of public torture or punishment. For instance, criminals
might be put in the pillory or in stocks in the town square, which
was intended to deter future crime from the individual as well as
everyone else in town. When prisons emerged, however,
punishment shifted from being mostly physical to being mostly

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 115
psychological. Within the confines of the prison, every aspect of the
prisoner's life was regimented, monitored, and controlled.

            The panopticon is what made surveillance possible.
Defined by its circular structure and a system of backlighting in
each prison cell, the panopticon made it possible for a guard in
the tower to monitor every movement that the prisoners made.
They were constantly visible. The guard in the tower, on the other
hand, was hidden. There were no lights in the tower to let prisoners
know whether or not they were being watched; however, they knew
it was always a possibility. So they had to constantly be on their
best behavior to avoid punishment. Over time, the prisoners began
to internalize the gaze of the guard and to monitor their own
behaviors.

                                                                                        Presidio
                                                                                        Modelo 2, by
                                                                                        Friman on
                                                                                        Wikimedia
                                                                                        Commons
                                                                                        (CC BY-SA)

            The panopticon serves as a poignant metaphor for current
surveillance practices. Just like the prisoners in the cells, everyone
in society is subjected to different forms of surveillance that force
their exposure--making their behaviors, identities, and
relationships visible. Meanwhile, the organizations that collect this
information about us (the metaphorical guards in the tower) are
largely invisible. We don't often see who specifically is collecting
information about us, what that information is, or how it's being

116 | Surveillance Capitalism
used. Even more significant is the psychological effect this
surveillance has. Like the prisoners in their cells, most people don't
know if they are being watched. They just know that it's always
possible, so they also internalize the gaze of authority to monitor
their own behaviors.

            A classic example might relate to traffic laws. Most of us
monitor our own speed. We come to a full stop at a stop sign. We
sit at an intersection waiting for the light to turn green even if there
are no other cars at the intersection. It's always possible that a cop
might be stationed nearby or that we are being filmed by a traffic
camera somewhere, and because we don't want to get a speeding
ticket or have our license revoked, we drive a little slower. We make
the full stop. We wait for the light to turn at the empty intersection.
Often we don't even consciously make these choices because the
behaviors--and often the underlying message about safety and good
driving--have become ingrained in our minds. The same is true for
lots of activities we do all day long, even parts of our identities
that we might typically think of as inherent. Foucault would argue
that a complex system of surveillance, rewards, punishments, self-
monitoring, and internalization is responsible for nearly all of our
behaviors.

            While surveillance itself isn't new, the term "surveillance
capitalism" typically refers to more recent practices related to
digital technology and data collection, which emerged gradually
once the internet shifted to a commercial enterprise run by a few
private companies. You might recall from the first chapter that the
World Wide Web was created with a focus on information sharing.
The NSFNET, developed by the National Science Foundation, was
dedicated to educational advancement and had initially banned the
commercial use of the internet. That changed in the mid-1990s as
the number of users grew beyond what the NSF could manage.
Private companies provided internet services, and more and more
businesses registered their websites with the purpose of attracting
new customers.

            One of the key events that perpetuated the development of

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 117
surveillance capitalism was the invention of cookies, which would
record the unique navigation paths of individual users as they
visited particular websites. According to Meg Leta Jones in
"Surveillance Capitalism Online," these paths were called
"clickstreams," which allowed web creators to understand how users
were navigating their site and to use that information to evaluate
the website's effectiveness. This technology was not built into the
original design of the World Wide Web. In fact, Tim Berners-Lee
intended for the web to be "stateless," meaning that it would retrieve
the information that a user is looking for, but nothing about the
transaction would be recorded or documented. For companies
looking to understand the user journey, they called this original
design the "memory" problem (Jones 186). The cookie, invented by
computer scientist Lou Montulli, created a unique session ID that
began when a user accessed a specific website. The server for that
website would place the text code into the memory of the user's
browser, which is then stored on the hard drive and allows the
website to recognize that user each time they return to the website.

            Importantly, Jones points out that the cookie is an "opaque"
memory, meaning that it's invisible to the user (187). The code could
include anything, to collect any sort of data, and the user wouldn't
know, which connects directly to the idea of surveillance. The user
becomes more visible while the companies collecting the data are
largely hidden. This obviously raised concerns about user privacy,
which then prompted Montulli to adjust the process so that users
could manage their own cookie preferences and receive
notifications before a cookie was placed on their computer. They
could accept or reject the cookie, though the default was set so that
all cookies were accepted. He argued that this was a technique that
actually protected users because it kept their identities anonymous
and it allowed them a measure of control over whether information
was collected, though they still wouldn't know what type of
information was collected or how it was being used.

            And then as the Clinton administration ushered in self-
regulation policies that removed commercial restrictions online

118 | Surveillance Capitalism
(White House) and as only a handful of large tech companies
survived the dot-com crash in the early 2000s, new practices
emerged that worked against the privacy of users (Salvucci).
Whereas companies had originally tracked user data only when
they were on a particular page, now they began tracking the users
themselves as they traveled across the internet, and they began
selling user data to interested third parties who could now market
their products and services directly to users based on their past
behaviors.

            Interestingly, Jones points out that surveillance capitalism
didn't begin with the cookie. As far back as the 1970s, direct mail
companies would buy mailing lists from varying companies with the
explicit purpose of targeting them with mail advertisements. For
instance, one medical lab sold patient information to a direct mail
service, which could then target those patients with ads for specific
products. One woman received diaper coupons because her medical
information revealed that she was pregnant. Jones explains, "Data
breaches, sexual privacy, informational asymmetries, and racial bias
were issues with direct marketing expressed by members of
Congress in 1970" (197). However, when given the chance to take
their names off all mailing lists, very few people responded. Though
direct mail was considered a minor nuisance, the opt-out method
was deemed sufficient to protect consumer information, which
Jones argues is what set the precedent for increased surveillance
capitalism once cookies were established.

            Another important component in the history of
surveillance capitalism was the emergence of Google, which
improved search results by creating a system that collected
information about users, their search queries, and their online
behaviors. As Shoshana Zuboff points out in The Age of Surveillance
Capitalism, the system was initially about enhancing the user
experience and providing the most relevant queries. However, it
didn't take long for Google to realize the value of the massive
amounts of user data it was collecting, which could be used for
targeted advertising that profits off people's personal data. Zuboff

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 119
also points to Facebook as a pioneer in surveillance capitalism
through its collection of user data and targeted advertising. Zuboff
argues that increasingly, users are treated as commodities as every
click is recorded as some sort of metric for enhanced analytics
and profit. Businesses obviously profit off this sort of data, but
so too do political organizations that have a stake in influencing
voter opinions and behaviors. The last chapter discussed the power
of media spins and echo chambers to direct people's perceptions
of reality. By collecting data about these users, political entities
could target their ads to individuals who are more likely to respond
favorably to their message--because they are predisposed to certain
beliefs and values. For example, the Cambridge Analytica scandal in
2016 revealed that the data firm had acquired data from 50 million
Facebook users and then sold that data to political campaigns so
they could build voter profiles and create targeted ads that would
sway voter sentiment (Confessore). This data was used to assist the
Ted Cruz and Donald Trump campaigns in 2016 and to promote
public support for Brexit.

Surveillance Practices

Remember that word "ubiquitous" from the first chapter? If our
use of technology is ubiquitous, so too is surveillance. Hardly a
moment of the day goes by when we don't have our phones nearby,
tracking our location. And as mentioned in the previous section,
many companies are tracking our activities across the internet,
gathering data about sites we've visited, hyperlinks we've followed,
products we've purchased, and so on. But the ways in which we are
surveilled and the (known) uses of this information extend much
further. Though it's impossible to identify every surveillance tactic
and though government organizations and large tech companies
aren't always forthcoming about the types of information they are
collecting, this section will look at some of the more common

120 | Surveillance Capitalism
surveillance strategies made possible through a variety of
technologies.

            Video surveillance. Video cameras are increasingly
common, particularly in public spaces such as busy intersections,
parking lots, street corners, schools, shopping centers, and
restaurants. Often, there will be a sign alerting the public that they
are being recorded, but not always. Sometimes the cameras
themselves are easy to spot, but not always. As you might imagine,
cameras are used in many circumstances to help prevent crime
and other unwanted behaviors. They're also helpful once a crime or
some other incident has occurred because they provide footage of
what happened and who was involved. Facial recognition software
and license plate scanners make it even easier to identify individuals
in specific places and visibly track their movements.

            The concern many people have relates to the abuse of
video surveillance--tracking and recording someone's movements
for the sake of spying or using video surveillance in deceptive or
inappropriate ways. For instance, people of color are typically
monitored more closely, and video surveillance makes it easy to
target/scrutinize these individuals while they are buying groceries,
pumping gas, eating dinner, and so on (Lee and Chin). There have
also been incidents where video cameras have been discovered in
inappropriate places, demonstrating a gross abuse of power. In
2003, a middle school in Tennessee was sued by parents after they
found out there were video cameras in the locker rooms that had
recorded their children undressing, and because of a lack of
security, the footage had been accessed by unauthorized users
outside of the school system (ABC News).

            Laptops and cell phones also have built-in video cameras,
which is a cause for concern. During the COVID-19 pandemic as
schools shifted to online learning, many people were concerned
about platforms like Zoom that gave viewers access to students'
homes, including their bedrooms and other activities that occurred
in the background (Lieberman). Similarly, it became common
practice to use remote proctors and other surveillance technologies

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 121
to monitor students' behaviors while they were taking tests. In many
instances, students felt the monitoring was unfair and overly
aggressive. And then there are the typical concerns about hackers
who gain access to video feeds from laptops, phones, and personal
home surveillance systems, usually with the intention of gaining
bank account information or spying on users' personal activities
(Erickson).

            Voice recognition. Many technologies also have a
microphone, including your phone, your computer, and many of
your household devices like Siri or Alexa. There's been concern for
some time that the government spies on personal conversations
in order to collect personal information (Weinstein). However, tech
companies are also leveraging voice recognition technology in order
to identify who we are and build a profile about us. Google says that
it uses snippets of voice recordings in order to get aggregate data
about user preferences and how the device can be improved, but
it says it doesn't connect specific conversations with specific users
(Tucker). Of particular concern is the fact that these smart devices
are listening all the time that they are on, even when they haven't
been activated (King). What's more, the recordings are sometimes
sent to third-party reviewers, which puts personal data at an
increased risk.

            Emails and texts. If you have an email account or a cell
phone provided by your employer, they have the right to view that
information. In fact, many employers have monitoring software
installed on employee computers that allows them to view emails
and other online activities (West). Cell phone companies retain
records pertaining to text messages and when they were sent.
Though most say that they retain the messages themselves for only
a short time after they have been delivered, some do store the data
for several days or even months after delivery (Evans). Likewise,
up until 2017, Google would scan Gmail customers' emails for the
purpose of having them analyzed for direct marketing purposes.
Though Google no longer scans emails, it is still able to track users
across multiple Google apps, including Gmail, Google Chrome,

122 | Surveillance Capitalism
Google Analytics, and Double Click. In fact, Google recently
published its privacy label for the Gmail app, which reports on all
of the types of data Google will collect, including location, purchase
history, contacts, user content, search history, identifiers, and
"other data" (Google, "Gmail").

            Social media. Social media companies like Facebook, X
(formerly Twitter), Instagram, and YouTube can also collect
information about you. This includes the information you provide
in your profile as well as your posts. It also includes your list of
contacts and the things that you like and share. All of this is
information that can be used to provide targeted ads across multiple
web platforms--not just your feed on that particular site. Many
social media sites also collect information about your location,
phone and email contacts, text and email messages, payment
information, online views, and more. These social media companies
not only use the information to better their own platforms, but they
also make a lot of money by selling user information to advertisers
(Vigderman and Turnera).

            Digital records. In the digital age, most of the private
information about you is stored on a digital server
somewhere--your health care history, the medications you take,
your bank account information, your grades, your credit score, your
legal record. For instance, think about the type of information that
most colleges collect about individual students--high school
transcripts, income information, bank information, individual test
scores and homework activities, attendance records, disciplinary
files, physical or mental health information, specific disabilities, and
so on. Likewise, doctor's offices, government organizations,
merchants, and others all collect private information about you.

            Big data. On a larger scale, more businesses as well as
educational and governmental organizations are able to collect big
data--massive amounts of information from a lot of different users
that help them see big-picture trends. It's less about the individual
user and more about analytics. To put it into context, this article
in the Harvard Business Review says that Walmart collects 2.5

                                                                 Surveillance Capitalism | 123
petabytes of information every hour based solely on customer
transactions (McAfee and Brynjolfsson). Since a petabyte is "20
million filing cabinets worth of text," that means Walmart can fill
50 million filing cabinets in the course of an hour, and that doesn't
count the information collected through cookies and other
surveillance tools.

            IoT. Let's look at one last category--Internet of Things
devices. These are smart devices that connect to the internet and
can then be controlled by our phones. Home security systems,
garage doors, heating and cooling systems, medical sensors, smart
watches, digital assistants like Alexa, doorbell cameras, and so on
are all IoT devices that collect data. Some of the information is
logged right away when you initialize the product and create a user
profile, but most of the information is created through your ongoing
use of the product (McFadin). This includes information about the
product and its status, the surrounding environment, and usage.

     Activity 4.1

        This section includes many of the most common forms of
     surveillance and data collection. Make a list of the
     surveillance technologies that you encounter each
     day--whether on your personal devices or in public spaces.

        After you make your list, separate them into two
     lists--one for what you consider to be acceptable or even
     beneficial uses of surveillance and one for what you
     consider to be too intrusive or threatening in some way.
     Consider your rationale for what constitutes positive
     surveillance (if anything) and what types of activities cross
     the line.

124 | Surveillance Capitalism
Commercialization and Behavior
Modification

By now it's probably pretty clear that surveillance capitalism is
about power and profit. Thinking back to Foucault's theory of the
panopticon and the psychological effects that surveillance has on
an individual, surveillance is a mechanism of control because it
creates "docile" bodies who have become conditioned to behave
in desirable ways, typically submitting to authority and accepting
certain behaviors (and identities) as "normal." Once people are
conditioned in this way, it's easy to capitalize on their perceptions
and values to create market demand for certain products and to
influence buying behaviors. Organizations in every industry collect
information about people's experiences and turn it into data that
can be leveraged to make predictions about what they will do. The
more relevant the advertising is to an individual, based on their
demographics, interests, location, and so on, the more likely they
are to buy the product. In an interview about her book on
surveillance capitalism, Zuboff explains,

      The opportunities to align supply and demand around the
      needs of individuals were overtaken by a new economic
      logic that offered a fast track to monetization....This
      economic logic has now spread beyond the tech companies
      to new surveillance-based ecosystems in virtually every
      economic sector, from insurance to automobiles to health,
      education, finance, to every product described as "smart"
      and every service described as "personalized."
   Zuboff demonstrates the pervasiveness of surveillance capitalism
with the recent discovery that even breathing machines are
collecting data about people with sleep apnea. Health insurance
companies receive that data and then use it for their own benefit,
usually to deny or reduce coverage.

            It would be impossible to trace all of the ways that
surveillance capitalism either makes or saves (as in the example

                                                                 Surveillance Capitalism | 125
above) companies money, but a few statistics might help put the
growth of surveillance capitalism and digital advertising in
perspective:

   From 2001 to 2020, digital advertising has grown by more than
      40% (Ebsworth et al.).

   In 2021, digital advertising rose nearly 30% from the previous
      year, making the largest annual growth in history (Oberlo). The
      total spent on digital advertising that year was more than $520
      billion worldwide.

   Google, Amazon, and Facebook receive the bulk (two-thirds) of
      these advertising dollars.

   Amazon's income from advertising doubles every two years
      ($14.1 billion in 2019). In 2020, Google made $147 billion in
      advertising. In that same year, Facebook made $86 billion,
      totaling 98% of its income (Ebsworth et al.).

            Certainly, surveillance capitalism has proven to be popular,
which is why it has grown so quickly. However, the major concern
stems from two interrelated issues:

   Invasion of privacy. As much of this chapter has demonstrated,
      surveillance capitalism is clandestine (Andrew et al.). While
      people create Facebook and Google accounts because they
      believe these services are created for their benefit, they are
      often unaware that their profile information and online
      activities are tracked so that commercial entities can
      commodity their experiences and inundate them with
      advertising. Lots of different applications and smart devices
      have access to data that many people couldn't imagine, and
      much of it is sensitive data that they wouldn't want to be
      collected--and they certainly wouldn't want it to be shared and
      exploited.

   Behavior modification. Researchers like Zuboff claim that
      surveillance capitalism not only predicts what we will do but it

126 | Surveillance Capitalism
      can actually alter the choices that we make through consistent
      yet subtle messaging that rewards us for certain behaviors and
      thus conditions us toward preset outcomes. Zuboff puts it this
      way: "The shift is from monitoring to what the data scientists
      call "actuating." Surveillance capitalists now develop
      "economies of action," as they learn to tune, herd, and
      condition our behavior with subtle and subliminal cues,
      rewards, and punishments that shunt us toward their most
      profitable outcomes."

            Behavior modification goes hand in hand with surveillance.
As companies collect more data about us, they are able to create
better algorithms and ultimately make better predictions. This is
largely dependent, however, on people's increasing engagement
with digital media. Nir Eyal's book Hooked: How to Build Habit-
Forming Products explains the way that companies intentionally
create addictions to products through a system of "triggers"
(prompting users to use the product) and "rewards" (based on the
user's compliance with the trigger). As Ebsworth et al. explain,
"Increasing engagement via the hook model provides both a
constant source of behavioural data and a committed audience for
advertisements." In other words, as engagement (and addiction)
increase, free will and freedom of thought would diminish as people
are "conditioned," "tuned," and "herded" to make specific buying
choices. As Foucault would say, they have become "docile" bodies.

            Importantly, the concern about behavior modification is
about more than just how people spend their money. It's also about
ideologies and political choices. Political parties and interest groups
can use data collection to steer people toward certain websites and
information and use a similar system of rewards and punishments
to direct their attention as well as their ways of thinking. "Political
partisans, including shadowy private interests and foreign
governments, promise to swing voters and elections with
microtargeted social media campaigns" (Lauer and Lipartito 1).
Some notable examples include the Cambridge Analytica scandal

                                                                  Surveillance Capitalism | 127
noted above and also more recent attempts to influence Cuban
voters in South Florida with propaganda that positions Democrats
as communists (Kapnick; O'Sullivan and Sands).

            Employers also use surveillance technologies to control
behaviors. Systems for clocking in and out, video cameras in public
workspaces, and software that monitors employee activities on
work computers and cell phones all have the effect of keeping
employees in line so that they can keep their jobs and perhaps
be rewarded with promotions or pay increases. This is exactly the
kind of surveillance and control that ties directly to Foucault's
panopticon. People modify their behaviors to avoid punishment (or
gain a reward), and over time as they internalize the gaze of the
"guard" (in this case, the employer, but it could also be a teacher,
government official, religious leader, etc.), their ways of thinking
and being begin to shift in ways that benefit the authorities in
charge.

            Importantly, while everyone in society is surveilled to some
degree, it is always the populations with the least amount of
power--those who are already marginalized--who are surveilled to
the greatest extreme: welfare recipients, people of color,
immigrants, working-class employees, criminals, and women.
Gellman and Adler-Bell explain it like this:

      Privacy scholars speak of philosophical rights and
      hypothetical risks; privacy-minded middle class Americans
      fear allowing the government too much access to their
      electronic trails. But there is nothing abstract about the
      physical, often menacing, intrusions into less fortunate
      neighborhoods, where mere presence in a "high-crime"
      area is grounds for detention, search, and questioning by
      police. At age sixty-five, tens of millions of Americans claim
      their Medicare benefits with nothing more eventful than
      completion of some forms. (Medicare.gov even promises
      to "protect your privacy by getting rid of the information
      you give us when you close the browser.") An impoverished
      single mother on Medicaid faces mortifying questions,

128 | Surveillance Capitalism
      face-to-face with benefit managers, about her lovers,
      hygiene, parental shortcomings, and personal habits.
   Their point is that surveillance capitalism affects everyone but
not to the same degree. Its prevalence in our society has had real
consequences for minorities, putting them under higher levels of
scrutiny, finding reasons to inflict "punishments," and perpetuating
discriminatory practices and injustices.

            You might wonder what all of this has to do with digital
writing. In some ways, it's maybe more geared toward digital
literacy, understanding how to use digital media and the
consequences of your choices. This critical unit is about
complicating the overly simplistic and utopian views of digital media
as unequivocally progressive and beneficial. It's about lifting the veil
to examine the more negative effects of digital media, which will
hopefully lead to more informed and intentional engagement. Also,
as we'll see in the third section of the book related to functional
literacy, digital writers do participate in surveillance practices. SEO
is based exclusively on behavioral data--how people search for
information and what they do as they travel across the internet.
Digital writers use that data to write copy that will capture users'
attention. They also use analytics to assess the effects of their SEO
practices, and they use lead generation to send email campaigns
and targeted social media ads to people--some who may have opted
in to receive updates and ads, but many who haven't. Critical
literacy means thinking more deeply about these practices and their
ethical and social--not just financial--consequences in order to
make informed choices.

Protecting Your Privacy

While it's impossible to navigate online spaces and remain
completely off the grid, there are some important ways that you can
control/limit the types of information that businesses can collect

                                                                 Surveillance Capitalism | 129
about you. You can--and should--take important steps to protect
your privacy, your data, and your accounts from cybercriminals.
This final section of the chapter lists some basic things that you can
do.

   Create strong passwords. Probably the best thing you can do
      to protect your private information from hackers is to create
      passwords that they can't guess. That means that they should
      be long and have a variety of upper and lowercase letters in
      addition to numbers and symbols. You should also have
      different passwords for different accounts. That might be a lot
      of passwords to keep track of, but there are password
      managers available that generate strong passwords, help you
      keep track of the passwords for your different accounts, and
      monitor your accounts for data breaches. A couple of common
      data managers are 1Password, LogMeOnce, and Dashlane. Of
      course, you'd want to make sure that if you use a password
      manager, your "master password" for that account is strong.

   Use two-factor authentication. Many accounts are moving
      toward requiring two-factor authentication, which only grants
      you access to your account when you provide two pieces of
      evidence that you own the account, including a password in
      addition to a temporary passcode, facial recognition, a
      fingerprint, or an answer to a security question. This is a great
      way to prevent unauthorized users from gaining access to your
      accounts. You can also enable two-factor authorization on
      some of your accounts, including your Apple ID, Google,
      Facebook, X, and banking websites. Check your account
      settings to see what types of security features are available.

   Install a browser extension. As this chapter discusses,
      companies and other organizations can collect more
      information about you than you might realize based on your
      browsing history. A browser extension like uBlock Origin is
      designed to prevent this data collection as well as the targeted
      ads that are generated as a result. Privacy Badger is another

130 | Surveillance Capitalism
   web extension that prevents trackers and targeted ads.
 Cover your camera. It's easier than you might think to install

   software on your computer that will take over your camera
   and collect private footage. An easy way to avoid that
   happening is to put a sticker over your camera.
 Opt out of targeted ads. Platforms like Apple, Facebook,
   Google, and X allow you to disable interest ads in your account
   settings, which will help cut down on the amount of targeted
   ads that you receive. You can also use this Simple Opt Out
   website to prevent similar data collection and ad targeting
   from numerous other organizations. Since you are "opted in"
   by default, you'll have to manually opt out of any sort of data
   collection.
 Consider a virtual private network (VPN). If you often connect
   to public Wi-Fi, a VPN can create a more secure connection by
   encrypting your data and hiding your IP address so that your
   internet service provider and other third-party organizations
   can't track your activities or see your information.
 Use antivirus software. Once your device has been "infected"
   with a virus, it's incredibly difficult to recover. Antivirus
   software adds another layer of protection that will help
   prevent viruses and other malicious software. Windows
   Defender is built into Windows automatically. Similarly, Mac
   computers have browser extensions and other security built in.
   You could always add another layer of security, such as Norton
   Antivirus or Malwarebytes. It's also important that as updates
   are made available for your browser, apps, and home devices,
   you install the latest version, which often has improved
   security features designed specifically for the latest threats.
 Enable remote tracking on your phone. If you lose your
   phone, it's important to make sure that your data doesn't fall
   into the wrong hands. To enable remote tracking, you must
   first set up a pin number and/or biometric login (i.e., facial or
   fingerprint recognition). You can then activate your phone's
   remote tracking feature, which will allow you to identify where

                                                               Surveillance Capitalism | 131
      your phone is and, if necessary, delete all of its data from a
      remote location.
   Beware of phishing scams. Increasingly, scammers are
      targeting people through their emails and text messages, often
      posing as someone that you might know and encouraging you
      to click a specific link or download a file. Never click on a link
      in an email or text message unless you are certain it's
      legitimate. You can hover over the link to see for sure what the
      URL is and if it matches the location where it says it will take
      you. Lots of misspellings and invalid email addresses or phone
      numbers are also red flags. You'd also avoid downloading
      unknown files unless you verify with the person who sent it
      about what it is. These are common ways that criminals spread
      malware that can lock you out of your device.
   Encrypt the information on your laptop. It's also possible to
      enable encryption on your laptop so that if it's ever lost or
      stolen, your data can't be accessed because it will come up as
      gibberish. For Mac users, this encryption tool is called FileVault
      and can be turned on in the system preferences menu. For PC
      users, device encryption is available under the settings menu,
      under "Updates & Security" (Morse).
   Be discerning. You want to keep your phone number and email
      address as private as possible. Don't give them out unless you
      have to, and if you do have to give an email address to sign up
      for coupons or some other perk, it's helpful to have a
      secondary "burner" email address devoted to spam. That way,
      if the account does get hacked, it doesn't include a lot of
      personal information about you, and it's not connected to your
      important accounts. You should also make sure your settings
      on social media and other accounts are set to "private" and
      that you don't share sensitive information or photos over social
      media, email, or text messaging that could be damaging if they
      fell into the wrong hands.

            As you can see, these guidelines relate to privacy in a

132 | Surveillance Capitalism
variety of ways--from targeted ads and data collection prompted
by businesses and tech companies to data breaches from hackers
looking to steal your private information. Though you won't be able
to block all forms of surveillance that have become so prominent
in our society, taking a few easy steps and being smart about the
information that you share will help you take control over your data
and provide a measure of protection from the invisible forces that
have a stake in tracking your digital activities.

     Activity 4.2

        This section provided lots of helpful, and fairly easy, ways
     that you can protect your information. This activity is
     simple: See how many of the security measures you can
     complete on your phone or laptop in the course of 15 or 20
     minutes. Many of them require a simple security
     adjustment or a change to your account preferences.

        For those that are more complex--researching VPNs and
     browser extensions, for instance--do some research about
     your options, including features, cost, and consumer
     ratings. Compile a list of your top options.

     Discussion Questions

         1. Look again at the introduction to this chapter and

                                                                 Surveillance Capitalism | 133
             the analogy of the manila folder as it relates to today's
             more complex data collection. How did the manila
             folder and other organization systems make
             surveillance possible? Why is it fitting that the manila
             folder is sometimes seen as a symbol of oppression?
        2. The chapter states in several places that data
             collection has the power to control behaviors in
             various ways. What does this mean? In what ways
             does surveillance influence people's behaviors?
        3. What is a panopticon, as described by Foucault?
             How does the metaphor of the panopticon relate to
             current surveillance practices in our culture?
        4. Which types of institutions perform this type of
             "panopticon" surveillance? Name as many as you can
             think of.
        5. What does the "capitalism" in "surveillance
             capitalism" refer to? How do companies make money
             off surveillance practices?
        6. What are some key historical events that
             perpetuated surveillance capitalism as we experience
             it today?
         7. This chapter mentions several ways that your data
             are collected. Which ones were you already familiar
             with? Which ones were a surprise?
        8. How do data collection and targeted advertising
             relate to behavior modification? What are some basic
             activities that organizations want to "nudge" people
             to do? Can you think of any specific examples of this
             type of nudging?
        9. Why is surveillance capitalism such a concern?
       10. What are some basic ways that you can protect
             your own personal data?

134 | Surveillance Capitalism
Sources

             1Password. "The World's Most Loved Password
          Manager." 1Password.com, n.d.,
          https://1password.com.

             ABC News. "Locker Room Cameras Expose School
          to Suit." ABC News, 16 July 2003,
          https://abcnews.go.com/US/
          story?id=90486&page=1.

             Andrew, Jane, et al. "Data Breaches in the Age of
          Surveillance Capitalism: Do Disclosures Have a New
          Role to Play?" Critical Perspectives on Accounting,
          vol. 86, 7 Dec. 2021,
          https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
          pii/S1045235421001155.

             Apple. "Control Personalized Ads on the App
          Store, Apple News, and Stocks." Apple.com, 2022,
          https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT202074.

             Apple Store. "Gmail-Email by Google." Apple.com,
          2022, https://apps.apple.com/us/app/gmail-email-
          by-google/id422689480.

             Banks, Adam. Race, Rhetoric, and Technology:
          Searching for Higher Ground. Routledge, 2005.

             Bristow, David L. "How Filing Cabinets Changed
          the World." History Nebraska, 24 Feb. 2022,
          https://history.nebraska.gov/blog/how-filing-
          cabinets-changed-world.

             Consumer Watchdog. "How Google and Amazon

                                                            Surveillance Capitalism | 135
               Are `Spying' on You." ConsumerWatchdog.org, 2022,
               https://www.consumerwatchdog.org/privacy-
               technology/how-google-and-amazon-are-spying-
               you.

                  Dashlane. "Dashlane." https://www.dashlane.com.

                  Ebsworth, Jonathan, et al. "Surveillance
               Capitalism: The Hidden Costs of the Digital
               Revolution." Evangelical Focus Europe, 7 Sept. 2021,
               https://evangelicalfocus.com/jubilee-centre/13158/
               surveillance-capitalism-the-hidden-costs-of-the-
               digital-revolution.

                  Erickson, Alexa. "The Real Likelihood You're Being
               Watched through Your Laptop Computer." Reader's
               Digest, 1 Apr. 2022, https://www.rd.com/article/
               laptop-camera/.

                  Evans, Joseph B. "Cell Phone Forensics: Powerful
               Tools Wielded by Federal Investigators." Fordham
               Journal of Corporate and Financial Law, 2 June 2016,
               https://news.law.fordham.edu/jcfl/2016/06/02/
               cell-phone-forensics-powerful-tools-wielded-by-
               federal-
               investigators/#:~:text=Cellular%20service%20provi
               ders%20retain%20records,very%20long%2C%20if%
               20at%20all.

                  Eyal, Nir. Hooked: How to Build Habit-Forming
               Products. Penguin Publishing Group, 2014.

                  Facebook. "How Can I Adjust How Ads on
               Facebook are Shown To Me Based on Data about My
               Activity from Partners?" Facebook.com,
               https://www.facebook.com/help/568137493302217.

136 | Surveillance Capitalism
   Foucault, Michel. Discipline & Punish: The Birth of
the Prison. Vintage Books, 1975.

   Gellman, Barton, and Sam Adler-Bell. "The
Disparate Impact of Surveillance." The Century
Foundation, 21 Dec. 2017, https://tcf.org/content/
report/disparate-impact-surveillance/?session=1.

   Google. "Block Certain Ads." Google Support,
https://support.google.com/ads/answer/
2662922?hl=en.

   ------. "GMail--Email By Google." Google, n.d.,
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/gmail-email-by-
google/id422689480.

   ------. "How Google Uses Cookies." Google Terms &
Privacy, https://policies.google.com/technologies/
cookies?hl=en-US.

   Jones, Meg Leta. "Surveillance Capitalism Online:
Cookies, Notice and Choice, and Web Privacy." in
Surveillance Capitalism in America, edited by Josh
Lauer and Kenneth Lipartito, University of
Pennsylvania Press, 2021.

   King, Evan Thomas. "How Google and Amazon Are
`Spying' On You." Consumer Watchdog, 15 Dec. 2017,
https://consumerwatchdog.org/uncategorized/
how-google-and-amazon-are-spying-you/.

   Laidler, John. "In New Book, Business School
Professor Emerita Says Surveillance Capitalism
Undermines Autonomy--and Democracy." Harvard
Business Review, 4 Mar. 2019,
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2019/03/

                                                Surveillance Capitalism | 137
               harvard-professor-says-surveillance-capitalism-is-
               undermining-democracy/.

                  Lauer, Josh and Kenneth Lipartito. "Introduction"
               in Surveillance Capitalism in America, edited by Josh
               Lauer and Kenneth Lipartito, University of
               Pennsylvania Press, 2021.

                  Lee, Nicol, and Caitlin Chin. "Police Surveillance
               and Facial Recognition: Why Data Privacy is
               Imperative for Communities of Color." Brookings, 12
               Apr. 2022, https://www.brookings.edu/research/
               police-surveillance-and-facial-recognition-why-
               data-privacy-is-an-imperative-for-communities-of-
               color/#:~:text=In%20fact%2C%20surveillance%20a
               nd%20data,current%20circumstances%20and%20p
               olitical%20regimes.

                  Lieberman, Mark. "Massive Shift to Remote
               Learning Prompts Big Data Privacy Concerns."
               Edweek.org, 27 Mar. 2020, https://www.edweek.org/
               technology/massive-shift-to-remote-learning-
               prompts-big-data-privacy-concerns/2020/03.

                  LogMeOnce. "All-In-One Security Platform."
               LogMeOnce.com, https://www.logmeonce.com.

                  Lui, Claire. "The Manila Envelope: The Inspiration
               Behind an Exhibition's Graphic Identity."
               Guggenheim.org, 2 Apr. 2021,
               https://www.guggenheim.org/blogs/checklist/a-
               manila-envelope-the-inspiration-behind-an-
               exhibitions-graphic-identity.

                  McAfee, Andrew, and Erik Brynjolfsson. "Big Data:
               The Management Revolution." Harvard Business

138 | Surveillance Capitalism
Review, Oct. 2012, https://hbr.org/2012/10/big-
data-the-management-revolution.

   McFadin, Patrick. "Internet of Things: Where Does
the Data Go?" Wired, 2018, https://www.wired.com/
insights/2015/03/internet-things-data-go/.

   Malwarebytes. https://www.malwarebytes.com/.

   Metz, Rachel. "Yes, Tech Companies May Listen
When You Talk to Your Virtual Assistant. Here's Why
That's Not Likely to Stop." CNN.com, 19 Aug. 2019,
https://www.cnn.com/2019/08/19/tech/siri-
alexa-people-listening.

   Microsoft. "What Protected with Windows
Security." Microsoft.com,
https://support.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/
stay-protected-with-windows-
security-2ae0363d-0ada-c064-8b56-6a39af b6a963.

   Morse, Jack. "How to Encrypt Your Computer (and
Why You Should)." Mashable.com, 14 Aug. 2021,
https://mashable.com/article/how-to-encrypt-
computer-windows-
mac#:~:text=How%20to%20encrypt%20a%20Wind
ows,encryption%20option%2C%20select%20Turn%
20on.

   Norton Antivirus. https://us.norton.com/.

   Oberlo. "Digital Ad Spend (2021-2026)."
Oberlo.com, https://www.oberlo.com/statistics/
digital-ad-
spend#:~:text=Digital%20Advertising%20Growth,ex
pected%20to%20continue%20in%202023.

   Ong, Walter. "The Writer's Audience is Always a

                                                Surveillance Capitalism | 139
               Fiction." PMLA, vol. 90, no. 1, 1975, pp. 9-21,
               https://www.jstor.org/stable/461344.

                  Ren, Jingjing, et al. "Information Exposure from
               Consumer IoT Devices: A Multidimensional
               Network-Informed Measurement Approach." IMC,
               Proceedings from the Internet Measurement
               Conference, 2019, pp. 267-269,
               https://moniotrlab.ccis.neu.edu/wp-content/
               uploads/2019/09/ren-imc19.pdf.

                  Salvucci, Jeremy. "What Was the Dot-Com Bubble
               & Why Did It Burst?" The Street, 12 Jan 2023,
               https://www.thestreet.com/dictionary/d/dot-
               com-bubble-and-burst.

                  Schabner, Dean. "Locker Room Cameras Expose
               School to Suit." ABCnews.com, 16 July 2003,
               https://abcnews.go.com/US/
               story?id=90486&page=1.

                  Simple Opt Out. "Opt Out of the Data Sharing You
               Wouldn't Opt in to." Simple OptOut.com,
               https://simpleoptout.com/.

                  Tucker, Jamey. "Voice Assistants Are Always
               Listening. Should You Be Worried?" What The Tech,
               8 Feb. 2021, https://www.whatthetech.tv/voice-
               assistants-are-always-listening-should-you-be-
               worried/.

                  Twitter. "Interest-Based Opt-Out Policy." Twitter
               Business, https://business.twitter.com/en/help/
               ads-policies/product-policies/interest-based-opt-
               out-policy.html.

140 | Surveillance Capitalism
   Ublock Origin. https://github.com/gorhill/
uBlock.

   Vigderman, Aliza, and Gabe Turner. "Who Much
Would You Sell Your Social Media Data for?"
Security.org, 22 July 2022,
https://www.security.org/blog/how-much-would-
you-sell-your-social-media-data-for/#.

   Weinstein, Adam. "The Government's Phone, Text,
and Email Spying Explained." ABCnews.com, 7 June
2013, https://abcnews.go.com/ABC_Univision/
governments-phone-text-email-spying-explained/
story?id=19347440.

   West, Darrell M. "How Employers Use Technology
to Surveil Employees." Brookings.edu, 5 Jan. 2021,
https://www.brookings.edu/blog/techtank/2021/
01/05/how-employers-use-technology-to-surveil-
employees/.

   The White House. "Technology and Innovation."
The Clinton-Gore Administration: A Record of
Progress, 2000,
https://clintonwhitehouse4.archives.gov/WH/
Accomplishments/technology.html.

   Zuboff, Shoshana. The Age of Surveillance
Capitalism. Profile Books, 2019.

                                                 Surveillance Capitalism | 141
5. Privileged Spaces

As we continue our critical investigation of digital technologies and
practices, it's important to consider the many ways that social
inequalities are perpetuated in digital spaces. In fact, the word
"critical" has a deeper meaning that goes beyond thinking carefully
about a topic from different perspectives. It can also be applied
more specifically to the examination of power structures within a
particular culture and how systems are often used to reinforce the
unequal distribution of benefits among different groups of people.
In fact, many issues that you might debate with someone are really
about power: Who should have the power to make and enforce
decisions? Which perspectives, behaviors, and people should be
prioritized? Which ones should be subordinated or ignored?

            This type of critical analysis requires constant self-
awareness and self-discipline to identify flawed thinking, uncover
"blindspots" and "self-delusions," and apply different modes of
thinking (e.g., scientific, social, economic, moral) in order to reach
a conclusion that will inform personal growth and positive action.
It also requires repetition, making you examine the same issue over
and over again as you encounter it in different contexts. This is
perhaps the most challenging--and important--aspect of critical
thinking: adopting a growth mindset that remains open to authentic
self-analysis and revision, even (and especially) when it's an issue in
which you struggle to engage with opposing perspectives.

            What does critical thinking have to do with social justice?
Everything. Your actions are driven by your values and beliefs--your
ways of thinking about the world. We all fall into habits of mind
based on personal perspectives and social norms, which guide our
daily interactions and routines; more often than not, we're not fully
conscious of where our underlying beliefs came from, how they
align (or not) with our core values, and what consequences they
have on other people. We might overlook or ignore how our actions

142 | Privileged Spaces
perpetuate the status quo in big and subtle ways. In contrast, critical
thinkers do the difficult work of asking questions, wrestling with
contradictions and complications, and silencing the natural feelings
of defensiveness and dismissal that emerge when existing
assumptions are challenged. The Foundation for Critical Thinking
describes critical thinkers like this:

      They work diligently to develop the intellectual virtues of
      intellectual integrity, intellectual humility, intellectual
      civility, intellectual empathy, intellectual sense of justice
      and confidence in reason. They realize that no matter how
      skilled they are as thinkers, they can always improve their
      reasoning abilities and they will at times fall prey to
      mistakes in reasoning, human irrationality, prejudices,
      biases, distortions, uncritically accepted social rules and
      taboos, self-interest, and vested interest. They strive to
      improve the world in whatever ways they can and
      contribute to a more rational, civilized society.
   It's not about guilt. As we studied in chapter 3, everyone has
their own terministic screen that shapes the way that they interpret
information. Being a critical thinker means that you examine your
perspectives and personal biases and that you try your best to
understand other viewpoints and experiences that are vastly
different from your own.

            When it comes to digital technology, this means looking
beyond the utopian perspective of technology as being always
inherently beneficial for everyone. In fact, contrary to what many
people believe, digital technology has not leveled the playing field
for minority groups. While it is true that the web was originally
intended to be a marketplace of ideas where lots of different voices
could be heard, the reality is that the internet has reinforced social
inequalities based on race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status,
education level, age, and so on. Minority groups don't have equal
access to digital technologies, which is particularly true if we
consider the different types of access. In his book Race, Rhetoric,
and Technology: Searching for Higher Ground, Adam Banks identifies

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 143
five types of access: (1) material access, "equality to the material
conditions that drive technology use or nonuse" (41); (2) functional
access, having "the knowledge and skills necessary to use
technological tools effectively" (41); (3) experiential access, "access
that makes the tools a relevant part of [the users] lives" (42); (4)
critical access, "understandings of the benefits and problems of any
technology well enough to be able to critique, resist, and avoid them
when necessary as well as using them when necessary" (42); and
(5) transformative access, "genuine inclusion in technologies and
the networks of power that help determine what they become, but
never merely for the sake of inclusion" (45).

            Indeed, minority groups struggle with multiple levels of
"access," and as our culture becomes more reliant on digital
technologies for social (Helsper and Deursen), educational (Human
Rights Watch), professional (Townsend), and financial (Sridhar)
activities, the digital divide continues to grow (Li). What's more,
when they are online, minorities continue to experience different
forms of discrimination, such as exclusion, stereotyping, and hate
speech intended to belittle and discourage (Nguyen et al.). As you
probably know already, hate speech is often more aggressive when
done online because people can reach a wider audience; navigate
in an echo chamber of other like-minded users who are unlikely to
challenge in-group bias; and hide behind keyboards, pseudonyms,
and anonymous avatars.

            This chapter takes a critical look at the social inequalities
that exist within--and are often made worse because of--digital
technologies and online spaces. First, we will define what "privilege"
is and how it functions in different contexts. Then we'll look at
some of the social consequences of inequality and how the status
quo is perpetuated in digital spaces, even amid technologies that
are intended to promote positive change. Finally, we'll look at some
practical tools you can use to evaluate the digital spaces you visit/
support as well as your own digital messaging so you can act as a
positive force in the fight for social justice.

144 | Privileged Spaces
     Learning Objectives

          Understand the different types of "access" that
             relate to digital technologies.

          Consider the numerous advantages that come with
             access as well as the ongoing disadvantages for
             people who don't have access.

          Have a clear understanding of what "privilege"
             means and the tangible effects that it can have for
             those with and without privilege.

          Understand what the digital divide is and the
             different factors that relate to a person's ability to
             access digital spaces.

          Learn about the different ways that some groups of
             people are marginalized in online spaces. Consider
             the ways that this divide relates to other forms of
             privilege.

          Learn critical literacy tools that will enable you to
             be more aware of and have a positive influence on
             discriminatory policies and exclusionary messages.

Defining Privilege

Unfortunately, the word "privilege" has become politicized in recent
years (Boyers). Some people automatically shut down or become
defensive when they hear the word, perhaps because it is
sometimes used to invoke guilt or to obfuscate other significant

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 145
experiences and qualities that make people unique. The point of
discussing it here in this chapter is not to reduce people's rich
human experiences and complex characteristics to a single
attribute (e.g., gender, skin color, economic status), and it's certainly
not intended to create feelings of guilt or defensiveness. The
purpose is to bring awareness to the fact that most people have
varying types of privilege depending on their social location. They
experience certain benefits that other groups don't have access to
because of lingering discriminatory practices and consequences. It's
helpful for you to consider how privilege (or lack thereof) in certain
circumstances has had an effect on your life and the opportunities
that you've experienced and to consider the consequences of
privilege (or lack thereof) for other people who are different from
you.

            First, a quick definition is in order. According to a library
guide at Rider University, privilege can be defined as "certain social
advantages, benefits, or degrees of prestige and respect that an
individual has by virtue of belonging to certain social identity
groups." The guide goes on to describe privilege that centers around
qualities like race, class, religious affiliation, gender, education level,
ability, sexuality, and so on. Everyone has a social location
comprised of varying identities. To have privilege means that
because of one or more of these attributes, you experience rewards
and opportunities that other people don't. In contrast, in some
circumstances, you might experience discrimination or unequal
access to rewards and opportunities based on one of these social
markers.

            Let's look at a simple example: the world is clearly set up
for people of average height. They are "privileged" because they
experience automatic benefits based simply on this one physical
characteristic. They can easily reach the pedals in their car. They
can see over the person in front of them at a movie theater or
concert. They can reach items on a top shelf at the grocery store or
in their own closet. Their feet touch the ground when they sit in a
normal chair. They can ride any roller coaster of their choosing at

146 | Privileged Spaces
an amusement park. Socially, they fit more easily into conversations
because they are at a similar eye level with other people. These
are all things they take for granted because they are in a privileged
position. The world is set up for them, and they don't have to deal
with the disadvantages of being short, which makes it easy to
overlook. A short person, on the other hand, deals with the hassles
every day of being short, which sometimes means they don't get the
opportunity to ride a particular roller coaster or sit comfortably in
normal chairs. In other cases, it means they have to work harder
than other people to reach the top shelf or operate a vehicle. They
are probably well aware of the disadvantages they face every day.

            A similar example happened just a few years ago at an
academic conference in which a panel of speakers was positioned
to sit in chairs across a platform in an auditorium. A series of tall
steps led up to the platform, and one of the speakers who was
walking with a cane had a very difficult time getting up the stairs to
the platform. The venue was set up for--it was "privileging"--people
who were able-bodied and could easily climb a couple of stairs. No
doubt, the people who organized and set up the venue with the
platform were also able-bodied. They in no way intended for this
woman to feel excluded or inconvenienced in any way. They simply
didn't think about the problems that she would encounter because
they didn't encounter those problems themselves.

            You can probably see where this is going. These are both
poignant examples of privilege that give some groups of people--tall
or able-bodied people--an advantage over others. Of course, short
people can still drive a car just fine with a few accommodations, and
once they are able to reach the ingredients they need off the top
shelf in the grocery, maybe with the help of a clerk or a step stool,
their short stature doesn't have anything to do with the quality
of the meal they might make when they get home. Similarly, the
woman at the conference delivered an excellent presentation based
on her expertise and years of study. However, in both cases, the
short person or the disabled person had to work harder to
overcome obstacles in order to participate in the same activities as

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 147
other people. This is what privilege is, and it can be applied to lots of
different circumstances: the poor family who can't afford childcare
for their children, the female employee who is always asked to make
food for social events, the Black shopper who gets followed by store
security.

            This connects to digital technologies in profound ways. All
digital technologies are designed by people with their own biases
and blind spots, which in turn influences the way those
technologies are designed and the experience that different users
have. In the first chapter, we touched briefly on the idea of biased
algorithms that serve dominant groups and further marginalize
certain populations (Eubanks; Metz). That's often because the
technology is created by people in dominant groups, those who
have multiple layers of privilege and aren't accustomed to examining
the world through a different lens. Take, for instance, the
experience of Joy Buolamwini, who started an organization called
the Algorithmic Justice League after realizing that the software she
was using to develop a new "facial analysis technology" was racist.
It would only work if she put on a white mask; it wouldn't recognize
her black face. She coined the term "coded gaze" to refer to "the
priorities, preferences, and prejudices of those who have the power
to shape technology--which is quite a narrow group of people"
(Buolamwini). In other words, many technologies are designed in
ways that further marginalize certain groups and reinforce the
status quo.

            To truly understand privilege and its consequences, it's
important to consider a few additional concepts:

   Having privilege doesn't mean that someone hasn't worked
      hard for the things they've received. As Allan Johnson explains
      in his book Privilege, Power, and Difference, "The existence of
      privilege doesn't mean I didn't do a good job or that I don't
      deserve credit for it. What it does mean is that I'm also getting
      something that other people are denied, people who are like
      me in every respect except for the social categories they

148 | Privileged Spaces
   belong to" (21-22).
 Your social location doesn't really say anything about you as a

   person. The color of a person's skin, their gender, their
   economic status, and their education are all qualities that
   people have, but they don't say anything deeper about a
   person's personality, their values and beliefs, their hopes and
   dreams for the future, and so on.
 Privilege is also not the same as difference, though the two
   things are related. Again, Johnson helps shed light on the fact
   that difference, in and of itself, is not a bad thing. People are
   not naturally afraid of or repelled by difference: "The trouble is
   produced by a world organized in ways that encourage people
   to use difference to include or exclude, reward or punish,
   credit or discredit, elevate or oppress, value or devalue, leave
   alone or harass" (16). He goes on to explain how even the
   categories of difference are socially constructed as a way of
   creating labels and that these labels are used to "reduce people
   to a single dimension of who they are" for the sake of creating
   an "other."
 The benefits of privilege are exponential (McCrann). Privilege
   means having advantages and resources on a daily basis to
   further your education, to obtain and maintain a career, to
   access job promotions, to develop a social support system, to
   take care of your own mental and physical health, and to
   pursue your interests and life goals. These things have a
   cumulative effect that puts someone in a greater position to
   reap more benefits. Something as simple as having the money
   for a tutor in middle school and high school would help a
   student learn study skills as well as important concepts that
   would elevate their GPA and test scores, help them get into
   more prestigious universities (perhaps with a scholarship), be
   successful in the academic program of their choosing, and be
   more likely to get a high-paying job in their given field, which
   leads to more financial benefits related to credit scores,
   material possessions, health care, retirement benefits, and so

                                                                       Privileged Spaces | 149
      on. Yes, this is a simplified example. The ability to pay a tutor
      might not be the sole reason for all of this success, but it would
      be a condition of privilege that would correspond with other
      advantages, such as parents who are well-educated, a
      comfortable home that is conducive to personal learning and
      growth, networking and internship opportunities, or the
      money to pay for a prestigious college once accepted. It's a
      complex network of advantages that facilitates continuing
      success. And for people who don't have particular types of
      privilege, their educational, social, and financial losses are also
      exponential.
   Privilege is easy to ignore or explain away if you have it. As
      demonstrated in the examples above, someone who is
      benefiting from some sort of privilege isn't likely to realize it.
      They aren't actively or intentionally oppressing anyone; they
      are simply living their lives in systems that are created to put
      them at the center, which makes it difficult to recognize the
      disadvantages other people face. If you aren't convinced, this
      Buzzfeed article has a long list of privileges that most people in
      first-world countries take for granted without giving a second
      thought to the significant personal benefits they provide or the
      reality that so many people around the world don't share these
      same benefits (Sloss).

            The challenge, of course, is to recognize your own privilege
in different ways. The simple fact that you have the ability and the
time to sit and read this text--perhaps for a college class--signifies
that you have the privilege of furthering your education, of taking
the time to nurture your own personal and professional interests, of
working toward a degree that will greatly enhance your chances of
obtaining a rewarding career and reaping the financial benefits. In
these and probably other areas as well, you've had some advantages
that other people haven't because of previous and continuing
privileges. That doesn't mean that you shouldn't work hard or take
advantage of opportunities as they arise. It also doesn't mean that

150 | Privileged Spaces
you should feel guilty for your success. What it does mean is that
you should pay attention to the way society is organized to benefit
certain people, recognize your own privileged circumstances, and
do what you can to effect positive change so everyone has equal
access to opportunities and personal benefits regardless of
differences.

     Activity 5.1

        Review this identity wheel (Scripps College) or something
     similar that will help you identify the different aspects of
     your own social location. Consider the areas in which you
     have privilege as well as the areas in which you don't. Can
     you identify examples of the privileges and/or
     disadvantages that you've experienced because of these
     identity markers?

        Once you are finished, share your list with someone else,
     preferably someone who is "different" from you in one of
     the categories. As they share with you, be attentive to and
     respectful of their perspectives. See if you can identify
     privileges or disadvantages in their examples that you
     hadn't previously recognized or thought about before.

     Activity 5.2

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 151
        Privilege is easy to overlook, which is why this Buzzfeed
     article by Morgan Sloss is useful. It challenges you to think
     about privileges that you probably haven't considered
     before. Review the list in the article itself as well as the user
     comments at the bottom. What other types of privilege can
     you think of that are often overlooked? Come up with as
     many as you can from your own life.

Marginalized Identities in Online Spaces

As noted in the introduction of this chapter, "access" can mean
different things--having access to digital technologies, having
access to the digital literacy skills necessary to effectively navigate
online spaces, and having social access (acceptance) in various
online communities. Marginalized groups lack access in at least
one, if not all, of these ways. While many people are privileged
enough to have automatic access to digital technologies and the
personal, educational, professional, and civic advantages that come
with them, others are excluded as an ongoing consequence of their
oppression. This is called the digital divide, referring to the growing
chasm between groups of people who have access and those who
do not (IEEE.org).

            Indeed, the digital divide is getting worse. For one thing,
as new technologies emerge and integrate into our everyday lives,
the list of technologies and applications that marginalized groups
can't access grows. For another thing, access to these technologies
is increasingly a way of life for those who have it. This has been
particularly true following the COVID-19 pandemic, in which
everything--education, professional activities, health care access,

152 | Privileged Spaces
and so on--shifted to online spaces and created a large disadvantage
for people without internet access (University of Washington
Bothell). Lan Fang et al. discuss those disadvantages:

      Information and communication technologies (ICTs),
      products that enable information storage, retrieval,
      manipulation, transmission, or reception in digital form,
      can improve access to goods and services; generate and
      maintain a safe and secure independent living
      environment; facilitate self-management of age-related
      challenges; and enable social connectivity and
      participation....The inaccessibility of ICTs has resulted in
      significant inequities in respect to who can access, use, and
      benefit from these interventions.

            There are interrelated factors that contribute to the digital
divide. While it might be easy to simplify the issue into "haves" and
"have-nots," the problem is more complex, centering around the
different types of access. Beaunoyer et al. identify four "proximal
factors" that determine a person's ability to successfully use digital
technologies:

 1. Technical means--access to quality digital tools, both
      hardware and software, as well as internet connection

2. Autonomy of use--the personal time and space required to
      freely use the technology

3. Social support networks--connection with experienced users
      who can help a person learn various skills

4. Experience--enough time to become familiar with and to reap
      the benefits from digital technology

            Importantly, it's no coincidence that some people have
access to digital technologies and the benefits they provide and
some people don't. Digital inequalities mirror, and thus reinforce,
existing social inequalities related to race and ethnicity, which are
inherently linked to socioeconomic status and educational
attainment (American Psychological Association). Fang et al. call

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 153
it a "pattern of privilege," in which a person's social location is
a determinant of other intertwined factors. Race, education, and
income are connected and tend to create further challenges related
to health, manual labor, strict gender roles, and so on, which further
decrease the chances of someone gaining access to digital
technologies. Though "access" is determined by a complex matrix
of factors, there are several that stand out as particularly salient
predictors:

   Age. Though the gap is getting smaller as more older adults
      gain access to digital spaces, there is still a significant number
      of older adults who aren't online. Hall et al. found that many
      older adults do have access to the devices themselves, but they
      aren't comfortable using digital technologies. They don't have a
      clear understanding of how the technologies work, and they
      don't have confidence that they will be able to learn. This is
      particularly concerning because so much health
      information--access to health records and communication
      with providers--occurs online.

   Socioeconomic status. Perhaps the most obvious factor is the
      digital gap between people who have the financial means to
      buy the latest technologies and internet services and those
      who don't (Khan Academy). Some people simply don't make
      enough to afford broadband internet or the range of devices
      that would allow them to be fully integrated into digital spaces.
      However, this also means that they lack access to resources
      and opportunities that might improve their financial
      situation--online degree programs and other educational
      activities, professional networking, job opportunities that are
      posted online or that require stable internet access, financial
      services, and so on. In other words, the divide grows wider as
      people with lower incomes fall further behind, while people
      with money are able to leverage digital technologies to acquire
      more wealth.

   Education level. People with higher levels of education are

154 | Privileged Spaces
   more likely to consistently and effectively use digital
   technologies. This article by the Pew Research Organization
   demonstrates that people with lower levels of education and
   less income are less likely to use the internet for personal and
   professional learning activities. Instead, "the internet is more
   on the periphery of their learning activities" (Horrigan). This is
   one instance where "access" might take a couple different
   forms--the money to obtain digital devices as well as the
   literacy skills to effectively navigate online spaces. Once again,
   lack of access further widens the divide, as people in this
   group are less likely to effectively participate in school
   activities that would enhance their education level (American
   University). As the American University article explains,
   students without access to quality digital devices are less likely
   to perform well in online learning activities and are less likely
   to persist to higher levels of education.
 Race. As discussed above, race is closely connected with
   socioeconomic status and education level. Nonwhite groups,
   particularly people who are Black or Hispanic, are more likely
   to experience poverty, which further deprives them of
   important resources, like educational opportunities and digital
   technologies, and as we've already seen, the negative
   consequences are further compounded by ongoing
   disadvantages and missed opportunities. What's more, when
   racial minorities do gain access to online spaces, they are more
   likely to experience discrimination that excludes them and
   discourages their participation. In other words, they are
   denied "access" to social communities. According to Tynes,
   online racial discrimination is a significant problem that affects
   a growing number of adolescents and includes things like
   "racial epithets and unfair treatment" based on race and
   ethnicity. It might also include rude or derogatory images,
   videos, comments, symbols, or graphic representations. Tynes
   also includes "cloaked sites" in the list of discriminatory
   practices, created to "spread misinformation about the history

                                                                       Privileged Spaces | 155
      and culture of certain racial/ethnic groups."
   Gender. Though there don't seem to be any indicators that one

      gender has more access to digital devices or literacy skills than
      another, women are more likely to experience different forms
      of abuse online. This article by the Council of Europe names a
      few examples: "non-consensual image or video sharing,
      intimidation and threats via email or social media platforms,
      including rape and death threats, online sexual harassment,
      stalking, including with the use of tracking apps and devices, as
      well as impersonation, and economic harm via digital means."
      The article goes on to explain that women are more likely to be
      the victim of cyberbullying and sexual exploitation online.
      What's more, individuals in the LGBTQ+ community are also
      more likely to experience online discrimination, exclusion, and
      harassment.
   Immigration status. Immigrants are less likely to have access
      to digital devices or literacy skills (Cherewka). Like other
      examples we've explored, immigration status is closely linked
      to other predictors, such as socioeconomic status and
      education level. Also, immigrants in more rural areas are less
      likely to have broadband services.

156 | Privileged Spaces
                                                                                        Wheel of
                                                                                        Power/
                                                                                        Privilege, by
                                                                                        sylviaduckw
                                                                                        orth, on
                                                                                        Flickr (CC
                                                                                        BY-NC-ND
                                                                                        2.0)

            These are just a few of the factors that influence a person's
level of access to digital spaces along with the numerous tangible
and intangible benefits that access affords. As indicated in the
examples, the negative effects of having little or no digital access
are cumulative, including fewer educational and employment
opportunities, limited social support (Courtois and Verdegem),
diminished health literacy and access to health care resources
(Beaunoyer et al.), and more struggles with mental health and social
well-being (Bchi et al.). Beaunoyer et al. explain:

      As an emerging form of social exclusion, digital exclusion
      contributes to worsen material and social deprivation.
      Being digitally excluded has consequences on health
      determinants such as education, work, and social networks,
      which impacts contribute in return to maintain limited
      access and use of technologies, a phenomenon referred to
      as the "digital vicious cycle."

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 157
     Activity 5.3

        This section touched briefly on some of the more obvious
     consequences of the digital divide, especially for those
     populations that don't have access to digital tools, literacy
     skills, and social communities. See if you can come up with
     other consequences--for individual populations as well as
     society as a whole. Some of the ongoing effects might be
     fairly obvious and significant, while others might be more
     subtle.

Critical Literacy in Action

Social inequality is a complex and pervasive problem, and there
aren't any simple solutions. Nevertheless, there are things we can
do to help close the digital divide, especially if we make a conscious
effort to pay attention to the disadvantages that other people face
and practice an attitude of inclusion. For one thing, we can support
programs and government policies that are working toward digital
equality and oppose decisions that would increase the gap. For
instance, net neutrality is a common term relating to the equal
access of users and businesses to high-speed internet capabilities
(Finley). It's the principle that internet providers should not be able
to discriminate against some types of content (by blocking or
slowing down internet speeds) in favor of others (that load much
faster), which in turn reduces the access of some people and/or
businesses to have their message heard.

158 | Privileged Spaces
            Ultimately, without net neutrality, providers can prioritize
some information--and also some types of people--over others
based on people's ability to pay more money. According to Finley,
"The fear is that, over time, companies and organizations that either
can't afford priority treatment, or simply aren't offered access to it,
will fall by the wayside." Unfortunately, many of the net neutrality
laws that had been in place during the Bush and Obama
administrations were overturned in 2017, which has opened the
door for providers to take advantage of fewer restrictions and more
financial incentives.

            You can also support government programs and projects
that are geared toward closing the divide. For instance, part of
Biden's American Jobs Plan is to "revitalize America's digital
infrastructure," which would include 100% broadband coverage so
that "unserved and underserved areas" gain access to internet
services, greater competition among a greater number of large and
small providers, and reduced internet prices (The White House).
However, as Chakravorti of the Harvard Business Review points out,
"Infrastructure alone does not necessarily translate into adoption
and beneficial use. Local and national institutions, affordability and
access, and the digital proficiency of users, all play significant
roles--and there are wide variations across the United States along
each of these." In addition to the infrastructure that makes it
possible for underserved populations to access the internet,
Chakravorti points out the need to increase "inclusivity" (so that
broadband is affordable and increases the likelihood that people will
be able to adopt internet technologies), "institutions" (to promote
government policies and best practices that prioritize public
access), and "digital proficiency" (to help people learn how to
effectively navigate digital technologies to send and receive
information).

            According to the North Carolina Department of
Information Technology (NCDIT), adoption is really key. Yes, it's
important to expand the infrastructure to make broadband services
available and affordable, and it's helpful to subsidize the cost of

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 159
emerging technologies so that everyone can use and benefit from
them, but availability doesn't matter if people don't adopt the
technology, either because they don't have the skills to effectively
engage with it or because they don't believe that it's beneficial.
As the NCDIT page explains, there are grants and other programs
available to not only provide resources to underserved communities
but also supply the training needed to help them successfully utilize
those resources.

DEI Framework

While there are some political agendas and grant programs that
might seem pretty far removed from your everyday sphere of
influence, there are also more direct, individual practices you can
adopt to create an online environment where everyone feels
welcome. The whole point of understanding your own privilege in
certain circumstances is to better identify moments where other
people are marginalized in some way and to utilize your own
influence to help rectify those issues. While the DEI framework is
most often used by businesses trying to cultivate a more just and
welcoming environment, it is also a great way to begin thinking
about your digital practices so that you can have a positive effect on
the communities you're a part of.

            DEI stands for diversity, equity, and inclusion (Extension
Committee on Organization & Policy). According to the Society for
Human Resource Management (SHRM), "The diversity, equity and
inclusion (DE&I) function deals with the qualities, experiences and
work styles that make individuals unique (e.g., age, race, religion,
disabilities, ethnicity) as well as how organizations can leverage
those qualities in support of business objectives." In other words,
being inclusive of different identities and perspectives is not only
ethical but it promotes business success. In fact, a 2022 study found
that companies with a diverse workforce earn 2.5 times more

160 | Privileged Spaces
revenue per employee, and inclusive teams are 35% more
productive (Research and Markets). Let's look at each word in the
acronym and consider how it might influence your online activities:

   Diversity. In this case, diversity refers to differences in race,
      gender, location, socioeconomic status, age, religion,
      (dis)ability--anything related to a person's social location that
      has a natural influence on the way that they experience and
      perceive the world. People and organizations that work to
      foster diversity are intentional about cultivating a diverse
      community because they see the inherent value in having
      different types of people and perspectives. It enriches the
      overall community, as people share their own ideas and
      experiences and are likewise challenged to consider
      viewpoints that are different from their own. What this means
      for your online activities is that you too would be intentional
      about openly and respectfully engaging with diverse people to
      better understand their experiences and ways of thinking. It
      doesn't mean you have to agree with other people all of the
      time, but it does mean that you should try to listen and to see
      where they are coming from. In addition to engaging with
      different people on various social media platforms, you'd also
      make an effort to diversify the places where you go to get your
      news and entertainment, all of which would make you more
      sensitive to the experiences and concerns of people who are
      different from you.

   Equity. This term refers to practices that value and prioritize
      social justice so that all people have equal opportunities. To be
      a proponent of equity means that you have a deeper
      understanding of the inequalities that persist in our society
      and the tangible effects that they have on people's lives. You
      not only recognize that these inequalities exist, but you
      advocate for marginalized groups in an effort to challenge
      discriminatory practices and mindsets and evenly distribute
      resources and opportunities. It means that as you engage with

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 161
      different groups of people online, you'd be aware of overt
      discriminatory practices as well as microaggressions that make
      people feel excluded or uncomfortable. At the very least, you'd
      stop engaging with groups and/or individuals who exhibit
      these negative attitudes. You might even feel compelled to
      address discriminatory behaviors in order to (hopefully)
      develop other people's sense of awareness and sensitivity.
   Inclusion. Whereas equity is about addressing social injustice,
      inclusion is about making people who are typically
      marginalized feel welcome, like they are wanted and valued. In
      fact, the word "tolerance" has in some ways developed a
      negative connotation because it doesn't imply that someone is
      truly wanted. To feel like someone is simply tolerating you
      would probably not make you feel particularly welcome. You'd
      feel like you are a nuisance. You'd still feel marginalized.
      Inclusion is about going out of your way to make people feel
      comfortable and included in the group. You'd invite other
      people to share their perspectives and participate in the
      conversation. You'd affirm their sense of belonging and the
      benefit/insight that they bring to the group.

            Utilizing this DEI framework won't help with the larger
problem of the digital divide, but it does help with one kind of
access. As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, there are
different kinds of access, including not only access to the
technology or the skills necessary to use that technology but also
access to groups online where people feel that they are respected
and that their voices are heard. If more people enacted a DEI
mentality as they engaged with different groups of people in digital
spaces, there would be fewer "privileged" spaces where some people
feel ignored or unwelcome.

162 | Privileged Spaces
Practicing Third Persona

Admittedly, it can be difficult sometimes to step outside of your
own perspective to really understand or predict how someone from
a marginalized group might be feeling in response to a particular
conversation or message. It's the type of thing that requires
intentionality and practice. It also requires a degree of humility
because the odds are that as you engage with different types of
people, you might unintentionally say something that is offensive
or insensitive, and in those moments, the best thing to do is to
apologize and learn from the situation by trying to understand it
from the other person's point of view.

            Learning also comes from thinking critically about the
messages that you encounter as well as the messages that you
create in order to identify the effect that they might have on your
audience. Here we're dipping into the rhetorical literacy that is
covered more extensively in part two of the textbook, but it's worth
a brief mention here, since thinking critically about your messaging
also requires thinking critically about your audience and your
underlying purpose. The main concept that is really helpful for
identifying insensitive or exclusive messages is called "third
persona," a concept that was introduced by Philip Wander in 1984.
However, first it might be helpful to refresh your memory about
"point of view." You've probably learned that a text can be written
in first person (with the focus on the speaker--"I" or "me"), second
person (with the focus on the audience--"you"), or in third person
(with the focus on other people outside of the group--"he," "she,"
"they").

            Wander's concept of third persona was a response to Edwin
Black's 1970 essay, "The Second Persona." In his essay, Black
discusses the concept of second persona as the audience that is
implied within a message. It isn't so much about the actual, real-
life people who are part of the audience; it's more about the ideal
audience that is invoked in a message, which in turn invites the

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 163
real audience to adopt a certain identity. Walter Ong discusses a
similar concept in his article "The Writer's Audience Is Always a
Fiction," in which the writer imagines an ideal audience and crafts
their message accordingly. For example, if a student is going to miss
class for a doctor's appointment, they might send a professor an
email that looks like this:

      Professor X, I'm so sorry to have to miss class, but I have
      a doctor's appointment tomorrow that I wasn't able to
      reschedule. I know that you take attendance very seriously,
      as do I, but I'm having some important tests run tomorrow.
      I'll be sure to get notes from a friend so I can catch up on
      what I miss. Thank you for understanding!
   In this short email, the student invites the professor to adopt a
certain identity as someone who "takes attendance very seriously"
but would also be understanding of the importance of a doctor's
appointment and the tests that are scheduled. The student is also
portraying the professor and the class as a serious endeavor, implied
by the fact that she is "sorry" to miss and that she knows important
information will be presented, so she'll be sure to find out what
she missed from a friend. The actual professor--the one behind
the computer screen reading the email--may or may not have all
of those qualities, but chances are that the professor would read
the email and feel somewhat compelled to adopt the identity of
a serious yet gracious instructor and respond positively to the
student's message. In other words, second persona is about
understanding the ideal target audience and how that audience
is portrayed in a particular message. A well-crafted message will
invoke an audience with particular interests, qualities, and values
that are appealing and therefore increase the likelihood of a positive
response.

            Whereas second persona is about the ideal target audience
("you"), Wander's concept of third persona is about the segment
of the audience that is left out--the "other." He describes it as the
part of the audience that is "negated" or "alienated" by a text. He
says, "But just as the discourse may be understood to affirm certain

164 | Privileged Spaces
characteristics, it may also be understood to imply other
characteristics, roles, actions, or ways of seeing things to be
avoided. What is negated through the Second Persona forms the
silhouette of a Third Persona" (Wander 209). In other words, just
as a message will automatically invoke ideal, good qualities that the
audience should possess, it also inherently implies negative qualities
that should be avoided. He makes it clear that many texts don't do
this intentionally; they simply take for granted what is "good" or
"normal," probably based on the speaker's own social location and
perspectives. Those identities are put in the center of the message,
while audiences who don't fit that criteria are pushed to the fringes.
Their lived experiences and perspectives are portrayed in a negative
way or ignored altogether. And often the identities that are negated
in a text are those same marginalized groups that have historically
been "left out" of all types of conversations, resulting in continuing
inequalities: "Beyond its verbal formulation, the Third Persona
draws in historical reality, so stark in the twentieth century, of
peoples categorized according to race, religion, age, gender, sexual
preference, and nationality, and acted upon in ways consistent with
their status as non-subjects" (Wander 216).

            Another example might be helpful to really see how the
concept of third persona might be applied to a message. Here is an
example of a simple assignment prompt for a college-level writing
course:

      For this assignment, you will write a rhetorical analysis of
      an online space--ideally someplace where you are fairly
      active. To begin, you should explore why you are drawn to
      this site. Does it in some way confirm your own Christian
      values? American values? You should also consider what
      you think is the purpose of the site and how the different
      elements of the site work together to help fulfill that
      purpose. When you get home this evening, post a brief
      response on our Canvas forum (around 500 words)
      discussing your perspective of the website you have
      chosen.

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 165
   At first glance, this assignment prompt might seem innocent
enough. It's asking students to do a very common writing
assignment--a rhetorical analysis--and to consider their own
perspectives of a particular online space. However, a closer look
through the lenses of second and third persona reveals a pretty
significant problem when it comes to the way that the ideal
audience--those conscientious students in the course--are
portrayed. It assumes (second persona) several things about the
audience:

   That they are "active" online.
   That they might naturally have "Christian" or "American" values

      as part of their identity.
   That they automatically have the extra time and the resources

      when they get home that evening to write a response.
   That they are confident writers and 500 words is a "brief

      response" that should be fairly easy.

This is the ideal, "normal" audience that is implied in the assignment
prompt. Certainly, in many college classes, there are students who
would fit this persona and they would likely feel compelled to step
into the identity of a confident and thoughtful writer. However,
many students don't. The assignment prompt wasn't written with
the intent to make anyone feel discouraged, frustrated, or alienated,
but that would absolutely be the result for some groups of students.
The assignment prompt ignores the fact that some students might
not be "active" online for whatever reason. It ignores the fact that
students might have different nationalities or religious beliefs. It
ignores the fact that many students work in the evenings or have
other personal obligations that would prevent them from being able
to complete this type of assignment so quickly. It ignores the reality
that some students don't have access to digital technologies or Wi-
Fi at home and that for them, completing this assignment would be
much more difficult. It also ignores students who struggle to write,

166 | Privileged Spaces
who would need a lot more time and direction to put together a
500-word response.

            Because of the power dynamics and the nature of some of
these assumptions about what it means to be a "normal" college
student, chances are that students who did feel alienated by this
message wouldn't necessarily challenge the professor or even call
to attention the difference in their own identities and experiences.
Some would probably still do the assignment, but they would have
to work a lot harder to find a public-access computer and to spend
the couple of hours it might take to complete the assignment. Some
might go ahead and write an analysis that centers their own values
regarding religion, ethnicity, race, sexuality, and so on, or they
might feel pressured to conform to "American" or "Christian" or
some other dominant identity because they think they will get a
better grade or because they don't want to draw attention to
themselves as different. And then there will be some students who
are alienated by this assignment prompt and won't do it because
they don't have the technological resources or the assumed writing
abilities to complete it in one evening. They'll get a zero for the
assignment, and if the course is sprinkled with lots of similar
assignments that put them at a disadvantage, they'll eventually
disengage and either withdraw or fail the course.

            This might seem like an extreme example, but the reality is
that messages have a great deal of influence over an audience and
their responses. For audiences who feel included in and valued by
the message, who feel capable of stepping into the ideal persona
that is portrayed, they are likely to respond positively to the
message and receive the ongoing rewards of acceptance and
prosperity, be they social, financial, educational, and so on. The
reverse is true for people who aren't included in the message, who
don't feel valued or capable of stepping into the ideal persona, who
feel ignored altogether.

            As we have studied throughout this chapter, there are
tangible disadvantages that come with being excluded from digital
spaces. Taking a critical approach to your own digital writing and

                                                                          Privileged Spaces | 167
the messages that you encounter online is an important step toward
true equality where everyone has access. Obviously, the point of
adopting a DEI framework and analyzing a message--particularly
your own--through the lens of third persona is to make necessary
revisions to your habits of mind and digital practices that might
unintentionally perpetuate others' marginalized status. In an ideal
world, there wouldn't be "privileged" spaces; there would instead
be a rich, diverse community of ideas and perspectives that benefit
everyone involved and continually invite more people to the
conversation(s). Critical literacy is at the very heart of making that
vision a reality.

     Activity 5.4

        Reread the section of this chapter about DEI (diversity,
     equity, and inclusion). For each concept of this acronym,
     write a reflection about your own digital practices. What
     are you already doing in this area? What problems or
     challenges do you encounter? In which spaces do you feel
     "included"? In which spaces do you feel "excluded" in some
     way? What types of things can you do in each category to
     have a more positive effect?

     Activity 5.5

168 | Privileged Spaces
   Select a handful of texts in which you are in the audience.
This might be a diverse selection of text messages / emails
directly to you or a group that you're a part of, and it might
also include messaging on social media or websites in
which the audience is broader. Analyze these messages
using second and third persona. Remember that second
persona is about the ideal target audience, and third
persona is about members of the target audience who are
ignored or devalued. What types of qualities (and identities)
are implied as positive or normal in the message you
selected? What types of identities are overlooked or even
devalued?

   Now do the same thing for a handful of texts that you
have recently written. Once again, try to select a variety of
texts and emails as well as other messages, such as blog
posts, social media posts, forum responses, and so on. What
do you notice about the assumptions that you make about
your audience? What kinds of qualities do you assume that
your audience has? What types of people might feel
marginalized when they read your message? Are there ways
that the text could have been written differently to be more
inclusive?

Discussion Questions

    1. What are the different definitions of the word

                                                                    Privileged Spaces | 169
             "critical"? How can they be applied to your own
             digital writing?
        2. What are the different types of "access" that are
             referred to in the chapter? Can you give a deeper
             explanation or example for each one?
        3. What is privilege? What forms of privilege do you
             have that put you at an advantage over others? What
             forms of privilege don't you have?
        4. The chapter also makes some additional
             distinctions about the concept of privilege. What are
             they? Which ones strike you as particularly relevant
             or important for you and the experiences you've had?
        5. What is the "coded gaze"? The chapter identified
             one example of a biased algorithm. Can you think of
             other examples? What are the ethical consequences
             of these technologies?
        6. What is the digital divide? In what ways is the
             digital divide getting worse? What are the four
             different factors that influence a person's ability to
             participate in the digital realm? Can you think of
             other factors that might be important or relevant?
         7. How is the digital divide connected with other
             forms of privilege? In other words, people who are
             denied "access" in some way also experience
             discrimination and inequalities based on other factors
             (e.g., race, age, ability, gender). Explain this
             connection.
        8. What are some of the more prominent factors that
             influence a person's level of digital access?
        9. How are the advantages and disadvantages of
             digital access "exponential"? What does this mean?
             Can you come up with some examples?

170 | Privileged Spaces
  10. What is the DEI framework? What do the different
        terms in the acronym stand for? How can this be
        applied to help remedy inequalities of access? Why
        do you think that businesses that utilize DEI are more
        successful?

   11. Explain the concepts of second and third persona.
        How can these concepts be used as a lens to critically
        analyze a text to understand how "access" is being
        denied to certain identities?

Sources

             American Psychological Association. "Ethnic and
          Racial Minorities & Socioeconomic Status." APA.org,
          July 2017, https://www.apa.org/pi/ses/resources/
          publications/
          minorities#:~:text=The%20relationship%20between
          %20SES%2C%20race,SES%2C%20race%2C%20and
          %20ethnicity.

             American University. "Understanding the Digital
          Divide in Education." American.edu, 15 Dec. 2020,
          https://soeonline.american.edu/blog/digital-
          divide-in-
          education#:~:text=Students%20from%20marginaliz
          ed%20communities%20are,is%20for%20more%20p
          rivileged%20students.

                                                                     Privileged Spaces | 171
                  Beaunoyer, Elisabeth, et al. "COVID-19 and Digital
               Inequalities: Reciprocal Impacts and Mitigation
               Strategies." Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 111,
               Oct. 2020, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
               articles/PMC7213963/.

                  Black, Edwin. "The Second Persona." Quarterly
               Journal of Speech, vol. 56m, no. 2, 1970, 109-119,
               https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
               00335637009382992?journalCode=rq js20.

                  Boyers, Robert. "The Term `Privilege' Has Been
               Weaponized. It's Time to Retire It." The Guardian, 8
               Nov. 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/
               commentisfree/2019/nov/08/the-term-privilege-
               has-been-weaponized-its-time-to-retire-it.

                  Bchi, Moritz, et al. "How Social Well-Being is
               Affected by Digital Inequalities." International
               Journal of Education, vol. 12, 2018,
               3686-3706,https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/
               papers.cfm?abstract_id=3871751.

                  Buolamwini, Joy. "Fighting the `Coded Gaze.'" Ford
               Foundation, 26 June 2018,
               https://www.fordfoundation.org/news-and-
               stories/stories/fighting-the-coded-
               gaze/#:~:text=I%20think%20of%20the%20coded,a
               %20narrow%20group%20of%20people.

                  Chakravorti, Bhaskar. "How to Close the Digital
               Divide in the U.S." Harvard Business Review, 20 July
               2021, https://hbr.org/2021/07/how-to-close-the-
               digital-divide-in-the-u-s.

                  Cherewka, Alexis. "The Digital Divide Hits U.S.
               Immigrant Households Disproportionately During

172 | Privileged Spaces
the Covid-19 Pandemic." Migration Policy Institute, 3
Dec. 2020, https://www.migrationpolicy.org/
article/digital-divide-hits-us-immigrant-
households-during-covid-19.

   Council of Europe. "No Space for Violence against
Women and Girls in the Digital World." COE.Int, 15
Mar. 2022, https://www.coe.int/en/web/
commissioner/-/no-space-for-violence-against-
women-and-girls-in-the-digital-world.

   Courtois, Cdric, and Peter Verdegem. "With a
Little Help from My Friends: An Analysis of the Role
of Social Support in Digital Inequalities." New Media
& Society, vol. 18, no. 8, 9 July 2016, https://doi.org/
10.1177/1461444814562162

   Eubanks, Virginia. Automating Inequality. New
York, St. Martin's Press, 2017.

   Extension Committee on Organization & Policy.
"What is Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI)?"
DEI.Extension.org, n.d., https://dei.extension.org/.

   Finley, Klint. "The WIRED Guide to Net Neutrality."
Wired.com, 5 May 2020, https://www.wired.com/
story/guide-net-neutrality/.

   The Foundation for Critical Thinking. "Defining
Critical Thinking." CriticalThinking.org, 2019,
https://www.criticalthinking.org/pages/defining-
critical-thinking/766.

   Fox, Pamela. "The Socioeconomic Digital Divide."
Khan Academy, 2022,
https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/
computers-and-internet/xcae6f4a7ff015e7d:the-

                                                         Privileged Spaces | 173
               internet/xcae6f4a7ff015e7d:the-digital-divide/a/
               the-socioeconomic-digitaldivide.

                  Hall, Amanda, K., et al. "The Digital Health Divide:
               Evaluating Online Health Information Access and
               Use Among Older Adults." Health Education &
               Behavior, vol. 42, no. 2, 25 Aug. 2014,
               https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/
               1090198114547815?journalCode=hebc.

                  Helsper, Ellen A., and Alexander J. A. Deursen. "Do
               the Rich Get Digitally Richer?" Quantity and Quality
               of Support for Digital Engagement. Information,
               Communication & Society, vol. 20, no. 5, 2017,
               https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/
               1369118X.2016.1203454.

                  Horrigan, John B. "Lifelong Learning and
               Technology." Pew Research Center, 22 Mar. 2016,
               https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2016/03/
               22/lifelong-learning-and-
               technology/#:~:text=The%20survey%20clearly%20
               shows%20that,take%20advantage%20of%20the%20
               internet.

                  Human Rights Watch. "Years Don't Wait for Them:
               Increased Inequalities in Children's Right to
               Education Due to Covid-19 Pandemic." HRW.org, 17
               May 2021, https://www.hrw.org/report/2021/05/
               17/years-dont-wait-them/increased-inequalities-
               childrens-right-education-due-covid.

                  IEEE.org. "Solutions to the Digital Divide: Moving
               Toward a More Equitable Future." IEEE.org, 2023,
               https://ctu.ieee.org/solutions-to-the-digital-
               divide-moving-toward-a-more-equitable-

174 | Privileged Spaces
future/#:~:text=The%20digital%20divide%20refers
%20to,have%20access%20to%20the%20internet.

   Johnson, Allan. Privilege, Power, and Difference.
Boston, McGraw Hill, 2005.

   Khan Academy. "The Socioeconomic Digital
Divide." Khan Academy, n.d.,
https://www.khanacademy.org/computing/
computers-and-internet/xcae6f4a7ff015e7d:the-
internet/xcae6f4a7ff015e7d:the-digital-divide/a/
the-socioeconomic-digitaldivide.

   Lan Fang, Mei, et al. "Exploring Privilege in the
Digital Divide: Implications for Theory, Policy, and
Practice." Gerontologist, vol. 59, no. 1, Feb. 2019,
https://doi.org/10.1093/geront/gny037.

   Li, Cheng. "Worsening Global Divide as the US and
China Continue Zero-Sum Competitions." Brookings,
11 Oct. 2021, https://www.brookings.edu/blog/
order-from-chaos/2021/10/11/worsening-global-
digital-divide-as-the-us-and-china-continue-zero-
sum-competitions/.

   McCrann, John. T. "The Reparations I Owe: An
Exponential Growth Model of Privilege." EdWeek.org,
13 July 2016, https://www.edweek.org/teaching-
learning/opinion-the-reparations-i-owe-an-
exponential-growth-model-of-privilege/2016/07.

   Metz, Cade. "Who Is Making Sure the A.I.
Machines Aren't Racist?" The New York Times, 23
June 2023, https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/15/
technology/artificial-intelligence-google-
bias.html#:~:text=Buolamwini%20and%20Ms.,31%20
percent%20of%20the%20time.

                                                         Privileged Spaces | 175
                  Nguyen, Sarah Hoan, et al. "How Do We Make the
               Virtual World a Better Place? Social Discrimination
               in Online Gaming, Sense of Community, and Well-
               Being." Telematics and Informatics, vol. 66, Jan. 2022,
               https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2021.101747.

                  North Carolina Department of Information
               Technology. "Closing the Digital Divide."
               NCBroadband.gov, n.d.,
               https://www.ncbroadband.gov/digital-divide/
               closing-digital-divide.

                  Research and Markets. "Diversity and Inclusion
               (D&I) Global Market Report 2022...." Research and
               Markets, 9 Aug. 2022,
               https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/
               2022/08/09/2494604/0/en/Diversity-and-
               Inclusion-D-I-Global-Market-Report-2022-Diverse-
               Companies-Earn-2-5-Times-Higher-Cash-Flow-
               Per-Employee-and-Inclusive-Teams-Are-More-
               Productive-by-Over-35.html.

                  Scripps College. "Social Identity Wheel."
               ScrippsCollege.edu, n.d.,
               http://www.scrippscollege.edu/laspa/wp-content/
               uploads/sites/38/Social-Identity-Wheel.pdf.

                  Sloss, Morgan. "People Are Pointing Out Privileges
               That Lots of People Don't Even Recognize, And This
               is So Important." Buzzfeed.com, 25 July 2021,
               https://www.buzzfeed.com/morgansloss1/things-
               people-dont-realize-are-privileges-reddit. 15 Oct.
               2022.

                  Society for Human Resources Management.
               "Introduction to the Human Resources Disciplines of

176 | Privileged Spaces
Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion." SHRM, n.d.,
https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/tools-
and-samples/toolkits/pages/introdiversity.aspx.

   Sridhar, Rama. "Bridging the Digital Divide is Key
to Building Financial Inclusion." Forbes, 10 Sept. 2021,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbesbusinessdevelopmentcouncil/2021/09/10/
bridging-the-digital-divide-is-key-to-building-
financial-inclusion/?sh=2c4c395b75ae.

   Townsend, Phela. "Disconnected: How the Digital
Divide Harms Workers and What We Can Do about
It." The Century Foundation, 22 Oct. 2020,
https://tcf.org/content/report/disconnected-
digital-divide-harms-workers-can/?session=1.

   University Libraries at Rider University. "Privilege
and Intersectionality." Rider University, 9 Oct. 2022,
https://guides.rider.edu/privilege.

   University of Washington Bothell. "The Pandemic
Reveals Digital Divide." UWB.edu, 1 July 2021,
https://www.uwb.edu/news/july-2021/pandemic-
reveals-digital-divide.

   Tynes, Brendesha, M. "Online Racial
Discrimination: A Growing Problem for Adolescents."
APA.org, Dec. 2015, https://web.archive.org/web/
20200724033710/https://www.apa.org/science/
about/psa/2015/12/online-racial-discrimination.

   Wander, Philip. "The Third Persona: An Ideological
Turn in Rhetorical Theory." Central States Speech
Journal, vol. 35, no. 4, 1984, 197-216,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10510978409368190.

                                                         Privileged Spaces | 177
                  The White House. "Fact Sheet: The American Jobs
               Plan." WhiteHouse.gov, 31 Mar. 2021,
               https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/
               statements-releases/2021/03/31/fact-sheet-the-
               american-jobs-plan/.

178 | Privileged Spaces
6. Affordances and

Constraints: A Critical

Analysis of Digital Spaces

This final chapter in the Critical Literacy Unit ties together some
important information as we delve a bit deeper into a critical
perspective of technology and how some of the theories we've
discussed so far might be applied to your daily life. The previous
chapters have explored various aspects of digital technology with
the goal of complicating and extending your understanding of the
social, professional, educational, and civic benefits. Hopefully, by
now it's clear why the concept of a "digital panacea" is a myth and
that for you to be truly intentional and effective as you navigate
various digital spaces, having a deep understanding of the benefits
as well as the limitations of those spaces is crucial.

            Far from more dystopian views of technology, this textbook
celebrates the opportunities and incredible rewards that so often
come along with online engagement--the opportunity to quickly
and easily find information about a variety of topics, the ability to
communicate with family and friends and colleagues to maintain
social connectedness and increase productivity, the ability to
engage in civic groups and participate in meaningful dialogue to
address important issues. It's no wonder that so much of our lives
revolve around digital technologies; they've become integral to our
communication patterns, our daily workflows, our personal
interests, our civic activities, and our entertainment preferences.
Indeed, part of critical literacy is being aware of various ways that
you rely on digital technology. As we'll see in this chapter, these
technologies don't just affect what you can do, they have a profound
impact on your thought patterns and your sense of identity--what
you can think and who you can be. And while that might sound a

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 179
little chilling, particularly after our discussions about surveillance
and behavior modification, it's not necessarily a bad thing, and it's
certainly not new. Human beings have always been "shaped" by the
tools that they use. Digital technology is a profound example in a
long line of other examples, and it has significantly expanded the
types of identities we can inhabit.

            As we've considered in different ways throughout this first
unit, digital technology isn't automatically, inherently beneficial.
There are opportunities for rewards just as there are also risks
associated with digital participation. Without intentionality and
careful self-monitoring, your use of digital technology can have a
negative effect on your social relationships, your cognitive function,
and your emotional health. (See chapter 2 for a recap of "The Bad
and The Ugly.") Without a conscious awareness of your everyday
digital practices and the more subtle--often invisible--encounters
that you might have with digital surveillance, commercialization,
echo chambers, and underlying agendas and spins, you will most
certainly be susceptible to the manipulations of other people whose
values and interests may or may not align with your own. You'll
be unaware of how businesses and large, impersonal corporations
motivated by profit margins influence how you spend your time
and money, what you think about, and even what you believe to be
true about the world. There's also the reality that you have certain
"privileges"--as evidenced by your basic ability to access this digital
text (i.e., your access to a digital device and your ability to read
the text)--and without a critical awareness of what those privileges
are and the difficult obstacles that other people face, you'd never
notice. You wouldn't be a positive force to combat some of the
most fundamental social injustices because you haven't challenged
yourself to pay attention to what they are.

            This textbook is focused on helping you develop your own
digital literacy so that you have the underlying skills and critical
thinking required to leverage the numerous benefits of participating
in digital spaces while also knowing how to identify and mitigate
the risks and limitations. While the previous chapters in this unit

180 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
focused on specific theories and concepts related to critical literacy,
this final chapter takes a step back to look more generally at the
affordances and constraints of digital tools. It will provide a
framework that will help you think more deeply about the
technologies, platforms, and practices that define your own
participation and to tease out some of the inherent complexities of
the choices you make from an ideological, personal, professional,
and practical perspective.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the concept of mediation and how
             technologies are always used as tools to mediate
             human activities.

          Adopt a broader understanding of "technology" and
             how many of the basic technologies that we use have
             become "invisible" to us.

          Learn the concept of affordances and constraints
             and how this framework can be used to take a closer
             look at how technologies affect your ways of doing,
             meaning, relating, thinking, and being.

          Understand the concept of ideology and how
             ideologies are embedded in the design and use of
             digital technologies.

          Consider the technologies you use for personal
             use--for communication, shopping, entertainment,
             health care--and how the framework of affordances
             and constraints might be applied.

          Consider the technologies you use (or will be
             required to use) in your (intended) profession and

        Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 181
             how the framework of affordances and constraints
             might be applied.

Affordances and Constraints of Digital
Tools

Most of the time, when we think of digital technologies, we focus
on the things they allow us to do. For instance, we can talk "face-
to-face" with someone miles away using FaceTime or Zoom. We
can curate our own music playlists and listen to the songs we like
all day long with portable earbuds. We can quickly and easily see
what our friends, family, and acquaintances are up to with a quick
scroll through our social media feed. And on and on. Many of the
technologies that we use have become so commonplace that we
don't really give much thought to what life would be like without
them. However, when we're forced to go without them--maybe
because we forgot our phone at home or the Wi-Fi has gone
out--then suddenly we realize just how much we rely on digital
technology to accomplish even the most basic tasks.

            While digital technology--like all technology--certainly
does allow us to do things more quickly and easily than we might
have otherwise, its effects on our lives are much more profound.
As we'll discuss in this section, it has an inherent influence on our
thought patterns and our own sense of "self" as we act out identities
utilizing these tools. We'll be relying heavily on the scholarship of
Rodney Jones and Christoph Hafner, whose book Understanding
Digital Literacies: A Practical Introduction describes the way that
technology mediates all of our activities. Remember from chapter 3
that to "mediate" means to go between two things or to "facilitate

182 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
interaction" (Jones and Hafner 2). They aren't referring only to
digital technology but any sort of technology that is human-made
for the purpose of helping us accomplish certain tasks. Pencils,
blankets, clothing, furniture, and toothbrushes are all examples of
technologies created for very practical purposes. And as Jones and
Hafner point out, they also "mediate" our activities as we interact
with the world. For instance, we would be hard-pressed to keep
our teeth clean and healthy without using certain technologies--a
toothbrush, toothpaste, dental floss. The same goes for the quick
reminder we might write ourselves on a Post-it note or the coffee
that we drink to get ourselves going in the morning. Without the
pencil and paper or the coffeemaker and mug, you wouldn't be
able to complete these very basic tasks, which probably seem fairly
incidental in the overall scope of your day--until you have to go
without them.

            One of the best examples of technology and how it
mediates our activities relates to our communication practices. In
itself, language is a technology. It's a human-made tool that helps us
accomplish specific purposes, and it serves as a mediator between
our thoughts and feelings and the people with whom we want to
communicate those thoughts and feelings. Unfortunately, the
Vulcan mind meld--where you simply touch your fingertips to
someone else's head in order to accomplish total mutual
understanding--isn't a real thing. You have to use language--be it
verbal, written, sign language, or body language--to help someone
else understand your meaning. Language is a medium that facilitates
your interactions with others. As we learned chapter 3, language is
often limited in helping us fully express ourselves and understand
others. Misinterpretations and misunderstandings are common,
though there is something to be said for the way that
communication allows people to connect in very profound ways
(Balter).

            The main idea is that the technologies that we use do help
us accomplish a variety of activities, but beyond that, they also
become "extensions of ourselves" (Jones and Hafner 2). The more

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 183
that we rely on everyday technologies to quickly and easily perform
tasks, the more invisible those technologies become (Steinhardt).
We might be extremely aware of how newer technologies like Zoom
or virtual reality equipment open up new types of experiences and
possibilities, but we don't think so much about how our coffee mug
holds hot and cold liquids and provides the ability for us to carry
those liquids around. It's an invisible technology that we take for
granted, adopting it as part of our identity. Jones and Hafner put it
like this: "In order to do anything or mean anything or have any kind
of relationship with anyone else, you need to use tools. In a sense,
the definition of a person is a human being plus the tools that are
available for that human being to interact with the world" (2).

            Drawing from Marshall McLuhan and Lev Vygotsky (Kurt),
Jones and Hafner offer a framework that allows a deeper
understanding of the way that technology influences our
fundamental definitions of self. In his introduction to Understanding
Media: The Extensions of Man, McLuhan writes, "Any extension,
whether of skin, hand, or foot affects the whole psychic and social
complex." They don't just affect what we can do but who we can
be and how we relate to other people. Though basic technologies
become invisible and are easily taken for granted, they have
significant influence over every aspect of our human experience.
When examining these influences, Jones and Hafner created a
framework for understanding both the affordances--the
possibilities that are enabled through our uses of technologies--as
well as the constraints--the possibilities that are foreclosed by those
same technologies. We can look at both the affordances and
constraints of any given technology in five different ways:

   Doing. At a fundamental level, technology helps us do certain
      things that we couldn't do otherwise (the affordances). As we
      adopt their use for specific activities, they also prevent us from
      doing other things (the constraints). Jones and Hafner give the
      example of a microphone--a technology that allows you to
      easily talk to a large group of people so they can hear you (an

184 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
   affordance), though it makes it impossible to have a private
   conversation with one or two people in a crowd (a constraint).
   Similarly, an email allows us to communicate important
   information in writing to an individual or a group (an
   affordance), but it's also impersonal and it slows down the
   back-and-forth exchange that an in-person conversation
   would provide (constraints).
 Meaning. The technologies we use also influence the types of
   meanings that we can make. Applications like Zoom and
   Facebook Live, for instance, communicate audio and visual
   elements and have the effect of making the audience feel like
   they are simultaneously experiencing an event with someone
   else. These messages and events take on a different meaning
   for the participants than they would have otherwise through
   text alone (affordances). However, those meanings are still
   limited by the vantage point of the camera or the inability of
   the microphone to pick up more subtle sounds (constraints).
   Jones and Hafner also point out that as technologies emerge,
   we have different ways of referring to our activities--live
   streaming, zooming, posting, sharing, following, texting,
   chatting, and so on--which are different kinds of meanings
   than we had before.
 Relating. Our use of technology influences the types of
   relationships that we can have based on the ways that we
   communicate. Some technologies allow for one-way
   communication from a speaker to an audience. Others allow
   for private one-on-one conversations as a limited group
   communicates back and forth. Still other technologies allow
   large groups of people to communicate back and forth. For
   instance, a text message is great for having a more private
   conversation with a closed group of people (affordance).
   However, it's not very effective for speaking with a large group
   (constraint), and the nature of the platform makes it more
   difficult to share lengthy, in-depth messages (another
   constraint). Though you also relate to people outside of digital

     Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 185
      technology in different ways, chances are that many of your
      interactions do take place in digital spaces, and the
      technologies that are available to you have a significant
      influence over who you are able to communicate with and the
      method of communication.
   Thinking. According to Jones and Hafner, our use of
      technology has "the capacity to change the way we experience
      and think about reality" (7). They go on to say that as we use
      technologies to accomplish certain tasks and interact with our
      surroundings, "certain things about the world will be amplified
      or magnified, and other things will be diminished or hidden
      from us altogether" (7-8). They are referring not just to what
      we think about but also our thought patterns. Because we have
      access to so much information at our fingertips, we don't
      spend so much time memorizing facts (which can be seen as
      both an affordance and a constraint). Instead, we can spend
      more time with more sophisticated forms of thinking, like
      creating new theories about the information that we have
      access to. We can spend more time collecting, analyzing,
      interpreting, synthesizing, and reasoning (affordances). On the
      other hand, our constant interaction with short, entertaining
      videos and brief online text with bullet points and hyperlinks
      might also affect our ability to engage for longer periods of
      time with other forms of information that we find "boring" or
      difficult (constraints).
   Being. On a fundamental level, the technologies we use have a
      direct influence on our sense of self--the identities that we
      inhabit. Doctors and nurses use medical stethoscopes and
      other medical equipment. Carpenters use hammers and
      measuring tape and other carpentry tools. As a student, you
      use textbooks and word processing applications and learning
      management systems, which are crucial to the ways that you
      act out your identity as a student. The technologies that you
      have access to influence the type of person you can be and
      how you express those identities--allowing for some options

186 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
      through the affordances and foreclosing other options through
      the constraints.

It might be worth noting that Jones and Hafner don't consider
constraints to be inherently bad. In fact, without the presence of a
constraint, people often adopt technologies without thinking about
better alternatives. And the presence of a constraint can spark
people to think about more creative and innovative solutions. These
concepts are simply tools that can help you think more deeply
about the technologies you use, even (especially?) those that are so
commonplace, you almost forget they are there. For the remainder
of this chapter, we'll use this framework to examine technologies
from different perspectives in order to further extend your critical
literacy and decision-making skills.

     Activity 6.1

        Make a list of the different technologies (beyond digital)
     that you use on a daily basis that have in some ways
     become "invisible" extensions of yourself.

        Alternatively, you might take a look in your backpack or
     purse or even your pockets. What technologies do you
     carry with you each day?

        For each technology that you identify, consider what
     those technologies allow you to do. How do they mediate
     your activity? How might they be considered extensions of
     yourself?

        Now take a closer look at one or two of the technologies
     you identified. What are the affordances and constraints in

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 187
     terms of what these technologies allow you to do, mean,
     relate, think, and be?

An Ideological Perspective

A critical perspective of the affordances and constraints of digital
technologies would certainly include an examination of the
ideologies that are embedded in our assumptions of and uses for
the online spaces we navigate. Everything that you do or think
or believe about the world is compelled by underlying
ideologies--what you have internalized as "normal" or "good" or
"valuable." Through the natural course of interacting with
others--your parents, teachers, friends, pastors, and so on--you've
developed your own ways of thinking about and acting in the world.
For our purposes, there are three things that are helpful to
understand about ideology:

 1. It's based in social interaction. Value systems aren't objective,
      nor are they independent of human creation. An ideology is a
      lens that is shaped by social, cultural, and historical forces,
      advocating one way of seeing and being over others.

2. It's often not explicit. Ideologies are implicitly embedded in
      the things we say and do, but they exist below the surface,
      often resisting a deeper interrogation. Critical literacy
      explicitly examines these underlying assumptions.

3. It's difficult to notice. Because we are so entrenched in our
      beliefs about the world, it's easy to take them for granted as
      the objective reality--the "right" way of seeing and thinking.
      That's why dominant ideologies that serve dominant groups at
      the expense of others are so difficult to identify and dismantle.

188 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
            As mentioned in the introductory chapter, this book
mirrors the framework for teaching digital literacies as outlined in
Stuart Selber's Multiliteracies for a Digital Age. He too dedicates
a section of his book to "critical literacy," which focuses on "how
students might be encouraged to recognize and question the
politics of computers" (75). In a similar way, the "Critical Literacy"
portion of this book is dedicated to examining digital technologies
and spaces that we tend to take for granted as inherently good and
teasing out some of the complexities and political ramifications of
our digital media practices. As we've seen throughout this section,
there are a variety of ways that digital platforms can be utilized, just
as there is a range of positive and negative effects that stem from
the technologies we adopt and how we use them.

            When we examine digital spaces from an ideological
perspective, it means that we're identifying the value systems and
power structures embedded in those spaces that we tend to
overlook. In 1985, Melvin Kranzberg, professor and president of the
Society for the History of Technology (SHOT), gave a presidential
address at the Henry Ford Museum, where he outlined "truisms"
about how technologies develop and the effect they have on society.
The first of his "Kranzberg's Laws" was this: "Technology is neither
good nor bad; nor is it neutral" (545). In other words, digital
technologies are designed by human beings with their own biases
and ideologies, and those biases are reflected in the ways those
technologies are used, often having the effect of benefiting certain
groups of people over others. For instance, a 2016 article about
algorithmic biasing demonstrates that even the math formulas that
are used in the design of a program aren't neutral (Kharazian). The
article looks specifically at a report about the Pokmon GO app
and the fact that the vast majority of the stops on the program
are situated in white neighborhoods, which in turn, made the game
more accessible for white users living in those areas.

            The Pokmon GO example illustrates some of the things
we've already said about ideologies being embedded in digital
technologies, usually in ways that are subtle, implicit, and easy to

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 189
overlook. An ideological perspective is a way of looking at digital
spaces beyond your immediate needs and uses and considering
other types of questions: "What is lost as well as gained? Who
profits? Who is left behind and for what reasons? What is privileged
in terms of literacy and learning and cultural capital? What political
and cultural values and assumptions are embedded in the
software?" (Selber 81). These are all questions that relate back to
the affordances and constraints that we identified earlier in the
chapter and the deeper questions that consider how technologies
encourage certain ways of doing, meaning, relating, thinking, and
being. Selber goes on to say,

      As such an uncomfortable line of questions implies, a
      critical approach to literacy first recognizes and then
      challenges the values of the status quo. Instead of
      reproducing the existing social and political order, which
      functional modes tend to [focused solely on the "how to"],
      it strives to both expose biases and provide an assemblage
      of cultural practices that, in a democratic spirit, might lead
      to the production of positive social change. (81)
   In other words, the technologies we adopt can perpetuate social
inequalities (Gaskell), but when we adopt an ideological perspective,
we can expose biases and power structures and work toward
effective solutions.

            Once again, Selber provides a helpful framework to
examine specific technologies and digital spaces. He identifies the
following parameters:

   Design cultures--considering the values and perspectives that
      influence the way that technologies are designed. Do some
      users benefit more than others because of embedded design
      bias?

   Use contexts--looking at the ways that technologies are used
      in specific contexts. For instance, certain applications are
      sometimes required in the classroom or in the workplace in
      order to complete certain tasks. What are those technologies?

190 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
      Why are they required over others? How do the digital
      technologies and policies of a place affect different groups of
      people in the community?
   Institutional forces--understanding the larger power
      structures that influence the technologies we adopt. What
      larger agendas are being served for a university or a company?
      Are these benefits at the expense of others in the community
      who have less power?
   Popular representations--looking at the ways specific
      technologies are culturally constructed. How are our
      assumptions about technology embedded in cultural
      messages? How do those representations influence the
      technologies we adopt? How are larger practical and ethical
      concerns addressed (or not)?

            From an ideological perspective, aspects of digital
technology relate directly to the values that get promoted in a
certain space--the beliefs, assumptions, actions, and identities that
are promoted as "good" or "normal." When paired with the critical
exercise of considering the affordances and constraints--the types
of identities, relationships, thought processes, and so on that are
made possible by certain technologies as well as those that are
excluded or devalued--we get a much better sense of the ideologies
that are embedded in the technologies we use as well as the larger
social consequences.

     Activity 6.2

        Consider a specific digital platform that is prominent in

        Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 191
     your school or workplace. It might be Canvas, Google Drive,
     or an application that is more specific to your major.

        Now examine that platform from an ideological
     perspective, using the parameters named in this section:

          Biases embedded in the design
          Use context
          Institutional forces
          Popular representations

        Write a response to each item and then write an overall
     conclusion about the social values that are embedded in
     that platform. What are the positive and/or negative
     consequences for different types of users?

A Personal Perspective

In contrast to the ideological perspective that challenges you to look
more broadly at the technologies we adopt and the influences those
technologies have on different groups of people and value systems,
a personal perspective compels you to look at the individual--the
affordances and constraints of the digital platforms that you use.
In contrast to the professional perspective, which we'll consider in
the next section, the personal perspective doesn't relate directly to
your professional endeavors, though admittedly the line between
professional and personal is sometimes blurry (even more so
because of digital technology). We'll be referring more specifically to
the technologies that you turn to for accomplishing more personal
objectives--communication with family and friends, educational
pursuits, health care, and so on. While we already named some

192 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
of the personal benefits of digital communication technologies in
chapter 2, this section challenges you to look at the affordances
and constraints of the specific platforms that you utilize. We'll look
together at some basic examples, but the idea is that you would
apply the affordances and constraints framework to your own
everyday practices.

Communication

There are way too many digital communication platforms to name,
but some of the most common are text messaging, email,
teleconferencing platforms, and specific social media sites. It will be
up to you to list the platforms that are most common to you. At first
glance, it's obvious that digital technologies can greatly enhance our
communication practices, making it possible to stay connected with
a lot more people, regardless of geographical constraints and time
differences. What's more, different platforms offer different levels of
intimacy, ranging from a quick text message or "like" on someone's
Facebook post to the more personal and nuanced conversations
we can have with someone over Zoom. The focus in this chapter,
as we work with affordances and constraints, is to consider the
trade-offs of the platforms you select for given tasks. Each platform
offers benefits and opportunities, but as we learned from Jones
and Hafner, it also forecloses other possibilities. Because
communication is so pivotal to all of the items listed in Jones and
Hafner's framework (i.e., your ways of doing, meaning, relating,
thinking, being), it's important to think carefully about the platforms
you use and the effects they have.

            Let's look at one example in particular: text messaging. This
seems like a pretty universal form of communication that applies
to the majority of people. It's also one of the more prominent ways
that people can quickly and easily communicate. So let's look at the
affordances and constraints of this particular platform:

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 193
            Doing. The benefit of texting is also probably obvious. It's
quick to send and receive a text message. It allows for direct
communication with a single person or a small group. It's also
versatile, allowing users to include not just text but also emojis,
pictures, and GIFs. However, there are some definite constraints to
messaging that make it less ideal for other forms of communication.
For instance, it isn't effective for having a conversation with a large
group of people. You can't tell when someone has read your
message. It's also a constraint that you can't delete a text message
once it's been sent, and once it is sent, it can be copied and reshared
in ways that are beyond your control.

            Meaning. Text messages allow for short, basic messages
that allow people to make plans, share information, and check in
with one another. Because of the ability to send not only text in
a message but also hyperlinks, emojis, pictures, videos, and GIFs,
users are able to create deeper meanings and create quick links to
more developed information. Also, because of the nature of a text
thread, there is a documented history of recent messages, which
makes it easy to "keep up" with the conversation. In contrast, a text
message wouldn't easily support a long message. A text message
also can't express the full range of emotions and meaning behind
the message. It doesn't allow readers to hear the inflection in the
speaker's voice or their tone, which makes it more likely to be
misinterpreted.

            Relating. Text messages also allow us to relate to family
and friends in a convenient way, which helps facilitate healthy
relationships. We can easily share information with our friends to
help maintain those friendships. We can check in with family
members to sustain family dynamics. Because text messages are
quick, we can do this pretty easily. However, text messages would
be a difficult way to sustain a deeper relationship over a long period
of time. A couple in a long-distance relationship probably wouldn't
feel very deeply connected with each other if they simply sent text
messages back and forth. Similarly, a parent who misses their child
who has gone off to college probably won't be fully satisfied with

194 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
text messages because they can't hear their child's voice or see their
face. It's missing the level of intimacy that some relationships would
require.

            Thinking. It's interesting that as text messaging capabilities
have evolved, so too have our ways of thinking about messages. For
instance, it seems more prominent for people to think about their
responses to a message in terms of a movie scene, which can be
easily grabbed as a GIF and plugged into the text thread. People
are more likely to think about their conversations in comparison
to movie scenes. They're also more likely to distill larger ideas and
emotional responses into a few sentences or even an emoji. All of
this is to say that text messaging also constrains our thinking by
forcing users to oversimplify their experiences and ideas.

            Being. As already stated, text messaging is pretty universal,
so it doesn't strictly limit the type of identity that a person can have.
However, there are some definite identity markers that a person
who writes text messages takes on: They are someone who has
the income and tech savvy to own a cell phone and respond to
messages. They are someone with a range of knowledge about
texting conventions--the acronyms and the ability to send
hyperlinks and GIFs. Often the types of emojis or GIFs that a person
sends are a reflection of their identity in some way, based on their
interests and personalities.

Education

Of course, digital technologies are also used for educational
purposes--both formal and informal. More informal spaces like
Wikipedia or Reddit provide additional information about a wide
variety of topics and interests. Other platforms are used in more
formal educational contexts. For instance, Canvas is a learning
management system commonly used to give students access to
resources, policies, and assignments for a particular course. It can

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 195
be used to supplement in-person instruction or as a hub where
online videos and teleconferencing can take place. Similarly, Google
Workspace for Education provides a range of communication tools
that allow students and instructors to communicate, collaborate on
projects, receive feedback, and so on.

            It seems especially true that there is no magic bullet when
it comes to ed tech. Though new platforms and applications are
constantly being introduced with the promise to engage students,
spark their creativity, and improve learning, the reality is that ed
tech also has its trade-offs--aspects of a particular platform or
program that are beneficial to the larger educational goal and then
aspects that are limiting. It comes to mind, for instance, that most
platforms put the instructor at a pretty significant advantage to
surveil student activity. Canvas, for instance, reports when students
last logged into Canvas and for how long. It gives the time stamp for
when students turn in an assignment. Similarly, Google Docs allows
shared users (i.e., teachers) to see the entire process of creating a
document--when it was opened, what the drafting process looked
like, how long it took, who else was on the document, and so on.
It puts student activities under the microscope, compelling certain
behaviors over others and often creating an environment of distrust
and suspicion.

            Further, there has been much recent discussion about data
analytics intended to measure student performance for the purpose
of assessing teaching practices and student learning. While this type
of ed tech is most often promoted as a helpful tool, Neil Selwyn
reminds us that all technologies are imbued with ideologies and
that it's important to consider what those ideologies and political
agendas are. He goes on to voice concerns about the reductionist
process of data analytics, which simplifies rich student experiences
to a couple of data points: "This relates to a broader suspicion
of educational data inevitably being inaccurate, incomplete, poorly
chosen, or simply a poor indicator of what it supposedly represents"
(12). Similarly, Gert Biesta et al. question whether our focus on
collecting data has undermined our underlying educational goals:

196 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
"The rhetorical power of the idea of `what works'--and similar
notions such as evidence-based practice or evidence-informed
teaching--should not make us forget that things never work in an
abstract sense and never work in a vacuum" (2). They go on to
discuss the benefit of measuring student performance but argue
that it can lead to a "perversion of what education is supposed to be
about" when that becomes the primary goal. In other words, school
systems can sometimes get so caught up in creating measurable
learning outcomes that they distort the teaching practices in order
to increase performance scores, regardless of whether those scores
are connected to any meaningful skills.

            Just as Selwyn argues against a "blind faith in data," on a
broader scale, it's important to resist a "blind faith in ed tech" as
we consider the range of effects of the technologies we use, their
underlying ideologies, and the social consequences for different
groups of people. Any digital platform that is used in the classroom
should be scrutinized to understand the affordances (the things it
allows in terms of doing, meaning, relating, thinking, and being) as
well as the constraints (the things that are disabled and the potential
negative effects).

Health Care

Another great example of how digital technology is used for
personal objectives is health care. Because technologies are so often
invisible, it's easy to take for granted the technologies that facilitate
your medical care. However, in the last couple of decades, the
medical industry has made huge shifts toward digital platforms that
make it much easier for doctors to care for patients. It also makes it
more convenient for patients if they want to change doctors or get
specialized care. One primary example is the digitization of medical
records. While this hasn't been an easy process (Badalucco), moving
patient records from the standard manila folder to an electronic

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 197
format has made it much easier for doctors to access patient
information, transfer records from one doctor to another, and
access treatment information that will reduce medical error and
increase patient outcomes. Another great example is the electronic
prescription, which makes it much easier and faster for doctors to
send a prescription to your preferred pharmacy. Not only is this
more convenient, but the system is safer, since dosing information
is automatically printed on the bottle and doctors have records of all
the medications that a person is taking in order to reduce adverse
effects.

            The advancements in medical technologies and the
correlating benefits are too numerous to list. This study by Alotaibi
and Frederico looks across a wide range of medical technology
advancements, such as electronic physician's orders, clinical
decision support, electronic prescriptions, automated medicine-
dispensing cabinets, and patient data management systems, among
other things, and determined that "information technology
improves patient's safety by reducing medication errors, reducing
adverse drug reactions, and improving compliance to practice
guidelines." Another huge shift in the health care industry came
in the form of telehealth and telemedicine in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention).
In many instances, patients can receive the same type of care from
the convenience and safety of their home. The article from the CDC
even mentions "remote intervention" in which surgeries can take
place via robot, which reduces the direct contact between a patient
and physician. There are also more automated technologies, such
as medical wearables (Insider Intelligence) and digital therapeutics
(Digital Therapeutics Alliance), that provide patients with a higher
level of independence as well as better health outcomes.

            Regarding our framework of affordances and constraints,
the affordances seem obvious. These technologies provide
significant opportunities to do more things--to meet with doctors,
to track medical histories and personal data, and to receive
prescriptions and medical interventions. They also increase the

198 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
range of meanings we can make as we adopt specialized
terminology (getting your "steps" in, for instance) as well as our
ways of thinking as our personal data and medical data become
increasingly top of mind.

            However, this critical unit of the book is about resisting
utopian perspectives of technology in favor of those that examine
deeper, more subtle consequences. It's easy to identify all of the
benefits of medical technologies, but the reality is that these
technologies are often complex and difficult to learn, which can
hinder doctors' ability to focus their attention on patient needs
(Gawande). What's more, these systems aren't immune to medical
errors that have serious medical consequences. In fact, in some
instances, they can lead to an increase in mistakes when inputting
or retrieving patient information and a decrease in communication
and professional consultations between doctors responsible for
patient care (Coiera et al.).

            Another significant challenge relates to access. Obviously,
not all people have equal access to digital technologies to use this
type of health care. As these technologies and medical processes
become more commonplace, often replacing the old, more "hands-
on" ways of doing things, there are certain populations that get
left out, which leaves them vulnerable to missing out on healthcare
information and interventions that would improve their health.
Certainly, the digital divide is a cause for concern. Additionally,
there's the reality that some medical technologies aren't designed
for all users equally. For people who aren't intuitive about
technologies or who don't speak English well, these technologies
can also function as a barrier instead of a gateway to better health
care.

            Perhaps one of the most significant issues relevant to
healthcare technologies is the changes in how we relate to other
people. Many of the advancements identified above take out the
personal touch between doctors and patients. The more intimate,
social, and emotional aspect of health care is sacrificed for the sake
of safety and self-preservation. Similarly, the relationship between

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 199
patients and doctors has shifted because of rising costs, concerns
over being sued, and a focus on unnecessary medical procedures,
all of which diminish the credibility of the medical industry
(Shmerling).

            These are just a few ways that digital technologies are used
for personal use and how the framework of affordances and
constraints can be applied. As you consider your own practices and
the digital technologies you employ--for entertainment, shopping,
or educational purposes, for instance--a deeper consideration of
how these technologies affect your ways of doing, meaning, relating,
thinking, and being can be extremely helpful in uncovering the
consequences of that use so that you can be intentional about the
choices you make.

A Professional Perspective

From a professional perspective, the framework of affordances and
constraints provides a way to examine how digital technologies
are employed in various jobs. As digital technology becomes
increasingly pervasive, the majority of jobs require extensive use
of those technologies in order to accomplish even the most basic
tasks. This has obvious implications for the digital divide, as we've
discussed earlier. People who are more familiar with these
technologies and have access to new advancements as they emerge
are better positioned to obtain more skilled jobs that require digital
literacy skills, which in turn, provides financial and social benefits
that accrue over time. The chasm between those with digital
literacy skills and those without is particularly problematic from
a professional perspective since it perpetuates the cycle of low
income for certain populations. That is certainly one way of looking
critically at the professional use of technology. However, this
section focuses more explicitly on different types of jobs and the
affordances and constraints that digital technologies bring to those

200 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
jobs--particularly to those workers who benefit in many ways from
the digital technologies that make certain parts of their jobs easier
and more flexible. But as we've learned throughout this unit of
the book, a critical examination of technology also considers the
disadvantages--the more negative outcomes that emerge as we
adopt certain technologies.

            Clearly, we can't focus on all jobs in this brief section.
Instead, we'll be looking at four different categories of digital
workers based on Ens et al.'s research about the affordances and
constraints of "decent work." Their paper "Decent Digital Work:
Technology Affordances and Constraints" examines four different
types of digital workers, which refers to people whose jobs are
defined by the technologies they use. While many people in their
jobs might employ digital technologies to varying degrees, not all
of them have been fundamentally changed because of digital
technology. They say, "Digital work is then better conceived of as
the type of which, which is fundamentally reconfigured through the
use of digital technologies embedding increasing levels of mobility
and precarity" (1; emphasis original). In other words, there are
aspects of technology that are beneficial to personal autonomy
because more things can be accomplished in a single day and it's
easier to stay connected with clients and colleagues. It's possible to
work from almost anywhere. These are all affordances, but on the
flip side is the reality that the opportunity to accomplish more at
work can lead to weakened boundaries between work and home life
and create higher levels of stress and fatigue. Being able to work and
connect with colleagues from anywhere allows for increasing levels
of flexibility and personal freedom, but it can also feel confining
in the fact that it's almost impossible to get away from these
connections or work obligations.

            Specifically, Ens et al. look at the affordances and
constraints of technology for four types of digital workers:

   The "gig" worker. This is a freelancer who is able to piece
      together different projects from a variety of different

       Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 201
      employers in order to make a living. While there is flexibility in
      where these people do their work and there is some freedom
      in being able to accept or reject a job (the affordances), there is
      also the need to constantly keep work coming in in order to
      make a living. The "gig" worker is also at a disadvantage when it
      comes to a lack of promotional opportunities, medical or
      retirement benefits, and a professional community to provide
      support and emotional connection.
   The "digital nomad." Like the gig worker, the digital nomad
      worker is not tied to a single employer. They are employed
      through contracts and are able to travel the world while they
      have digital meetings with clients and fulfill their contractual
      obligations. Unlike the gig worker, this is a "nomadic" type of
      person who enjoys the freedom of being able to work from
      anywhere and therefore spends most of their time traveling.
      This is obviously a huge benefit, particularly if they are able to
      get contractual jobs that sustain the expense of constant travel
      and self-indulgence. On the other hand, it's also stressful to
      always be looking for the next job or to sometimes have to take
      on multiple jobs. It's also difficult to keep a consistent work
      schedule while traveling and to stay connected with clients
      and other people. Also, there is never a truly "paid vacation" as
      there would be in a stable, corporate environment, which can
      lead to fatigue and burnout.
   The "nine-to-fiver." This is someone with a single employer,
      bound by the traditional eight-hour workday. While many
      nine-to-five jobs occur in an office or some other facility, the
      emergence of digital technology has made it increasingly
      possible for nine-to-fivers to work remotely from home, which
      provides more flexibility and convenience. However, these
      workers are still tied to the obligations of a single employer
      and don't have as much flexibility regarding their work hours.
      The opportunity to work remotely can also weaken workers'
      sense of belonging.
   The "traveling elite." Like a nine-to-fiver, the traveling elite

202 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
      has a single employer, but their role in that company is one
      that requires constant travel in order to meet with clients. It's
      high-intensity and can be extremely rewarding (and lucrative),
      but it can also be exhausting, since the schedule often requires
      long hours. Also, these workers spend quite a bit of time in
      hotels and airports, which can lead to feelings of social
      disconnect.

            While these are very broad categories that barely brush the
surface of the types of technologies that different professionals use
and the affordances and constraints of each one, these categories
do provide a picture of how professional jobs have shifted as a
result of digital technologies, providing new types of jobs as well
as new opportunities within jobs that previously existed. It also
underscores the reality that with every affordance (a new benefit
that provides convenience and flexibility) there is a constraint (an
aspect of the technology that can be limiting and isolating in some
way). As you think more specifically about a profession--probably
your own current or intended profession--and the technologies that
are compelled within that field, this framework of affordances and
constraints as well as the different types of digital work can help
contextualize the consequences of those technologies.

            Let's look at one example: teachers. While there are all
different types of teachers at different institutions, it's true that
advancements in digital technology--especially during the
COVID-19 pandemic--dramatically shifted the work structure for
many teachers. Suddenly, they had to shift from in-person to online
instruction while also making themselves available to answer
questions and provide additional help in some way--either via
synchronous or asynchronous instruction. Many of the
technologies that have emerged made it easy for teachers to record
lectures, have students do group work in digital spaces, have
individual conversations with students, and provide extra resources
(all affordances). However, as many students and instructors have
reported, it's difficult to engage students in an online environment.

      Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 203
Watching (and recording) videos can be tiring, and it lacks the
social/emotional connections that are afforded in the classroom.
What's more, teaching became a lot more time consuming. Instead
of having in-person conversations and answering questions on the
spot, teachers spent a lot more time recording and uploading
lectures, responding to student questions via email, grading
additional assignments to check student learning, and so on. While
platforms like Google Workspace, Canvas, Zoom, ScreenPal, and
others allowed for education to continue (for some with access)
during the pandemic, there were also numerous constraints as
these technologies became more integral to the teaching/learning
process.

            A critical look at the technologies in the education field
would look specifically at the technologies listed above and the
affordances and constraints of each one, some of which are more
conducive to helping students and teachers communicate than
others, but which also limit personal freedom and create more
emotional and cognitive strain. As you consider a range of other
professions and the digital technologies that are employed, you
should also examine how specific platforms are used and what the
affordances and constraints are for professionals in that field.

     Activity 6.3

        Interview someone who is currently working in your
     intended profession. Your interview should focus on not
     just the particulars of their daily tasks and responsibilities
     but also the digital technologies that they employ to get
     their job done. Ask a range of questions about how these
     technologies are helpful but also how they might be

204 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
     limiting or confining in some way. You should also ask
     broader questions about benefits and disadvantages of
     their job (which may or may not be connected to
     technology).

        Based on the interview, you should write up a profile
     about that person and the job that they do. Next identify
     the primary technologies that they use in their professional
     role and the affordances and constraints of those
     technologies. How do they help with productivity,
     communication, professional growth, and autonomy? In
     what ways are they limiting?

            In this first unit of the book, we've discussed critical
literacy with a focus on a wide range of advantages and
disadvantages that are associated with digital technologies. The
hope is that these larger considerations and frameworks become
part of your own intellectual process as you evaluate the
technologies you use every day that have become "invisible," as
you learn new technologies that are compelled for personal and
professional reasons, and as you make choices about how to use
those technologies. In fact, it's those commonplace, overlooked
technologies that often deserve more critical awareness. In her
article "Technology and Literacy: A Story About The Perils of Not
Paying Attention," Cynthia Selfe argues that when technologies
become "invisible" to us, they also become most dangerous because
we aren't thinking critically about their implications. While you
might not always have choices about certain technologies--since
some will be required in the educational or professional settings
you engage--it can still be incredibly important to be aware of the
broader implications of technology so that you can advocate for
groups of people who have been overlooked or for processes that
would be more advantageous in some way. And in those situations

      Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 205
where you do have choices, a deeper understanding of the
affordances and constraints of the technologies that are available to
you will greatly enhance your effectiveness as a communicator and
as someone who has a positive effect on the communities of which
you are a part.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is the broader definition of technology
             (beyond digital technology)? How might these
             technologies be considered an "extension of yourself"
             as they "mediate" your activities?

        2. What does it mean that some technologies
             eventually become "invisible"? How might this be
             both a good and bad thing?

        3. What are "affordances" and "constraints"? How can
             these terms be applied to the technologies that you
             use? Give some examples.

        4. Jones and Hafner extend the framework of
             affordances and constraints to consider the effects of
             a particular technology on our ways of doing,
             meaning, relating, thinking, and being. Explain what
             these different categories mean and how they relate
             to the technologies people use.

        5. What is ideology? The chapter lists three important
             considerations of how ideologies are embedded in
             technology. What are they? Why is this an important
             aspect of critical literacy?

        6. What are some of the consequences of ideologies
             that are perpetuated in the technologies you use?

206 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
    7. Identify and explain the four elements in Selber's
        framework for critically analyzing digital spaces. Can
        you provide an example of a technology and how you
        might evaluate it using at least one of those
        elements?

   8. What are some of the personal uses of technology
        that this chapter considers? How can the framework
        of affordances and constraints be applied to other
        aspects that weren't explicitly discussed
        (entertainment or shopping, for instance)?

   9. What are the four types of digital workers
        identified in the chapter? How do these categories
        along with Jones and Hafner's concept of affordances
        and constraints provide a framework that can be used
        to consider other professions and uses of
        technologies?

Sources

             Alotaibi, Yasser K., and Frank Frederico. "The
          Impact of Health Information Technology on Patient
          Safety." Saudi Medical Journal, vol. 28, no. 12, Dec.
          2017, pp. 1173-1180, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
          pmc/articles/PMC5787626/.

             Badalucco, Traci. "The Battle to Move U.S. Health
          Care from Paper to Digital Far From Over." USNews,

 Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 207
               5 Nov. 2015, https://www.usnews.com/news/
               articles/2015/11/05/the-battle-to-move-us-
               health-care-from-paper-to-digital-far-from-over.

                  Balter, Michael. "`Mind Meld' Engalbes Good
               Conversation: When Two People Talk, Similar Areas
               of their Brain Activate." Science.org, 26 July 2010,
               https://www.science.org/content/article/mind-
               meld-enables-good-conversation.

                  Biesta, Gert, et al. "Editorial: Why Educational
               Research Should Not Just Solve Problems, But Cause
               Them as Well." British Educational Research Journal,
               vol. 45, no. 1, Feb. 2015, pp. 1-4, https://doi.org/
               10.1002/berj.3509.

                  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
               "Telemedicine Access and Use." CDC.gov. 6 Aug.
               2021, https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/covid19/rands/
               telemedicine.htm.

                  Coiera, E., et al. "The Unintended Consequences
               of Health Information Technology Revisited."
               Yearbook of Medical Informatics, no. 1, 10 Nov. 2016,
               pp. 163-169, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/
               articles/PMC5171576.

                  Digital Therapeutics Alliance.
               https://dtxalliance.org/.

                  Ens, Nicola, et al. "Decent Digital Work:
               Technology Affordances and Constraints." Thirty-
               Ninth International Conference on Information
               Systems, 2018, San Francisco.
               https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
               329450302_Decent_Digital_Work_Technology_Aff
               ordances_and_Constraints.

208 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
            Gaskell, Adi. "Technology Isn't Destroying Jobs,
         But Is Increasing Inequality." Forbes, 3 May 2019,
         https://www.forbes.com/sites/adigaskell/2019/
         05/03/technology-isnt-destroying-jobs-but-is-
         increasing-inequality/?sh=4cf06c605e78.

            Gawande, Atul. "Why Doctors Hate Their
         Computers." The New Yorker, 5 Nov. 2018,
         https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/11/
         12/why-doctors-hate-their-computers.

            Insider Intelligence. "Latest Trends in Medical
         Monitoring Devices and Wearable Health
         Technology (2023)." Insider Intelligence, 13 Jan. 2023,
         https://www.insiderintelligence.com/insights/
         wearable-technology-healthcare-medical-devices/.

            Jones, Rodney, and Christoph Hafner.
         Understanding Digital Literacies: A Practical
         Introduction. Routledge, 2012.

            Kharazian, Zarine. "`Technology Is Neither Good
         Nor Bad; Nor is it Neutral:' The Case of Algorithmic
         Biasing." Social Science Research Methods Center, 18
         Nov. 2016, https://ssrmc.wm.edu/technology-is-
         neither-good-nor-bad-nor-is-it-neutral-the-case-
         of-algorithmic-
         biasing/#:~:text=Kranzberg's%20First%20Law%20s
         tates%3A%20%E2%80%9CTechnology,cultural%20v
         alues%20and%20societal%20outcomes.

            Kranzberg, Melvin. "Presidential Address:
         Technology and History: `Kranzberg's Laws.'"
         Technology and Culture, vol. 27, no. 3, July 1986, pp.
         544-560, https://www.jstor.org/stable/3105385.

            Kurt, Serhat. "Lev Vygotsky--Sociocultural Theory

Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 209
               of Cognitive Development." Educational Technology,
               7 July 2020. https://educationaltechnology.net/lev-
               vygotsky-sociocultural-theory-of-cognitive-
               development/.

                  McLuhan, Marshall. Understanding Media: The
               Extensions of Man, MIT Press, 1964.

                  Phaneuf, Alicia. "Latest Trends in Medical
               Monitoring Devices and Wearable Health
               Technology." Insider Intelligence, 16 Apr. 2022,
               https://www.insiderintelligence.com/insights/
               wearable-technology-healthcare-medical-devices.

                  Selber, Stuart. Multiliteracies for a Digital Age.
               Southern Illinois University Press, 2004.

                  Selfe, Cynthia. "Technology and Literacy: A Story
               About The Perils of Not Paying Attention." College
               Composition and Communication, vol. 50, no. 3, Feb.
               1999, pp. 411-436, https://doi.org/10.2307/358859.

                  Selwyn, Neil. "What's the Problem with Learning
               Analytics?" Journal of Learning Analytics, vol. 6, no.
               3, 2019, pp. 11-19, https://learning-analytics.info/
               index.php/JLA/article/view/6386.

                  Shmerling, Robert H. "Is Our Healthcare System
               Broken?" Harvard Health, 13 July 2021,
               https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/is-our-
               healthcare-system-broken-202107132542.

                  Steinhardt, Ken. "The Best Tech Makes the
               Underlying Technology Invisible." Forbes, 30 Nov.
               2021, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
               forbestechcouncil/2021/11/30/the-best-tech-

210 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
        makes-the-underlying-technology-
        invisible/?sh=41c236f17ba5.

Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces | 211
212 | Affordances and Constraints: A Critical Analysis of Digital Spaces
PART II

RHETORICAL LITERACY

                                                                       Rhetorical Literacy | 213
214 | Rhetorical Literacy
7. The Everyday Function of

Rhetoric

Remember that word "ubiquitous" from the introduction? It's
probably a fairly obvious thing to say that digital technology is
everywhere, embedded in our most basic daily tasks and often going
completely unnoticed. However, following our discussions in the
first section of the textbook, the hope is that you have a deeper
understanding of the ubiquitous nature of digital media. Now we
turn our attention from critical literacy to "rhetorical literacy." Even
more pervasive than our use of digital technology is our use of
rhetoric, and much like the technologies we use, rhetoric often goes
unnoticed. In fact, you are constantly sending messages out into the
world--whether it be written or verbal messages that you carefully
crafted beforehand or unanticipated conversations, offhand
remarks, facial expressions, or body language. Even the clothing you
wear sends messages to people about who you are and what your
interests, occupations, and moods might be.

            Unfortunately, rhetoric is a word that is often
misunderstood. People sometimes think of it as an act of
manipulation--something politicians use to garner attention and
increase votes, but their words don't have any real meaning. It's all
"hot air." However, while this is certainly an example of rhetoric,
it's nowhere near complete. In simple terms rhetoric is the art
of communication. If you were to Google the term, the Oxford
Languages would tell you that rhetoric is "the art of effective or
persuasive speaking or writing, especially the use of figures of
speech and compositional techniques." The second definition given
is "language designed to have a persuasive or effective effect on its
audience, but often regarded as lacking in sincerity or meaningful
content." That's the "hot air" definition described earlier. However,
these definitions are both inadequate because they fail to recognize

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 215
the more subtle, everyday uses of rhetoric. While you might
intentionally use rhetoric for specific occasions--a speech or a
debate or an op-ed article, for instance--you also use rhetoric in the
more mundane interactions you have with people all day long. You
use rhetoric as you walk down the aisle at the grocery store, drive
through town, or sit quietly in a classroom. You might not always be
aware of the messages you are sending and the effect that you have
on other people, but you are indeed using rhetoric, and the more
that you are able to cultivate an awareness of rhetoric and how it
functions in your everyday life, the more effective you will be in your
interactions with other people--both in person and online.

            The goal of this chapter is to help you understand what
rhetoric is and how foundational it is to our everyday lives. Far
from being an act of manipulation, rhetoric in its most useful form
is about enhancing mutual understanding and respect in order to
facilitate compromise, problem-solving, and healthy relationships.
It's also inherently connected to your sense of identity and the
way that you develop knowledge about the world. Defining rhetoric
as the art of effective communication intentionally broadens the
parameters of when and how we use rhetoric. It's also fairly simple,
particularly compared to the definitions that other rhetoricians
have given throughout history. For instance, American Rhetoric lists
a number of "scholarly" definitions of rhetoric:

   "The art of enchanting the soul" (Plato).
   "The faculty of discovering in any particular case all of the

      means of persuasion" (Aristotle).
   "One great art comprised of five lesser arts: inventio,

      dispositio, elocutio, memoria, and pronunciatio" (Cicero).
   "That art or talent by which discourse is adapted to its end.

      The four ends of discourse are to enlighten the understanding,
      please the imagination, move the passion, and influence the
      will" (George Campbell).
   "The study of misunderstandings and their remedies" (I. A.
      Richards).

216 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
   "A form of reasoning about probabilities, based on assumptions
      people share as members of a community" (Erika Lindemann).

The list goes on, but the point is that there are a lot of different
ways that we could consider rhetoric and its function. What all
of these definitions have in common is a focus on purpose--what
the communicator is trying to achieve as a result of their message,
whether written or spoken, whether explicit or implicit. Similar to
our definition of rhetoric is the one articulated by Andrea Lunsford,
who defines rhetoric as "art, practice, and study of human
communication" (American Rhetoric). This is also a broad definition
that encompasses not only the message itself but also the academic
and personal endeavor of understanding how communication works
and how it can be utilized effectively.

            Perhaps one more definition will be useful as we launch
into this unit about rhetorical literacy and its relationship to digital
communication. The Department of Rhetoric and Writing Studies at
San Diego State University defines rhetoric like this:

      Rhetoric refers to the study and uses of written, spoken
      and visual language. It investigates how language is used to
      organize and maintain social groups, construct meanings
      and identities, coordinate behavior, mediate power,
      produce change, and create knowledge. Rhetoricians often
      assume that language is constitutive (we shape and are
      shaped by language), dialogic (it exists in the shared
      territory between self and other), closely connected to
      thought (mental activity as "inner speech") and integrated
      with social, cultural and economic practices. Rhetorical
      study and written literacy are understood to be essential to
      civic, professional and academic life.
   That's obviously a more complex and nuanced definition than
some of the others we've reviewed, but it accurately captures the
significance of rhetoric to our thought processes, our civic
engagement, our relationships, our activities, and our very
identities. In this first chapter of the rhetorical literacy unit, we'll

                                                  The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 217
take a closer look at the elements that comprise the rhetorical
situation as well as examples of rhetorical appeals that are used
to enhance the effectiveness of a message. Developing a deeper
awareness of these concepts will help you identify how they are
used in the messages you encounter and utilize them more
intentionally and effectively in the messages you send.

     Learning Objectives

          Gain a broad understanding of what rhetoric is and
             how pervasive it is in your everyday life.

          Understand what the rhetorical situation is and the
             key elements that are involved.

          Consider the criteria of rhetorical discourse in
             contrast to other forms of speech.

          Learn how the elements of a rhetorical situation
             can be transferred from one circumstance to the next
             for a deeper analysis of effective communication.

          Examine the three main types of rhetorical appeals
             and how they can be applied.

          Learn more specific rhetorical strategies of
             rhetorical modes and rhetorical devices and how they
             can be used to enhance a message.

          Consider the larger functions of rhetoric in
             everyday conversations.

218 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
The Rhetorical Situation: Key Terms

Probably the best way to cultivate a deeper understanding of
rhetoric is to consider the elements of the rhetorical situation,
which was defined by Lloyd Bitzer in his 1968 essay "The Rhetorical
Situation." In this essay, he considers the elements that are present
when rhetorical discourse emerges--the circumstances that
precipitate the message and would have an impact on how it is
received. No message can be fully understood without considering
the larger context, which Bitzer says is crucial in understanding
the effectiveness of that message to meet its intended goal. Bitzer
defines rhetoric as

      a mode of altering reality, not by the direct application of
      energy to objects, but by the creation of discourse which
      changes reality through the mediation of thought and
      action. The rhetor alters reality by bringing into existence
      a discourse of such character that the audience, in thought
      and action, is so engaged that it becomes mediator of
      change. In this sense, rhetoric is always persuasive. (4)
   In other words, rhetoric creates action. It has the power to
influence the thoughts and behaviors of the audience in certain
ways, depending on the motives of the speaker along with the
message itself and the context in which that message is
delivered--all elements of the rhetorical situation.

            Let's back up, though, and consider the most fundamental
element of rhetoric: purpose. All rhetorical discourse has a purpose,
something that the speaker hopes to accomplish as a result of the
message. As already discussed, this purpose might be really obvious
and explicit. For instance, you might find yourself in some sort of
debate about a political issue, and so you are using logical reasoning
and evidence to convince your audience to agree with your position.
Or you might be out with friends or family members, and you want
to convince them to eat at a certain restaurant or agree to see a
specific movie with you. Once again, you'd use all of your rhetorical

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 219
skills to get them to do whatever it is you are suggesting. In many
other circumstances, though, the purpose might not be quite so
obvious. Maybe you're out for a walk in your neighborhood and
when you pass one of your neighbors, you feel compelled to stop
and say hello. Maybe your neighbor is the talkative sort, and so you
end up locked in a conversation for longer than you might like, but
you don't want to be rude. That is also a rhetorical situation with
a purpose: to maintain a friendly relationship with your neighbor.
And if someone stops you and asks you for directions, your response
would also be rhetorical. Your purpose would be to give clear
directions so they can get where they want to go.

            Every time you craft a message for an audience--whether
it's an in-person conversation, an email, a text message, a "like"
on Facebook, or a quick wave hello to a friend in the hallway at
school--you have a purpose. It might be to persuade your audience
about a particular issue or course of action, it might be to inform
them about a process or a concept, or it might be to give a positive
impression of yourself and cultivate or maintain social relationships.
Rhetoric, then, refers to the communication strategies you use in
a given situation to meet that purpose, to influence the attitudes
and behaviors of your audience. This suggests, as Bitzer says, that
all rhetoric is persuasive. Even if your primary purpose is to inform
your audience about a topic, there is an underlying purpose to
convince them that the topic is worthwhile and that you are a
credible source of information. There is also the reality that one
seemingly minor message could have more than one purpose, often
with a social component. A teacher who gives a short lesson in
class has multiple purposes--to inform students clearly about the
topic, to persuade them that this is an important topic worth their
time and effort, to encourage them that they are able to learn and
effectively apply the material, to maintain a positive social rapport
with the class so that students are engaged and more open to
learning. It might be a five-minute lesson about semicolons, but the
underlying rhetorical purpose is likely multifaceted and nuanced.

            One important aspect of Bitzer's essay about the rhetorical

220 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
situation is his discussion of exigence. According to Bitzer, before
a speaker has a purpose, there must be an exigence, which he
defines as "an imperfection marked by urgency" (6). Or, as Kate Mele
puts it, exigence is the source, the "driving force." Just like a river
starts from somewhere--a spring--Mele explains that a message
also starts from somewhere: the exigence. To really understand
a rhetorical message and the speaker's purpose, it's crucial to
understand the exigence that prompted the message. If, for
example, you wake up sick one morning and can't make it into
work, that's an exigence that prompts a message to your boss. Most
people can't simply not show up to work. You'd have to notify a
boss or coworkers in some way to avoid confusion and any potential
problems that could arise from your absence. These are the
imperfections--the exigence--that would compel you to send a text
message to coworkers or to call in sick to your boss.

            An exigence might be a problem that has already arisen that
needs to be addressed. For instance, if you fail to call in sick and you
receive angry text messages from your coworkers, that's a problem
that has materialized and has to be addressed. Alternatively, an
exigence might be a potential problem that could arise if you don't
speak up. For instance, you'd call in sick to prevent the potential
confusion and chaos that might arise from your absence. Similarly,
you engage in the conversation with your neighbor, even though
you don't want to, to avoid the negative consequence of making your
neighbor mad or hurting their feelings. Exigence is so important
because it compels the message, it informs the speaker's purpose,
and the effectiveness of the message can be evaluated based on
whether the exigence is resolved. In fact, according to Bitzer,
rhetoric is about understanding the underlying problem and then
creating discourse that can fully or partially resolve that problem.
So in our example of you calling in sick to work, the exigence isn't
the fact that you are sick. Calling in to your boss won't have any
effect on whether or not you are sick. The exigence is the negative
consequences that could arise at work that day--either in the overall
workflow or in the impression that your boss and coworkers have

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 221
of you. Communicating clearly with everyone about your situation
would help resolve those potential problems.

            Like many other aspects of rhetoric, the idea of exigence
can be fairly complex when you consider various elements of the
rhetorical situation and the different perspectives involved. For one
thing, there might be multiple exigencies that inform a single
message. If we go back to our example above about calling in sick,
one exigence would certainly relate to the more productive aspects
of the workplace. Being short-staffed would mean that important
tasks aren't completed or they aren't completed well. It could have
an impact on production quality, customer satisfaction, sales
revenue, and so on. Another exigence to the same message might
be social. If you don't let others know you won't be at work, they
will think of you as being lazy and inconsiderate. Those relationships
might be strained the next time you see those people if you don't
let them know what's going on. Another exigence might relate to
your own professional success. If you don't call in, you might get
fired, or you might not be seriously considered for the next raise or
promotion.

            Not only do multiple exigencies exist, but the very
existence of an exigence is up to the interpretation of the rhetor.
Whereas Lloyd Bitzer argued that the rhetorical situation compels
rhetorical discourse, Richard Vatz argued that there isn't a single,
objective rhetorical situation that exists outside of our individual
interpretations. It's up to each individual to select the details from
a particular situation that are important and then to interpret the
meaning and the potential consequences of those details. Vatz says,
"I would not say `rhetoric is situational,' but situations are rhetorical;
not `...exigence strongly invites utterance,' but utterance strongly
invites exigence; not `the situation controls the rhetorical
response...' but the rhetoric controls the situational response" (159).
In other words, we wouldn't all objectively agree that an exigence
exists or that one specific response is the "right" one. Individual
interpretations, values, and agendas inform how we perceive a
situation and how we respond.

222 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
            Once we understand the underlying exigence, which
compels the purpose of the rhetorical discourse, we'd consider the
other elements of the rhetorical situation to evaluate the
effectiveness of the message:

   The speaker--the person who is sending the message. We'd
      probably look more closely at this person's authority on the
      subject, their reputation for being trustworthy, and the
      relationship they have with the audience. If you are someone
      who calls in sick all the time, for instance, then chances are
      your message won't be as well received by your boss because
      you have already created a negative impression.

   The audience--the intended recipients of the message. Per our
      definition above, the audience has the power to resolve the
      exigence in a rhetorical situation by adopting certain attitudes
      and behaviors. In that case, a closer look at the audience--their
      current attitudes, values, experiences, expectations,
      impressions of the speaker, and so on--is crucial in
      understanding the effectiveness of a message. If you did wake
      up sick and needed to let people know, your message would be
      very different if you were sending it to your boss as opposed to
      your family or friends. Your relationship with those potential
      audiences and their expectations are vastly different.

   The message--the spoken, written, or visual text that
      corresponds with the speaker's purpose. This is the mediating
      tool intended to help the target audience understand the
      speaker's thoughts and ideas and to compel them to respond in
      ways that will resolve the exigence.

   Kairos--the most opportune timing of a message (Pantelides).
      Again, this is a highly contextual element that considers the
      message itself as well as the location, the expectations of the
      audience, and other constraining factors. For instance, if you
      are interested in asking someone out on a date, you'd consider
      the appropriate moment for this type of conversation that
      would increase your chances of success. You'd wait until they

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 223
      are in a good mood and not distracted by other conversations
      or tasks. You might also wait until you are with that person in a
      place that is fairly quiet. All of those elements relate to kairos,
      which would have a significant influence on the audience's
      response.
   Constraints--the "persons, events, objects, and relations which
      are parts of the situation because they have the power to
      constrain decision and action needed to modify the exigence"
      (Bitzer 8). Anything that could interfere with the audience's
      willingness to react positively to the message--whether their
      own beliefs and attitudes, their negative impression of the
      speaker, past experiences, a lack of understanding about key
      concepts or cultural values--is considered a constraint.
      Though not all constraints can be overcome, the key to a
      successful message is often the speaker's ability to predict and
      craft their message to overcome as many constraints as
      possible.

                                                                                        Rhetorical
                                                                                        Triangle, by
                                                                                        Ted Major,
                                                                                        on Flickr (CC
                                                                                        BY-SA 2.0)

            These are but a few of the elements that are present in
any rhetorical situation. Other considerations might include the
medium that the speaker uses to communicate the message (be it

224 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
with spoken language, sign language and gestures, an email, etc.),
the genre of the message (with standard conventions that might
dictate things like format, organization, and tone of the message),
and the larger historical and social context that influences the way
that an audience would interpret a message. What is important to
keep in mind is that while all of the specific details of a rhetorical
situation are unique, the elements themselves are always present.
There will always be a speaker, a message, an exigence, a purpose,
and so on, and your ability to identify and carefully consider these
elements will equip you to more effectively craft a message that
anticipates potential constraints and persuades your intended
audience.

     Activity 7.1

        Summarize a handful of conversations you've had
     today--with friends, coworkers, teachers, acquaintances.
     They might be in person, or they might be text messages,
     emails, phone calls, and so on. Describe what the
     conversation was about and then see if you can identify
     some of the elements of the rhetorical situation: speaker,
     audience, message, purpose, exigence, kairos, and
     constraints.

        Pay close attention to your own purpose in these
     conversations as well as the exigence that provoked your
     response and any constraints that might have existed to
     prevent you from meeting your goal. What does a closer
     examination of these conversations say about rhetoric and
     how it functions in your everyday life?

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 225
Rhetorical Strategies

We've been talking pretty broadly about the message that emerges
as a response to some sort of exigence, but the message itself is
the most important aspect of rhetoric. It's the force that allows for
the expression of ideas and a deeper connection with other people.
It compels attitudes and behaviors that provide tangible solutions
to real problems. Often the study of rhetoric requires a deeper
examination of the message that is produced and how it is fitting
(or not) for a given audience in a particular situation. In that case,
we'd look at the rhetorical strategies of the message--the way that
the message is crafted in order to help the speaker inform and/or
persuade the audience.

            There are many different types of strategies that we could
look at. In this section, we'll look at three primary groupings that can
be particularly helpful when you are evaluating the effectiveness
of a message, including your own. The first set of strategies are
called rhetorical appeals, which were introduced by Aristotle in
350 BC in his classic work Rhetoric I & II (Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy). In it, he set forth three broad types of persuasive
appeals:

 1. Logos refers to logic. We might try to persuade someone based
      on logical reasoning, principles of cause and effect, statistics,
      and other forms of evidence. A sound argument is one that
      clearly lays out the reasons for the argument and clearly
      articulates that line of reasoning with strong evidence. It
      makes explicit connections between the evidence, the
      reasoning, and the larger claim. It might also examine
      counterarguments and use the same type of evidence and
      logical reasoning to refute opposing views. Particularly in
      academic writing, logos is considered the strongest appeal
      because it demonstrates a high level of critical thinking and it
      comes to a conclusion based on an examination of the issue

226 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
     itself. Digital writers also use logos when they use hyperlinks
     to show supporting evidence, explain how a particular process
     or concept works, give examples, and provide statistical
     evidence, often in the form of pie charts or bar graphs.
2. Pathos refers to emotion. This type of appeal tries to persuade
     readers to adopt a specific attitude or take action in some way
     based on an emotional response that is invoked in the
     message. Advertisements are often based around pathos
     appeals, with pictures of people who are having fun or
     benefiting in some way from a particular product or service,
     thus creating feelings of desire in the target audience, who
     want to experience those same benefits. Other messages
     might try to invoke feelings of anger or pity or fear to incite
     specific behaviors in the audience. An ad seeking donations for
     the Humane Society would likely show pictures of cute puppies
     and kittens. Political ads often use misleading statistics and
     outright fabrications to get audiences to feel angry about the
     opposing candidate. While pathos appeals are sometimes used
     to manipulate or distract audiences, there are positive uses of
     pathos, too, that help audiences get a deeper sense of
     understanding and empathy for people and problems outside
     of their personal experience. Narratives and descriptions are
     often used as pathos appeals that help audiences emotionally
     connect to a message. Digital writers use pathos not only in
     their language but also with pictures, videos, and even color
     choices that reinforce certain emotions.
3. Ethos refers to credibility. This has everything to do with the
     speaker and how much the target audience trusts this person
     to provide accurate and reliable information on the topic at
     hand. The ethos appeal is often threefold. (1) Phronesis: The
     wisdom, experience, and credentials of the speaker. Do they
     have personal and/or expert knowledge about the topic? Is
     this person an expert in a particular field and/or has done
     extensive research on this topic. (2) Arte: The personal
     virtues, ethics, and character of the speaker. Is this an honest

                                                The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 227
      and ethical person? (3) Eunoia: Goodwill exhibited toward the
      audience. Does the speaker seem to have the audience's best
      interest in mind? An audience is more likely to believe and
      respond positively to a person whom they trust based on that
      person's past behaviors, their reputation, and perhaps their
      position as an established leader. While a message can't always
      overcome an audience's negative impression of the speaker,
      there are definite ways to build credibility by demonstrating
      sound evidence and research (expertise) and by crafting a
      message in a way that comes across as genuine and
      transparent (ethics). Digital writers might also develop ethos
      by displaying specific certifications or awards, customer
      testimonials, and pictures that demonstrate professional
      excellence or personal ethics.

            While some people think of these rhetorical appeals as
being antiquated--perhaps since they are Greek words that date
back to Aristotle--their importance really can't be overstated.
Nearly all rhetorical discourse fits into at least one of these
categories, though they aren't mutually exclusive. (A logos appeal
might also be an ethos appeal. Using evidence from a recent study,
for instance, provides logical support for an argument while also
building your credibility as a knowledgeable researcher.) And since
all rhetoric revolves around specific purposes that solve existing or
potential problems, these rhetorical appeals are the building blocks
of discourse that have real consequences in the world. In fact, as
we progress through the remainder of the textbook, we'll often
refer back to these appeals as guiding principles for effective digital
writing.

            The next group of rhetorical strategies that we'll examine
are the modes of discourse, which are more specific categories
that fit under the larger umbrella of the logos, pathos, and ethos
appeals. These are methods of communicating different types of
information so that the audience can more fully understand the
intended meaning. They provide methods you can use to clarify

228 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
vague concepts or events with information that is specific and
concrete. As outlined in Jenifer Kurtz's chapter on "Rhetorical
Modes," they are

   Narration--telling a story or anecdote, often with the goal of
      helping readers connect emotionally with the main character
      and/or understand how an event unfolded.

   Description--using sensory details that make a particular
      setting or object more vivid for readers, so they can more fully
      picture what it looks like, feels like, and so on.

   Process--giving readers step-by-step details about how
      something works or how they can accomplish a specific task.

   Illustration and exemplification--demonstrating a concept or
      idea through the use of evidence or examples.

   Cause and effect--describing why something happened and/
      or what the consequences of an event or action might be.

   Compare and contrast--helping audiences more fully
      understand a concept or object by describing how it is similar
      to or different from something they are already familiar with.

   Definition--giving a statement of meaning for a particular
      term or idea.

   Classification--organizing parts of a larger whole into
      categories to help readers understand similarities and
      differences between them.

            As you can see, each rhetorical mode, depending on how
it's used, could be classified as a type of rhetorical appeal. A
narrative, for instance, is often used as a pathos appeal--to get
audiences to connect with a particular character and the
circumstances they are facing more fully and emotionally. Similarly,
clear description could be used to compel certain emotions in
audiences (a pathos appeal), and it might also be used to provide
clarity and imply further logical connections (a logos appeal). The
main point here is that so much of the communication we do--in
spoken word and in writing--is built around these rhetorical modes,

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 229
which become the building blocks of larger rhetorical appeals
that--if crafted well--help the speaker to meet their communication
goals. We'll look more specifically at the rhetoric of digital writing in
a later section, but suffice it to say for now that digital writing is also
built from rhetorical strategies, though there are quite a few more
tools at your disposal to engage audiences and build meaning.

            The final group of communication strategies that we'll
discuss are called rhetorical devices, which refer to a way of using
language for persuasive purposes. Whereas the rhetorical modes
we discussed above relate more to the content of a message, a
rhetorical device is often more about word choice. It's a way of
phrasing a particular idea in order to increase the audience's
engagement as well as their emotional reaction. In fact, rhetorical
devices are sometimes called "slanters" because they put a certain
spin on a message--either positive or negative--to make audiences
feel a certain way. Rhetorical devices are typically emotional
(pathos) appeals, sometimes intended to help audiences engage on
a deeper level with a topic and sometimes--in the case of a
slanter--intended to manipulate their emotions or distract them
from the logical (or illogical) aspects of a message.

            The list of rhetorical devices is extensive (Merriam-
Webster)--way beyond what we could practically study in one
chapter--but it might be worth looking at a few examples to
demonstrate how common they are and the persuasive effect they
can have:

   Simile--a comparison using "like" or "as." This is a common
      device that has clear connections to the compare-and-
      contrast rhetorical mode identified above. However, whereas
      the mode would provide a deeper discussion of the similarities
      and differences between two or more things, a simile is a
      simple phrase and is often used to create positive or negative
      associations. For instance, saying that a political candidate was
      "grasping for words like a drowning man clinging to driftwood"
      puts the politician in a more negative light, making them seem

230 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
      desperate.
   Metaphor--a comparison that doesn't use "like" or "as." A

      metaphor can't be taken literally, which requires the audience
      to recognize that it's a figure of speech, implying a comparison.
      For example, saying that one of your friends "didn't pull any
      punches" in a recent conversation with you is (hopefully) a
      metaphor. It doesn't literally mean that your friend was hitting
      you. It's a comparison that implies your friend wasn't trying to
      spare your feelings.
   Euphemism--making a topic that is negative or neutral seem
      more positive than it is. For instance, instead of calling
      someone "stubborn" (a fairly negative term), calling them
      "tenacious" or "determined" puts a more positive spin on it.
      Similarly, instead of selling "used cars," a car dealership will
      often refer to them as "pre-owned vehicles," which has a
      slightly more positive ring to it.
   Dysphemism--making a topic that is positive or neutral seem
      more negative than it is. For instance, calling one of your
      teachers a "dictator" would obviously put that person in a more
      negative light. A person who calls their spouse a "ball and
      chain" is also using a dysphemism that makes their spouse and
      their marriage seem confining.
   Hyperbole--extreme exaggeration, typically for dramatic effect
      to demonstrate the importance or significance of something.
      Saying that you could have "died" of embarrassment at a
      particular moment emphasizes the significance of your
      feelings and would probably garner more sympathy from your
      audience.

The list goes on. It can sometimes be really helpful to know the
various rhetorical devices so that you can identify them when they
are used in a conversation. However, more important than knowing
the specific terms is being able to recognize how language is used
in a given situation to elicit specific emotions and how those
emotional responses benefit the speaker. Obviously, not all

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 231
rhetorical devices are negative. They can be used in positive ways
to capture an audience's attention and demonstrate the significance
of a particular idea. Also, when used well, a rhetorical device can be
extremely effective in persuading an audience. However, rhetorical
devices can be used to manipulate or distract, and when they come
across as melodramatic or underhanded, then they have the
opposite effect, often diminishing the credibility of the speaker in
addition to dissuading the audience. For that reason, understanding
how rhetorical devices are used and for what purpose is helpful as
you interpret and respond to messages and as you craft your own.

     Activity 7.2

        Collect a handful of various digital messages. These might
     include an email you have received, text messages, blog
     posts, social media posts, and so on. Try to make each one
     different in terms of the platform and what you perceive to
     be the purpose of the message.

        Now consider the rhetorical strategies that are used in
     each message. You might begin by simply labeling the broad
     rhetorical appeals--logos, pathos, and ethos--remembering
     that a given text could use more than one appeal. Then drill
     down into each category. Can you identify specific
     rhetorical modes that are used to engage the audience or
     clarify information? Can you identify specific rhetorical
     devices?

        Finally, consider whether each message is effective based
     on its use of the various appeals. Which strategies enhance
     the meaning and persuasiveness of a given message? Which
     ones are ineffective because they are unclear, illogical, or

232 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
     clearly manipulative? What other strategies might have
     been used to make the message more effective?

The Ubiquitous Nature of Rhetoric

So back to where we started: rhetoric is everywhere, all the time.
This chapter was designed to demonstrate this point more fully
(using a blend of logos and ethos appeals) and to underscore the
importance of the messages you send as well as the complexity of
a given rhetorical situation. While many situations might call for
very intentional and thoughtful attention to the rhetorical elements
that should influence the way that a message is crafted and how
audiences might react (a marriage proposal, for instance, or a public
speech or sermon), there are many rhetorical situations that
materialize each day that we are prone to overlook because they
might seem insignificant. We might not even identify them as a
rhetorical situation because they are so informal, low-stakes, or
brief. However, the reality is that every time a message is conveyed
to an audience--whether it is intentional or not, whether it is
planned beforehand or not--it is a rhetorical situation with an
exigence, a purpose, and a reaction from the audience. A quick text
message, a wave to someone that you know, and your body language
as you sit in class or in a meeting are all examples of rhetorical
messages that can result in positive or negative consequences
depending on the context of the situation and the audience's
interpretation of the message.

            Having a clearer understanding of rhetoric and how it can
unfold in both the big and the small moments will, at the very least,
help you see how rhetoric functions in your everyday life. In fact, so
many of the things that you strive to accomplish rely on rhetoric.

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 233
All of your social relationships are built on and largely consist of
rhetorical messaging. Similarly, your ability to effectively send and
interpret messages has a direct impact on whether you pass a class,
get a job, pay your bills on time, buy or sell a house or a car, enjoy
a night out with your friends, and so on. If you were to track your
conversations throughout the course of a day or a week and then
consider the rhetorical implications of each one, you'd see that even
the most mundane exchange with someone helps you work toward
larger goals. Here are some examples of how rhetoric functions in
your everyday life:

   To complete a task. You rely on clear messaging with your
      boss/coworkers and or your teachers/peers in order to
      complete work tasks and larger projects. You receive
      messaging that details deadlines and other requirements for
      assignments, and you send messages in order to clarify those
      instructions, work with peers/colleagues on projects, and
      interact with customers. Even minor tasks like renewing your
      driver's license or filling a grocery order require rhetorical
      discourse.

   To forge and maintain social relationships. These are often
      more mundane, seemingly meaningless text messages and
      informal conversations that you have--sometimes with close
      friends and family and sometimes with acquaintances and even
      strangers. These interactions are also persuasive, meant to
      facilitate people's positive impressions of you and to create
      feelings of connectedness and care. Even minor interactions
      with strangers, in which you let someone get in front of you at
      the grocery checkout or you tell the McDonald's drive-thru
      attendant to have a great day, are social interactions that
      encourage goodwill and create momentary connections.

   To express yourself. Often you speak up in order to express an
      idea or an emotion. Sometimes, this might overlap with other
      functions of getting work done or forging social connections.
      Self-expression might seem like a more personal discourse

234 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
      that doesn't relate to rhetoric, but when you have an audience,
      it's rhetorical--often for the sake of being heard and
      understood. Even when you are expressing feelings and ideas
      that won't be positively received by your audience, there is still
      the underlying goal of being part of a conversation and sharing
      your perspective.
   To solve problems. Rhetorical discourse can be used to
      identify a problem and to work through the potential solutions
      and consequences with others who are involved. This is also a
      social exchange, since it involves working through different
      perspectives and finding solutions that will appease everyone.
   To learn. In this case, you receive messages, ask clarifying
      questions, and produce texts that apply specific concepts in
      order to develop your understanding of a given subject.
   To receive a personal benefit. You use rhetoric to persuade
      audiences to act in your favor. Maybe you get pulled over, and
      you use rhetoric to dissuade the officer from issuing you a
      ticket. Or you missed an assignment deadline, and you
      convince your teacher or your boss to let you turn it in a
      couple of days late.
   To benefit others. In this case, you would speak up in some
      way to help other people. Maybe you clearly explain a concept
      or an idea to someone who is trying to learn, so you take the
      time to help them understand. Or perhaps you defend the
      viewpoint of a person or a group in order to defend their rights
      or interests.

            These are a few examples of how rhetoric functions in
deeper ways in our everyday lives, helping us work toward big-
picture objectives in our personal, civic, and professional lives.
When put into that larger context, it becomes clear that a
conversation is never just a meaningless conversation. There are
larger objectives at stake, and having a clear understanding of what
those objectives are and how they stem from rhetorical discourse
will aid in your success.

                                                 The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 235
     Activity 7.3

        Track your conversations for an entire day, or maybe
     several days in a row, even the ones that seem minor. Write
     down some basic elements of the rhetorical
     situation--speaker, audience, message, exigence, purpose.
     At the end, review your data and look for larger patterns in
     these conversations, perhaps related to the functions
     identified above or other "functions" or types of objectives
     that you identify. Many conversions have more than one
     function, so be sure to give all of the appropriate labels.

        Write a brief response that explains the different
     functions that you identified and how some of the smaller
     conversations you had work toward those larger goals.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a rhetorical situation? What are the key
             elements that are involved? Can you use those key
             elements to demonstrate an example of a rhetorical
             situation you've encountered recently?

        2. What does Bitzer mean when he says that rhetoric
             can alter reality? How does rhetorical discourse alter
             reality? How does this view of rhetoric relate to

236 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
      Bitzer's definition of exigence?
 3. What does Vatz mean when he says, "Meaning is

      not discovered in situations, but created by rhetors"?
      Can you think of an example in which two people
      might interpret the exigence differently?
 4. Define kairos and explain how it relates to the
      effectiveness of rhetorical discourse.
 5. What are some possible constraints that can
      influence the success of a message?
 6. Define the three rhetorical appeals and give
      examples of each one.
 7. What does it mean that the rhetorical appeals
      might overlap in a particular message? Can you give
      an example?
 8. What are the rhetorical modes of discourse? How
      do they relate to the rhetorical appeals?
 9. What is a rhetorical device and how does it relate
      to the rhetorical appeals? Define two to three
      rhetorical devices that aren't defined in this chapter
      but are identified on the Merriam-Webster website.
      Give your own example for each device that you
      select.
10. How do even small conversations fit into the larger
      definition of rhetoric? How does all rhetorical
      discourse work toward larger objectives?
11. The definition of rhetoric given by the Department
      of Rhetoric and Writing Studies at San Diego
      University says that "we shape and are shaped by
      language." Explain what you think that means.

                                         The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 237
     Sources

                  American Rhetoric. "Scholarly Definitions of
               Rhetoric." American Rhetoric, n.d.,
               https://www.americanrhetoric.com/
               rhetoricdefinitions.htm.

                  Bitzer, Lloyd F. "The Rhetorical Situation."
               Philosophy and Rhetoric, vol. 1, 1968, pp. 1-14,
               http://www.arts.uwaterloo.ca/~raha/309CWeb/
               Bitzer(1968).pdf.

                  Department of Rhetoric and Writing Studies.
               "What Is Rhetoric?" San Diego State University, n.d.,
               https://rhetoric.sdsu.edu/about/what-is-rhetoric.

                  Eidenmuller, Michael E. "Scholarly Definitions of
               Rhetoric." American Rhetoric, 2021,
               https://www.americanrhetoric.com/
               rhetoricdefinitions.htm.

                  Kurtz, Jenifer. "Rhetorical Modes." Let's Get
               Writing! edited by Ann Moser, Virginia Western
               Educational Foundation, Inc., 2018,
               https://pressbooks.pub/vwcceng111/chapter/
               chapter-5-rhetorical-modes/.

                  Pantelides, Kate. "Kairos." Writing Commons, n.d.,
               https://writingcommons.org/article/kairos-2/.

                  Rapp, Christof. "Aristotle's Rhetoric." Stanford
               Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2022,
               https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-
               rhetoric/#StruRhet.

238 | The Everyday Function of Rhetoric
   Merriam-Webster. "31 Useful Rhetorical Devices:
`Simile' and `Metaphor' Are Just the Beginning."
Merriam-Webster.com, n.d. https://www.merriam-
webster.com/words-at-play/rhetorical-devices-
list-examples.

   Mele, Kate. "Rhetorical Situation, Exigence, and
Kairos." In Introduction to Professional and Public
Writing. Pressbooks, 2020.
https://rwu.pressbooks.pub/wtng225/chapter/
exigence-and-rhetorical-situation/.

   Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. "Aristotle's
Rhetoric." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 15
Mar. 2022, https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/
aristotle-rhetoric/#StruRhet.

   Vatz, Richard. "The Myth of the Rhetorical
Situation." Philosophy & Rhetoric, vol. 6, no. 3,
Summer 1973, pp. 154-161. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/40236848.

                               The Everyday Function of Rhetoric | 239
8. Rhetoric as a Social Tool

Let's begin this chapter with a key premise that is embedded in
communication studies and throughout this textbook: all language
is social. It's a complex tool that we learn through our interactions
with other people, and we use it in collaboration with others to
exchange ideas and facilitate action. You've probably heard people
say that they aren't "social," meaning that they tend to be more
introverted, preferring not to interact with other people outside
of their intimate circle. Certainly, that's one way of thinking about
"social"--the personality trait that compels some people to seek
out human interaction and to continually expand their circle of
relationships. However, for our purposes, that is a pretty limited
definition of "social" because it focuses on individual personalities
instead of the ordered social systems of which we are all a part.

            In this chapter, "social" refers more broadly to human
relationships and organizational structures. By nature, humans are
social creatures, seeking out relationships that provide a sense of
connection, purpose, and identity. And as we discussed at length in
the previous chapter, our relationships are facilitated by rhetoric.
The ways that we receive, interpret, and send messages (whether
explicit or implicit, whether verbal or nonverbal) have a direct
influence on how our relationships with other people develop, grow,
and shift. In fact, our relationships are defined by our common
terminology (e.g., "friend," "mom," "teacher," "spouse"), which carries
shared expectations of meaning and appropriate behaviors. We also
tend to view our relationship with another person as a compilation
of our interactions--a series of symbolic, rhetorical activities that
give shape to our view of that relationship and our role in it. Taken
as a whole, our relationships determine our sense of self, our daily
activities and priorities, and our long-term goals. They are also
responsible for the way that we perceive and respond to "reality."

            This chapter explores the inherent social function of

240 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
rhetoric, taking a deeper look at the effects that language has on
an individual and cultural level. While the last chapter provided
a glimpse at the different ways that rhetoric can function in our
everyday lives, this chapter affirms that every rhetorical interaction,
though it may serve a variety of other objectives, is steeped in
preexisting social systems that shape and reinforce meaning.
Examining these influences will provide valuable insights into the
social nuances that exist in our daily interactions and the way that
language is used to demonstrate our belonging to various groups,
which in turn increases our persuasive effect.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the social function of language that is
             fundamental to every message.

          Consider the symbolic nature of language and the
             ways that words and other symbols are encoded and
             decoded to provide meaning and social connection.

          Review the concept of mediation and the ways that
             language is not only shaped by our thought processes
             and ideas but able to directly influence our thought
             processes as well.

          Learn about the ways that language is used to
             express our identity and belonging in different
             groups, which reinforces social connection and
             strengthens our persuasive ability.

          Learn about how language is a tool for social
             intervention to either reinforce or alter our symbolic
             categories and how that type of intervention can
             create tangible change in the world.

                                                                Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 241
          Consider how effective communication hinges on
             effective listening, including best practices regarding
             civil discourse and rhetorical listening.

          Understand the complex nature of communication
             and the reasons why disconnect occurs.

          Consider the ways that digital spaces can
             exacerbate disconnect as well as the affordances of
             digital spaces that can be used to facilitate mutual
             understanding.

Language As...

The function of language can't be overstated. It's our connection
to the world and shapes our perceptions of every experience we
have. We've already discussed the fact that language is an inherently
social tool, even in moments when it might not be so obvious. For
instance, language is obviously social when you are in what we
might commonly consider "social situations," where you are making
plans with or are already out with friends. Maybe one of your
coworkers invites you to a birthday party, and suddenly you have to
navigate what might seem like an uncomfortable "social situation"
because you are shifting from a professional to a more personal
relationship with this person. However, the reality is that every
interaction you had with that person, even in the more
"professional" setting, was also social simply because you had to
utilize language to come to a shared meaning. You might have sent
an email to this person about a particular task, or maybe you filled
out a specific form that is standard to your workplace that this
person received and then acted upon. These are all social

242 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
interactions because you are endeavoring to communicate an idea
to another person, and you are relying on shared cultural tools--that
is, language and perhaps company terminology and the
understanding of how the "form" is supposed to work--to get those
ideas across. This section explores the many ways that language is
inherently social.

Language as Symbolic

On a fundamental level, language consists of symbols that are
socially constructed and understood, which makes it possible to
communicate ideas to others. A symbol is a representation. It's not
the thing itself; it stands in for concepts and ideas. For instance,
the word "pizza" isn't the pizza itself; it's the symbol that has been
created to represent the idea of pizza, and when you use that word
with someone who knows what the symbol means, then you have a
shared understanding. And you can use other symbols like "16-inch,"
"meat-lovers," and "thin crust" to further specify your meaning. As
explained by the University of Minnesota Libraries, a system of
symbols is called a "code," which provides limitless opportunities
to create meaning through the combination of symbols (encoding)
for others to decipher (decoding). These codes are "ever-changing"
as words and other types of symbols emerge and adapt to reflect
new cultural contexts and communication needs. Codes are also
flexible, allowing us to reference abstract concepts and ideas as
well as objects and events that are removed from our immediate
surroundings by time and/or space. This aids our ability to think
deeply about a concept and to express complex ideas to others. The
Social Science LibreText library explains it like this: "Language is
based on complex rules relating spoken, signed, or written symbols
to their meanings. What results is an indefinite number of possible
innovative utterances from a finite number of elements." The point
is that language is a social tool that is learned through social

                                                               Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 243
interaction. Words have meaning because they've been assigned
meaning, and through the process of language acquisition, we've
learned what those meanings are and how to use them to
participate effectively in conversations with other people.

Language as Mediator

As discussed in chapter 6, language is the tool that mediates our
thoughts and feelings so that we can express them to other people.
It's the bridge that forges connections between you and your family,
your friends, your coworkers, and even the strangers that you
interact with throughout the day. Yes, this includes more in-depth
conversations you might have with someone to work through a
problem, but it also includes the high-five you give one of your
friends in the hallway to reinforce your friendship, the quick
selections that you make with your phone to put items in your
"shopping cart" and to finalize your purchase, and the use of your
turn signal to let other drivers know you want to change lanes.
These are all outward expressions through the use of symbols, of
internal feelings and desires, which allow other people to
understand your meaning and respond appropriately. Interestingly,
there is research that suggests a reciprocal relationship between
language and our thoughts (Lumen Learning, "Language and
Thinking"). Not only do our thoughts give shape to the language
that we use, but our language also has a significant impact on our
thought patterns and our ways of processing information.

Language as Identification

Language is also used to express our identity and align ourselves
with other people. Kenneth Burke theorized that we naturally seek

244 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
out ways to relate to other people through parts of our identity
that we have in common, and we use language to demonstrate to
ourselves and others our membership in specific groups based on
those commonalities. Essentially, the social function of language
revolves around our ability to persuade others--by adopting specific
language patterns and expressing our shared perspectives and
values--that we are similar to them, that we belong to the group,
which in turn builds our credibility. For instance, a lot of people
bond over their shared interest in a particular sports team. They
talk about the players. They discuss the team's record and other
statistics. They rehash highlights from the most recent game, and
they speculate on what will happen next week. They wear fan gear,
and they cheer during the games. All of this demonstrates their
identity as part of the fan group, persuading others that they belong
because of their sports knowledge and the high value they place on
the success of their team.

            Similar to Burke's "identification" is the concept of a
discourse community--groups that share specific goals and have
particular ways of communicating with one another as they work
toward those goals (Lumen Learning, "Discourse Communities").
Most people belong to multiple discourse communities. For
instance, people in a particular field of study are in a discourse
community, often interacting with one another to grow their own
knowledge or to further advance the field itself. Their ways of
communicating--using specific terms, often communicating in
specific genres, demonstrating shared standards and values--are
specialized, meaning that people outside of the group would likely
feel confused and somewhat alienated. Similarly, people who work
for a particular organization are in a discourse community, using
specialized forms of communication as they work together to run
the company. Within that company, people who work in a specific
department are in a discourse community, communicating in
specific ways about specific things that other departments don't.
And so forth. You might be in a discourse community as part of a
sports team, an interest group, a church, a class, and so on. Like

                                                                Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 245
Burke's concept of identification, people in discourse communities
demonstrate their belonging by adopting the communication
patterns of the group, which is something that they learn to do over
time as they interact with other, more experienced members.

Language as Social Intervention

One final way that we might consider the social nature of language
is its ability to persuade others to take some sort of action or
to adopt a particular perspective. Opt and Gring call this "social
intervention," and they relate it directly to language and the way that
we assign meaning using symbols: "When we name, we symbolically
categorize experience. We compare experience to the symbolic
categories that our language community has created to
communicate about experience. We select the category into which
the experience seems to fit. Then we use the symbol associated
with that category to talk about your experience" (Opt and Gring
40). According to this view, our way of naming and interpreting
experience reflects our ideology, the broader theory we use to
assign meaning to events. When we socially intervene, we attempt
to persuade others to assign the same meaning to things that we
do, either by maintaining their current perspective or by adopting
a new one. If we want others to "recategorize" a particular thing,
"we emphasize how experience no longer fits the expectations
associated with the current way of naming it" (Opt and Gring 54).
We continually negotiate and renegotiate meaning as we interact
with others, which has a direct impact on our ways of seeing,
understanding, relating, and acting in the world.

246 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
Rhetorical Listening

Unfortunately, when people think about rhetoric, there tends to be
a focus on the self. "How can rhetoric help further my goals? What
key points should I make in order to persuade my audience to see
my perspective." The problem with this mindset is that it ignores
the other half of effective communication, which is listening. Most
likely you've been in conversations that go around in circles because
nobody is truly listening to each other. When emotions run high,
particularly when we're convinced that we are "right," we're much
more likely to speak over the other person or maybe to scoff or roll
our eyes while they are talking. Some people might seem like they
are listening based on their body language and head nods, but in
reality, they are biding their time, perhaps planning out what they
are going to say next once the other person stops talking. That's
not effective communication because it undermines our ability to
understand where the other person is coming from and to
reexamine our own thinking as we work toward solutions. Also, it's
incredibly difficult to get someone else to listen to what you have
to say when you don't extend the same courtesy. Yes, it's a very
basic skill--listening when other people are talking--that probably
extends all the way back to kindergarten, but pay attention to some
of the conversations around you, and you'll discover that a lot of
people are bad at listening, often because they are distracted by
their phones and other digital devices.

            Before we unpack the concept of rhetorical listening and
the significant influence it can have on a conversation, let's review
the concept of civil discourse. In this context, the word "civil" means
respectful and engaged. It means that during a conversation when
another person is speaking, even when they are sharing viewpoints
that directly conflict with your own, you show them respect as an
engaged audience member who is going through the intellectual
process of trying to understand their point of view and work toward
solutions that are mutually beneficial (American University). At its

                                                                Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 247
most basic level, civil discourse is a calm and rational discussion
where you would

   Wait for the other person to finish speaking before you
      respond.

   Give that person your full attention, with eye contact and head
      nods that show you are listening.

   Be respectful with your body language. Don't roll your eyes or
      scoff. Similarly, you'd avoid facial expressions and body
      language that come across as threatening.

   Ask clarifying questions to be sure that you fully understand
      what the person has said. It's also common to rephrase some of
      their main points in your own words.

   Keep a calm demeanor when you do respond. Avoid yelling,
      being sarcastic, or speaking with a sharp tone.

   Stay focused on the issue and base your responses on logical
      reasoning and honest feelings. Avoid attacking the other
      person or responding in a way that is manipulative, irrelevant,
      or melodramatic.

Basically anything that encourages open dialogue and makes room
for alternative ideas and opinions is civil discourse. It certainly
doesn't mean that you have to agree with other people or ignore
your own feelings and perspectives. Instead, civil discourse seeks
to uncover disagreement for the purpose of understanding and
resolving conflict.

            While civil discourse can be an effective way to engage with
another person and resolve conflict, rhetorical listening takes the
process a step further because it requires you to attend more fully
to the complex human experience and feelings of the other person,
even going so far as to consider the intention behind their message
and the underlying emotions that they might not be able to fully
express. Krista Ratcliffe defines rhetorical listening as "a stance of
openness that any person may choose to assume in relation to any
person, text, or culture" (1). Ratcliffe focuses especially on "cross-

248 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
cultural" identifications, which require the listener to actively
identify their own "disidentifications" and biases that act as a barrier
to fully understanding what another person is saying and where
they are coming from. In other words, we don't ignore the
differences between ourselves and the speaker. Instead, we
consider what those differences are and interrogate how they
would naturally lead to different ways of thinking, speaking, and
experiencing the world: "The result of such understanding is a
broader cultural literacy, which affords us opportunities for
negotiating our daily attitudes and actions, our politics and ethics"
(Ratcliffe 300). It's impossible to ever really step outside of our
individual lens, but when we listen rhetorically with the intention
to truly see the other person and their point of view, we recognize
that other valid perspectives exist outside of our own, and we make
a genuine effort to understand those perspectives.

            So the difference between civil discourse and rhetorical
listening is one of intent. There is a deeper focus on seeing the
other person more fully, and there's more "risk" involved that you,
not just the other person, might change your opinions and attitudes
as a result. In his TED Talk called "The Power of Listening," William
Ury says that real listening requires a shift in focus from our own
perspectives and potential responses to the perspectives and
experiences of the person who is speaking. "We listen from their
frame of reference, not just ours," which means that we not only
listen to the words that are being said but "to what's behind the
words" (Ury 6:44). It's a conscious effort to step into the other
person's point of view, which puts the focus, at least momentarily,
on their underlying needs and emotions, not your own motives and
persuasive strategies that might change their mind. The benefits of
this kind of listening are obvious, but they are also really significant:

 1. It allows you to more fully understand the other person's
      position, which will facilitate deeper insights and personal
      growth.

2. It builds deeper social connections and trust between you and

                                                               Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 249
      that person. Instead of being a disagreement that creates
      tension and distance between you and the other person,
      rhetorical listening demonstrates care for the other person
      and can go a long way in strengthening a relationship.
3. It brings you closer to "yes," according to Ury. By that, he
      means that the other person, once they have felt heard, will be
      more likely to listen to you. That's not to say that you're
      interested in simply being "right" or getting your own way.
      Following a genuine effort on both sides to listen and
      understand, you're more likely to identify a solution that is
      mutually beneficial.

     Activity 8.1

        Identify a personal experience that was significant to you
     in some way. It should be something that you remember
     well, including contextual circumstances as well as the
     details of the event. It could be a happy memory, or it might
     be a more negative experience in which you were
     disappointed, embarrassed, vulnerable, or scared.

        Work with a partner and share your stories with each
     other. As the other person is describing their own
     meaningful experience, give them your full attention and
     listen to really try to understand that experience from their
     perspective. You can jot down notes while they are
     speaking and ask follow-up clarifying questions that would
     help you understand the details of the event and the
     feelings that your partner experienced.

        Once both of you have shared, then take some time to

250 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
     write down their story. It could be told in first person (as if
     it's being told from their point of view), or you could stay in
     third person. The important thing is to tell the story
     accurately, with the details and descriptions that would
     help other people clearly understand the event. You should
     also focus on telling the story in a way that is compelling
     and that demonstrates the significance and the range of
     emotions your partner experienced. The goal is to help
     other readers understand and empathize with your partner
     as the main character in the story.

Digital Spaces and Rhetorical
(Dis)Advantages

Thus far in the chapter, we've emphasized the fact that language is a
social tool, created by humans with the purposes of communicating
and connecting with other human beings in a variety of ways. But
it's also inherently limited in its ability to fully communicate the
complexity of our experiences and ideas. And it requires careful
interpretation and negotiation as people make progress (or not)
toward mutual understanding. How many times do
misunderstandings happen because we misinterpret what another
person is saying or what their intended meaning is? The reality
is that we probably never interpret the meaning of a message the
exact same way as someone else because we all bring a complex
layering of experiences and values to a conversation, which will
naturally influence what we pay attention to and what we take
away from a conversation. Similarly, we all have our own unique
ways of experiencing, seeing, thinking about, and speaking about

                                                                Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 251
the world around us, which direct the ways that we encode and
decode messages.

            These moments of misunderstanding are examples of
disconnect, in which we don't fully share the same meaning of an
experience or a message as someone else. Our interpretations and
ways of speaking about a particular event or idea don't align with
someone else's, which if left unresolved, can lead to confusion,
frustration, and alienation. You've probably experienced disconnect
with someone else where it's obvious that you aren't seeing eye to
eye about an event or an issue, in which case, you know that it can
sometimes be difficult to clearly understand someone else's point of
view because yours seems so clear and obvious. It's easy to assume
that the other person is the one with the wrong perspective and
that if we could just explain it to them, then they would "get it."
While that might be the case sometimes--or the reverse might be
the case sometimes and you are the one who doesn't get it--the
reality is that disconnect is complex. In his 1950 article titled "Is
Anybody Listening?" author and journalist William Whyte said, "The
great enemy of communication...is the illusion of it" (174). In other
words, we might believe that the meaning of a message is clear and
obvious, which then prevents us from providing clarity or seeking to
understand how someone else interpreted a message, which in turn
widens the gap between us and another person. Being aware that
people interpret messages differently--based on a complex layering
of past experiences, elements of identity, values and personal
interests, previous knowledge of a given subject, and unique ways of
using and understanding language--increases our odds of extending
the conversation and being more attentive to areas where
misunderstandings might occur.

            There are some unique challenges that come with trying
to communicate clearly in digital spaces. For one thing, there is
a barrier in time and space between you and your audience. For
instance, text messages often aren't immediate. They unfold over
the course of an hour or maybe several hours while you are going
other places and doing other things. It's easy to lose track of the

252 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
conversation or fail to provide your full attention. There's also the
reality that in many digital spaces, communication is lacking some
of the rich details that help us to more fully interpret the meaning.
Things like facial expressions, body language, vocal inflection, and
tone of voice all provide important cues for listeners, which are
largely absent in written texts like emails, text messages, blog
articles, and so on. What's more, digital communication has quickly
evolved to include an ever-expanding array of emojis, acronyms,
and GIFs, which rely on shared cultural knowledge and individual
interpretations. Studies by Miller, Miller et al., and Jiang et al. ("The
Perfect One" and "Understanding Diverse Interpretations") discuss
the complex messages that are often embedded in simplified forms,
such as emojis and GIFs, which can increase the likelihood of
misinterpretation and misunderstanding. Even when there are rich
cues--in images and videos, for instance--communication tends to
be one-way, without the ability for the speaker to gauge audience
understanding or for listeners to ask clarifying questions or share
their own perspectives.

            In relation to our previous discussion about rhetorical
listening, digital communication can make it harder to see the
person behind the message--the complex feelings and human needs
that motivate a conversation. This type of listening that attends
to the person behind the message and reads between the lines to
understand what's not being said is an incredibly nuanced skill, and
it relies on a certain amount of empathy. Unfortunately, a screen
creates a barrier of time and space that makes it harder to "see" the
other person, especially for social media posts and blogs that are
meant for a broad audience. It's easy to forget about the flesh-and-
blood person who created that content, which makes it more likely
that we will respond in ways that are careless and self-centered. In
fact, Emiliana Simon-Thomas, the science director at UC Berkeley's
Greater Good Science Center, says that screen time can erode our
ability to experience empathy, largely because the immediate, in-
person nuances of a conversation get lost (qtd. in UC newsroom).
Having empathy to truly listen to someone in an online space

                                                               Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 253
requires greater awareness of our own emotions and reactions as
well as more intentionality to attend to the other person and
respond appropriately.

            While there are certainly aspects of digital communication
that make mutual understanding more difficult, there are also
affordances that can help facilitate better communication practices.
For one thing, the more distant, delayed nature of digital
communication can be a huge advantage because it allows us time
and space to wrestle with our emotions and to craft an appropriate
response. An excellent rule of thumb for any type of digital
communication that you find upsetting--whether it is an email, a
text, or a social media post--is to walk away for a bit. (As noted
in previous chapters, social media algorithms are designed to be
addictive and to spread content as quickly as possible, which often
ends up being emotionally charged, negative [dis]information
[Cocchiarella].) Shut your laptop or put away your phone and give
yourself some time to process. You might find that your initial
reaction--perhaps rooted in fear, anger, or defensiveness (UC
newsroom)--was an overreaction that would have escalated
negative feelings and created further disconnect. Stepping away for
a bit to calm down and assess your feelings can facilitate a more
authentic, open response that will further the conversation.

            Another benefit of digital communication is the ability to
enrich communication using a variety of tools. Later in this unit,
we will discuss multimodality and how various "modes" can
significantly enhance the meaning of a message. In this context, a
mode is a resource that helps you communicate meaning. It might
be the way that you emphasize text using a bold font, capital letters,
or different colors. Or it might be your ability to use hyperlinks
to direct an audience to information that will provide important
background, supporting evidence, or contextual information. Not
only can we hyperlink to articles and studies, but we can link to
videos and pictures to elaborate on an idea and clarify meaning.
These are tools that can't necessarily replace the nuances of an in-
person conversation, but they do create opportunities to provide

254 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
clarity and emphasis that go well beyond what an in-person
conversation can do alone. A well-crafted digital message that
strategically draws on these tools can go a long way to engage
audiences and promote mutual understanding.

            Obviously, communication is a complicated endeavor, and
as long as there are humans involved with their different
perspectives and experiences, there will always be the opportunity
for misunderstandings and disagreements. However, good
communicators consistently work toward mutual respect and
shared understandings by thinking deeply about audience, fully
listening to other people's thoughts and ideas, attending to the
feelings and needs behind a message, and drawing on
communication tools and processes that will bridge the
communication gap.

     Activity 8.2

        Identify a recent misunderstanding that you experienced
     or witnessed. Describe the event and see if you can
     describe what the misunderstanding was about. In other
     words, what was the idea, issue, or event on which these
     two people didn't agree or understand in the same way?

        Now take your analysis of the event a step further to see
     if you can identify the perspectives and feelings of each
     person involved. Why did they respond the way that they
     did? What are some past experiences these people might
     have had to shape their interpretation of the event? What
     are possible interests, values, or aspects of identity that
     would influence their understanding? Try to be fair and
     think deeply about the possibilities.

                                                               Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 255
        This type of thought process can help you step into
     another person's point of view, which is a good way to
     practice empathy. It can also help you think more deeply
     about your own perspectives (if you were part of the
     conversation) and consider where they come from and how
     they shape your reactions.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What does it mean to say that all language is social?
        2. In what way is language symbolic? Can you give

             examples of symbolic language other than spoken
             words?
        3. How does the symbolic function of language allow
             for more complex thinking and communication?
        4. How do we learn to encode and decode language?
        5. In what way does language function as a mediator?
             What is the reciprocal relationship between thought
             patterns and language?
        6. How can Burke's theory of identification through
             language be applied to online spaces?
         7. What is a discourse community? Describe a
             discourse community that you belong to and the
             common language patterns that define that group.
             This might include terminology used as well as the
             content you focus on, the mode of communication,
             and the underlying purpose and values embedded in

256 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
        the discourse.
   8. What does it mean that language is a tool for social

        intervention? How can language be used to change
        attitudes and behaviors?
   9. What is the difference between civil discourse and
        rhetorical listening? What are the benefits of each?
        How can each one be used effectively in online spaces
        to enhance communication?
  10. What are the rhetorical advantages and
        disadvantages of digital spaces? What are some tools
        that digital communication can leverage to enhance
        the meaning of a message?
   11. The book has identified in several places the way
        social media algorithms are designed to spread
        disinformation, spark emotional reactions, and
        promote people's addiction to social media. What is
        your reaction to this information? How can you
        protect yourself against these negative
        consequences?

Sources

             American University. "What Is Civil Discourse?"
          American University, n.d.,
          https://www.american.edu/spa/civildiscourse/
          what-is-civil-discourse.cfm.

                                                          Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 257
                  Burke, Kenneth. A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley:
               University of California Press, 1950.

                  Cocchiarella, Christopher. "Manipulative
               Algorithms and Addictive Design: Summing Up
               What's Wrong with Social Media." Mindful Technics,
               30 Nov. 2021, https://mindfultechnics.com/
               manipulative-algorithms-and-addictive-design-
               summing-up-whats-wrong-with-social-media/.

                  Jiang, Jialun, et al. "`The Perfect One':
               Understanding Communication Practices and
               Challenges with Animated GIFs." DeepAI.org, 22 Mar.
               2019, https://deepai.org/publication/the-perfect-
               one-understanding-communication-practices-and-
               challenges-with-animated-gifs.

                  ------. "Understanding Diverse Interpretations of
               Animated GIFs." CHI EA `17: Proceedings of the 2017
               CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human
               Factors in Computing Systems, 2017,
               https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3027063.3053139.

                  LibreTexts. "Symbols and Nature." Sociology
               (Boundless), 2020, https://socialsci.libretexts.org/
               Bookshelves/Sociology/
               Introduction_to_Sociology/
               Book%3A_Sociology_(Boundless)/03%3A_Culture/
               3.02%3A_The_Symbolic_Nature_of_Culture/
               3.2E%3A_Symbols_and_Nature.

                  Lumen Learning. "Discourse Communities."
               English Composition II, n.d.,
               https://courses.lumenlearning.com/wm-
               englishcomp2/chapter/discourse-communities/.

258 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
   ------. "Language and Thinking." Introduction to
Psychology, n.d.,
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/waymaker-
psychology/chapter/reading-language-and-
thought.

   Miller, Hannah. "Investigating the Potential for
Miscommunication Using Emojis." GroupLens, 5 Apr.
2016, https://grouplens.org/blog/investigating-
the-potential-for-miscommunication-using-emoji/.

   Miller, Hannah, et al. "`Blissfully Happy' or `Ready
to Fight': Varying Interpretations of Emoji."
Proceedings of the Tenth International AAAI
Conference on Web and Social Media, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, 2016, https://doi.org/10.1609/
icwsm.v10i1.14757.

   Opt, Susan K., and Mark A. Gring. The Rhetoric of
Social Intervention: An Introduction. Sage
Publications, Inc., 2008. ProQuest Ebook Central,
https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/
andersonedu-ebooks/detail.action?docID=997189.

   Ratcliffe, Krista. Rhetorical Listening:
Identification, Gender, Whiteness. Carbondale, IL:
Southern Illinois UP, 2005. Print.

   UC Newsroom. "Find Social Media Frustrating?
Try Empathy." University of California, 11 Feb. 2020,
https://www.universityofcalifornia.edu/news/find-
social-media-frustrating-try-
empathy#:~:text=Too%20much%20screen%20time
%20and,reading%E2%80%9D%20each%20other%27
s%20emotional%20expressions.

                                              Rhetoric as a Social Tool | 259
                  University of Minnesota Libraries. "Language and
               Meaning." Communication in the Real World, 2013,
               https://open.lib.umn.edu/communication/
               chapter/3-1-language-and-
               meaning/#:~:text=Language%20Is%20Symbolic,you
               r%20hand%20back%20and%20forth.

                  Ury, William. "The Power of Listening." YouTube,
               uploaded by TedxSanDiego, 7 Jan. 2015,
               https://www.google.com/
               search?q=mla+style+citation+for+a+tedtalk+on+yout
               ube&rlz=1C5GCEM_enUS1009US1009&oq=mla+style
               +citation+for+a+tedtalk+on+youtube&aqs=chrome..6
               9i57j33i10i160j33i299j33i22i29i30.5803j0j7&sourceid=
               chrome&ie=UTF-8.

                  Whyte, William Hollingsworth. "Is Anybody
               Listening?" Fortune, 1950.

260 | Rhetoric as a Social Tool
9. Rhetoric in the Digital

Realm

Influencers have become increasingly prominent on social media
channels, where they engage with thousands of followers and often
receive a salary and other perks from companies that benefit from
their popularity. The more followers they have, the more money
they make (Nashville Film Institute), which means that many people
have turned it into a full-time profession, and many more are trying
to generate enough followers to do the same. But have you ever
wondered what types of skills a successful influencer must have?
Or, similarly, have you ever thought about why businesses of all
shapes and sizes spend so much time and money thinking about
the different ways they want to communicate with their audiences?
A content strategist, responsible for creating an organization's
communication plan, is typically a core member of the leadership
team for one simple reason: businesses need customers in order
to survive, and the process of engaging and retaining customers
requires very intentional, continual messaging across a number of
different channels (Cione-Kroeschel).

            You've probably realized by now that all of these skills relate
back to rhetoric. The basic elements of the rhetorical
situation--audience, message, speaker, purpose, exigence, and
kairos--are foundational in all of our interactions, whether personal
or professional, and considering some of the (dis)advantages of
digital spaces that we discussed in the previous chapter, rhetorical
skills are even more important online, in moments where the
speaker and the audience are separated by time and space. As
opposed to in-person conversations, where audiences are more
likely (hopefully) to actively listen to a message and where the
speaker can (sometimes) gauge the audience's reaction and make
appropriate adjustments, digital spaces create unique challenges

                                                          Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 261
that make it more difficult to get a message to "land," especially
if the audience is fairly broad and loosely defined. It's harder to
capture people's attention among the onslaught of ads and spam
messaging that people receive each day. It's more difficult to
cultivate trust and make genuine personal connections. And it's less
likely that people will understand your meaning when you're not
right there beside them to guide them in the right direction or
answer questions.

            These are just a few of the challenges that arise in digital
communication, but the good news is that they aren't
insurmountable. However, they do require a much deeper
consideration of audience to identify the relevant needs,
expectations, and values that would influence their interpretation
and that should, therefore, guide the way that you craft a message.
This chapter focuses on these key rhetorical considerations and
thought processes that will facilitate more effective digital
communication. While the chapter takes a more professional
slant--considering aspects of branding and audience engagement
that might align with a business's marketing strategy--the concepts
presented here are also incredibly relevant to your own personal
brand as well as your professional goals. Whether you aspire to
be an influencer, a content writer, or something else entirely, the
digital writing tools and strategies discussed here will significantly
increase your success.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the important role of a content
             strategist in the overall success of an organization.

          Gain a deeper understanding of an organization's or

262 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
             an individual's "brand" and why it's important to
             intentionally identify and cultivate a brand.
          Take a closer look at the importance of the
             audience in digital communication.
          Understand specific research strategies that are
             used to identify the target audience.
          Practice brainstorming processes that stem from
             audience research and that help inform effective
             content strategies.
          Understand the concept of digital orchestration
             and how specific types of messages on different
             channels work together to meet specific
             communication goals.
          Gain a deeper appreciation for rhetorical concepts
             and strategies that inform the use of more complex
             digital tools and communication strategies.

Branding

We've discussed the fact that all messages have a purpose--a
response that the speaker hopes to elicit from the audience as a
result of the message. It might be to get the audience to understand
a concept, agree with a particular claim, click on a link to a website,
purchase a product or service, reshare a post, subscribe to a
channel, and so on. Often, there is more than one purpose behind a
message. For instance, a company might send a promotional email
to a list of subscribers with the primary purpose of getting the
audience to purchase a product. But to do that, the email would also
have to inform them about the product, convince them to click the

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 263
link to visit the website, and maybe persuade them to sign up for a
free trial or contact a sales agent for more information.

            A much more subtle, yet crucial, purpose behind most
messages is to make a positive impression on the audience, and the
collective sum of those messages and audience impressions reflects
that person's or organization's brand. While the word "brand" could
be used to refer to a company's "brand name," or the company
that produces a particular product, it also refers to the way that
the public perceives that company. Jerry McLaughlin, a Forbes
contributor, explains it like this:

      Put simply, your "brand" is what your prospect thinks of
      when he or she hears your brand name. It's everything
      the public thinks it knows about your name brand
      offering--both factual (e.g. It comes in a robin's-egg-blue
      box), and emotional (e.g. It's romantic). Your brand name
      exists objectively; people can see it. It's fixed. But your
      brand exists only in someone's mind.

            It's important to note here that brand is not the same as
"mission." An organization's mission relates to what they are trying
to achieve with the work they do--often related to meeting
customer's needs with a particular product or service. It's the
primary reason that the organization exists, and ideally, every task,
both big and small across every department, would further its
mission. While mission is about what a company hopes to do, brand
is about who the company is. It's the perception that people have
about that company's personality, values, integrity, customer care,
expertise, and commitment to excellence. Obviously, a positive
public perception in these areas would motivate higher levels of
audience engagement, which has a direct effect on profit margins
and a company's ability to achieve its mission.

264 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
                                                                                        Basics of a
                                                                                        Brand by
                                                                                        Julianmaker
                                                                                        77, on
                                                                                        Wikimedia
                                                                                        Commons
                                                                                        (CC BY-SA
                                                                                        4.0)

            Let's look at an example. In the last several Super Bowls,
Budweiser has become known for its commercials featuring the
friendship between a horse and a dog. A recent Budweiser
commercial in the 2022 Super Bowl told the story of an injured
horse and the emotional connection it had with a dog, which aided
in its recovery. This is one in a long line of commercials since 2014
(with a commercial titled "Puppy Love") that trace the friendship
between these two animals and create a strong emotional reaction
in viewers. While the connection to the Budweiser
product--beer--is nonexistent in these commercials, the real focus
is on telling a story that viewers will associate with the Budweiser
organization. The commercials highlight the hardworking, simple

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 265
American values of farm life, the strength and determination of the
Clydesdale (which have been featured in Budweiser commercials
since 1996, according to Sloan), and the friendship and intense
loyalty between the animals--all qualities that Budweiser hopes that
viewers will begin to associate with their company. Over the years,
these heartwarming commercials have been immensely successful
in not only engaging viewers but creating positive feelings toward
the Budweiser name.

            Obviously, expensive commercials with a large viewership
are one way that a company can work toward developing its brand,
but remember that a brand is the sum of all of the messaging and
impressions that people have about a company. It relates to the
content on its website, its social media posts, and the experience
that customers have with a product or when they engage with
customer service representatives. It also includes stories that are
outside of the company's control--articles (positive or negative) that
are published in the news as well as customer reviews on Yelp or
on a company's Google Business Profile. In other words, everything
that a company says and does should align with its intended brand,
and companies that aren't intentional about consistently
communicating their brand suffer the consequences (Dontigney).

            Individuals also have a personal brand--the way that they
want to be perceived by other people. Similar to corporate branding,
this relates to your personality, your values, and your loyalty as a
friend. It also relates to your professional niche--your work ethic,
professionalism, and expertise in a specific field. Although the idea
of a personal brand sometimes has a negative connotation, implying
the idea that a person is fake and/or self-absorbed, people who
have the most success with personal branding are authentic,
highlighting the parts of themselves and their experiences that they
want to be known for (Chan). They are also consistent, focusing
on one key message or niche for which they want to be known,
communicating often, and being faithful to that brand in all online
and offline interactions.

            As organizations and individuals set goals and take steps to

266 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
cultivate their online presence, branding is central to their ability
to reach key stakeholders, make connections, develop trust, and
prompt deeper levels of audience engagement. And at the heart
of each message that creates positive impressions is a deep
understanding of rhetorical concepts and strategies that make
those connections possible.

     Activity 9.1

        Think of a company or a brand name that you are familiar
     with. Without looking up anything online, create a list of
     qualities that you believe define this company's brand. Now
     visit the company's website and social media pages. What
     kinds of content does this company publish? Be sure to
     read the About Us page, Mission Statement, and so on.
     Consider the implied meaning behind pictures and videos.
     Look at the tone of their written content. You might even
     look at customer reviews regarding their experience with
     the organization. Does this company's online messaging
     and customer feedback line up with the qualities you had
     listed? Are there any inconsistencies? Are there additional
     qualities that this company is striving to be known for that
     you didn't originally list?

     Activity 9.2

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 267
        Take a moment to consider your own personal brand.
     What qualities do you hope to be known for by family and
     friends? What do you want to be known for from a
     professional standpoint? Now review your most recent
     digital messages. Which ones line up with the qualities that
     you listed? Which ones don't? What type of content might
     you post (perhaps on LinkedIn or your own professional
     website) to demonstrate your interest, professional
     experience, and expertise in your desired field? Consider
     how you might carve out a specific "niche" within that field
     that would set you apart from others.

A Closer Look at Audience

Obviously, the audience is important to the success of a message.
As we discussed in chapter 7, all rhetorical messages have an
exigence--an imperfection or problem that prompts the speaker
to communicate. In a rhetorical situation, only the audience can
resolve the problem. The audience alone has the power--by
adopting a certain perspective or taking a particular action--to fulfill
the speaker's purpose, which is why a focus on audience is so
important. A skillful communicator must consider who the audience
is, what they already know about a given topic, what questions they
will have, and what types of experiences and values they have that
will influence the way that they respond to a message. As opposed
to messaging that is writer-focused, emphasizing the speaker's
point of view, a reader-centered approach is focused on audience
(Long et al.). It forces the writer to step into the reader's point
of view and to write a message in such a way that it anticipates

268 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
and responds to their questions, interests, objections, and values.
It influences big-picture aspects of a message, such as content and
organization, as well as smaller, sentence-level strategies, such as
word choice and tone (Oaks).

            As you might imagine, your conception of audience gets
more complicated when you move to the digital realm. For one
thing, you're not likely to be there with the audience as they read or
watch a message, which means that you can't gauge their immediate
reactions and follow up with clarifying information or respond to
objections. Also, it's often much more difficult to identify who the
audience is. Certainly, something like a text message or email is
likely directed toward a person or a group of people that you know
well, though you can't control who else--outside of your intended
audience--might see that message. But other things like social
media posts or content posted on a website are open to a much
broader audience, made up of people with different interests,
perspectives, and values. It's impossible to prioritize the perspective
and to engage the attention of everyone who might stumble across
the message, which is why digital writers often focus on the target
audience--the ideal audience for whom a message is intended. For
instance, a store that sells mostly baby clothes and other related
merchandise like car seats and strollers would primarily target
parents who either have or are soon expecting to have babies.
Though other people might buy baby supplies for different reasons,
the most likely customers would be young parents, and so the
store's web content, social media posts, email blasts, and so on
would be written with that audience in mind. Similarly, though all
kinds of people purchase services from a nail salon, by far the most
common customers are women, and as a nail salon thinks more
about the type of woman that would be most likely to get their
nails done--someone with at least some disposable income, perhaps
someone who is busy at home and/or at work and is looking for
a way to "pamper" herself--it becomes easier to craft persuasive
messages that highlight services and experiences that these women
would want.

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 269
            This type of messaging that focuses on specific segment(s)
of the broader audience is called target marketing because it
focuses on target audiences--those people who are actually
interested in the products and services that a business offers.
Successful businesses might even segment their target audience
in different ways, thereby creating smaller groups of people with
specific qualities in common, which makes it possible to create
different messages that would appeal to those different audiences
(Coursera). For instance, most universities use segmentation in
order to appeal to different types of people who might be interested
in getting a degree. High school seniors are an obvious target, but
increasingly, universities are also targeting high school juniors and
sophomores, students from other universities who might want to
transfer, and older adults looking to go back to school. They might
also pay attention to the type of degree that a student is interested
in so that they can communicate more specifically about relevant
programs, job placement rates, and so on.

            All of these strategies increase the likelihood of engaging
individuals in the target audience. Also, because social media and
internet browsing platforms use algorithms that gather data about
individual browsing histories and online experiences (GCF Global),
those people are more likely to encounter messaging that aligns
with their interests and preferences, which in turn, makes it more
likely that they will take action. For that reason, businesses are
moving away from mass marketing strategies that cast a wide net
across broad audiences. The more that they are able to clearly
define target audiences and craft messages that will appeal to their
needs, interests, and expectations, the more likely it is that their
messages will reach the right people and have a positive effect. In
the remainder of this section, we'll look at specific strategies that
digital writers use to define and engage their target audience(s).

270 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
                                                                                        Market
                                                                                        Segmentatio
                                                                                        n, by Cara
                                                                                        Miller (CC
                                                                                        BY)

Audience Research

Research is the first, and arguably the most important, step in the
process of clearly defining who the audience is and what their needs
are. In fact, most businesses conduct market research as part of
their business startup plan in order to guide product development
and business strategy (Small Business Administration). However, the
most successful businesses are the ones that continuously gather
information about their key stakeholders in order to stay apprised of
important trends, thought patterns, and experiences and then make
appropriate adjustments to the product itself, customer service,
promotional concepts, and communication strategies. In other
words, audience research guides every aspect of an organization's
daily operation. Without it, communication tends to be overly
generalized, failing to capture anyone's attention, including people
in the target audience. Another tendency is to assume that the
audience is relatively monolithic and that they all share similar
qualities and perspectives as we do. This is called the false
consensus effect (Choi and Cha), and writers who fall into this trap

                                                          Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 271
end up alienating important members of the audience and
weakening the brand.

            There are two broad categories of audience
research--primary and secondary--with several different research
methods within each category (USC Annenberg). The best approach
depends largely on the type of information an organization is
looking for as well as the available resources and potential
limitations that either facilitate or discourage particular methods.
What's more, these research strategies aren't mutually exclusive.
Businesses regularly combine multiple research methods in order to
deepen their understanding of the audience.

            Often a good place to start is secondary research, which
builds on the research that other people have done. This might
include case studies that other organizations have conducted that
provide in-depth information about a particular real-world
situation--a specific problem or perhaps a person or a group of
people. Though the specific details of a case study can't be
generalized to apply to everyone, they often provide helpful ideas
and solutions that can be applied to other situations. Another form
of secondary research comes from surveys and studies published
by organizations that specialize in market research. For instance,
the Digital News Report from the Reuters Institute for the Study
of Journalism, the Pew Research Center, Gallup Poll, and
YouGovAmerica are just a few examples of organizations that are
constantly conducting research about different groups of people
and posting their findings. While this type of information is probably
too general for most organizations to apply directly to their target
audience, it does identify interesting ideas and trends that might be
useful to explore using primary research.

            As opposed to secondary research coordinated and
published by others, primary research is conducted firsthand by
an organization and is specific to its own target audience. As you
might imagine, this type of research is the most effective in helping
an organization connect with its constituents and understand the
needs, desires, and challenges that are most relevant to its business

272 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
offerings and communication strategies. The most common
primary research include

   Metrics. One of the quickest ways to gauge audience
      sentiment is through digital metrics that paint a picture of
      users and their online experiences and decisions (Indeed
      Editorial Team). Some of the most common metrics include
      SEO (to determine the most common search terms and
      strategies that people use related to a particular concept), web
      traffic (to measure which pages are the most popular, which
      links people tend to click, how long people stay on a particular
      page, how many people "bounce" off a page that isn't relevant
      to their needs, etc.), traffic from other channels (to see how
      many people came to a website from other means, such as
      social media posts, text messaging, or email messaging), and
      brand awareness (to see how many people like, follow, share,
      comment on, or repost an organization's social media
      messaging). This is the type of analytics that many businesses
      conduct on a daily basis to gauge the effectiveness of their
      messaging and to make appropriate adjustments.

   Surveys. A survey is the most common form of audience
      research because it is a quick and cost-effective way to gather
      information directly from the target audience. Surveys also
      allow organizations to gather information from a larger
      segment of the target audience, which in turn provides more
      accurate results. Another advantage is that surveys can be
      designed with different types of questions--multiple choice,
      true/false, rating scale, matrix, and open-ended that allow
      respondents to use their own words to describe their
      experiences (SurveyMonkey). On the other hand, surveys
      require careful planning to ensure that they meet ethical
      standards, are easy to understand, motivate people to respond,
      and meet core research objectives (Mount Wachusett
      Community College). Another limitation of surveys is that it's
      difficult to gather in-depth information about people's

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 273
      attitudes and experiences. For instance, a survey response
      might indicate that more than half of the respondents aren't
      interested in a particular product or service, but it doesn't
      provide deeper information about why that is or what
      strategies might be more useful to engage their interest.
   Interviews. As opposed to surveys that allow organizations to
      collect a little bit of information (mostly quantitative) about a
      lot of people, interviews provide much more in-depth
      information about people's experiences, thought processes,
      feelings, attitudes, and so on. Of course, it's important to select
      people from the target audience and to carefully craft open-
      ended questions that will lead to deeper insights. Interviews
      are also more time consuming. This includes not only the
      interview itself, but the time it takes to identify interview
      candidates, schedule the interviews, transcribe the interview
      recordings, and analyze the data. However, interviews are
      often worth the trouble because they provide so much rich
      detail about a person and their way of thinking, seeing, and
      valuing (Virginia Polytechnic Institute University Libraries).
      Interviews can transform "interview subjects" from the target
      audience into flesh-and-blood people whom an organization
      can understand and empathize with.
   Focus groups. Finally, focus groups are a great way to quickly
      get information from different types of people in the target
      audience. Like interviews, focus groups are designed around
      open-ended questions that relate directly to an organization's
      research goals, and they provide qualitative information and
      in-depth responses as well as the ability to follow up with
      more questions. However, the goal with a focus group is less
      about gaining rich detail about one person's experience and
      more about understanding thought patterns and behavioral
      trends among a group. It's therefore helpful to group people
      together based on traits that they have in common--gender,
      age, education level, and so on--and to have enough people
      present so that it's possible to distinguish group patterns from

274 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
 individual quirks and anomalies.

Activity 9.3

   Practice crafting survey or interview questions. To do
this, you should first focus on a particular product, issue, or
experience that you want to learn more about. For instance:
Why do people enroll in a particular college or university?
How do people prioritize vacation planning during the
summer? What are some of the most significant financial
challenges that people in your age group experience?

   Identify a similar research question and then identify the
type(s) of people who would provide the most helpful
information. (For instance, if you want to know why people
enroll in a particular college or university, you'd identify
different types of students--from different age levels,
majors, and so on--who are actively enrolled.) Next, craft
several questions (8-10) that would help you explore this
topic with people in your target audience. You'd probably
include a few questions that collect demographic
information about age, gender, and so on as well as more
in-depth questions that relate directly to your research
question.

   To take this activity a step further, you might administer
this survey or interview to see what kind of information you
gather and to troubleshoot any weaknesses or gaps in your
initial set of questions.

                                                    Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 275
Audience Personas

In addition to audience research, businesses often create audience
personas that "flesh" out the perspectives and experiences of
individuals in the target audience (Thorp). While the specific
characteristics of a persona are fictionalized--including the person's
name, job title, family circumstances, hobbies, and so on--their core
qualities are representative of real people in the target audience:
their interests, values, challenges, demographics, and so on, all of
which stems directly from the data collected from audience
research. As noted above, surveys, interviews, and focus groups
are all useful strategies for collecting information about the target
audience, including their hobbies, professional goals, personalities,
priorities, preferences, daily schedules, and pain points. All of this
information is compiled and analyzed to identify audience patterns
and insights, which are used to develop specific personas.

            The purpose of these personas is to get the writer in touch
with the target audience, to humanize their challenges and
perspectives, and to craft messages that reach individual people
on a deeper level. One of the key benefits of identifying the target
audience is that it focuses on solving real problems. The idea isn't to
trick as many people as possible into buying a product or engaging
in an activity. The target audience is the segment of the population
who, based on their interests and challenges, would actually benefit
from a particular product, service, or activity. The personas help
businesses and other organizations empathize with the audience
and communicate effectively about the solutions they offer so that
the people who would benefit most have the opportunity to engage
(Worthy).

            An effective audience persona answers several questions
that help organizations get to know their audience. While there are
different ways to craft a persona, Growth Business identifies six
categories that can be used to identify relevant information about
the target audience:

276 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
1. Who are they? This might include things like a job title and
     other responsibilities as parents, homeowners, children of
     aging parents, and other activities in the community. This
     category can be used to identify a person's daily schedule, their
     primary job responsibilities, and what they prioritize as they
     manage their time and make decisions throughout the day.
     Finally, you should use this category to identify demographic
     information about this person--age, race, socioeconomic
     status, gender, education level, and so on.

2. Where are they? This question can be taken several different
     ways. It might include where a person is geographically
     located. This is especially important for organizations that
     cater to people in specific locations. Understanding where a
     person lives and how a particular organization fits into that
     landscape can be extremely useful. This category could also
     include the online platforms where this person is most likely to
     receive information--social media platforms, websites, news
     sites, and so on. Based on a range of personal characteristics,
     people have different online habits. Identifying the digital
     spaces where someone in the target audience is likely to be is
     crucial to reaching them.

3. What are their goals? What does this person hope to
     accomplish, both personally and professionally? This might
     relate to career milestones, promotions, and activities. It might
     also include goals related to health, travel, relationships,
     parenting, lifestyle, and so on. Identify the primary things that
     motivate this person and how those goals propel their daily
     decisions and activities.

4. Why are they struggling? One key aspect of the target
     audience that most businesses seek to identify are the pain
     points that people in their target audience experience. These
     are the problems, frustrations, and desires that people
     experience that could be remedied by the product, service, or
     activity that a company has to offer (Shewan). These pain
     points are what motivate a person to seek some sort of

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 277
      solution, making it more likely that they will respond positively
      to a message that aligns with their needs. Specific information
      in this category might identify problems related to physical
      pain, financial limitations, inconveniences and time
      constraints, and emotional frustrations. Pain points might also
      relate to obstacles that prevent this person from meeting the
      key personal and professional goals.
5. How can you help? Once you've fleshed out a person's goals
      and motivations as well as the pain points that they
      experience, you have the tools you need to catch their
      attention. The key is to think critically about how a particular
      product, service, or activity can help this person meet their
      goals or alleviate their pain points so that you can craft your
      message with a focus on these benefits.
6. When is the best time to reach this person? Remember the
      term "kairos" from chapter 7? Kairos is the most opportune
      time or circumstance for a message to reach a particular
      audience--when they are more likely to have the time and
      mental focus to pay attention to your message and respond
      positively. This category helps you think about when that
      might be. Based on this person's daily schedule and priorities,
      when are the ideal times to communicate your message to this
      person? What channels might be most appropriate based on
      their preferences and expectations?

            Creating audience personas can certainly be a lot of work.
Often, an organization will create multiple personas to represent
different types of people in their target audience, which are used
to craft different types of messaging. However, given the fact that
most people see somewhere between 4,000 and 10,000 ads each
day (Simpson), the only way to break through the clutter is to
understand where and how to craft messages that resonate with
your target audience.

278 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
                                                                                   Sample User
                                                                                   Persona
                                                                                   Drake
                                                                                   Motors Ltd,
                                                                                   by Daniel
                                                                                   Eizans, on
                                                                                   Flickr (CC
                                                                                   BY-NC-ND
                                                                                   2.0)

Activity 9.4

   Visit a website of a company or organization of your
choosing. It could be a local company that provides a
product or service. It could be a larger chain or global
corporation. Or it could be a nonprofit organization like a
church or a charity. Whatever organization you choose, you
should review the website to get a clear understanding of
what this company does and what types of products,
services, and activities they offer.

   Now consider what type of person might be in the target
audience. What are their key values, priorities, and
interests that would entice them to engage with this
organization?

                                                    Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 279
        Finally, based on your general ideas about the target
     audience, create an audience persona to represent a
     specific person in the target audience. Use the six
     categories identified in the above section to create this
     persona. Be ready to explain how the qualities of the
     persona you created align with the qualities of the
     organization's target audience.

Buyer Journey

One final consideration related to the target audience is called the
buyer journey, which is the mental process that a person goes
through when they decide to engage with an organization and take
action in some way--to buy a product or service or to take part in
an activity (Sellers). Just because a product or service is available
doesn't mean that people will automatically buy it. Especially in the
digital age where people research company websites and customer
reviews, people are more discerning than ever about how they
spend their time and money. The buyer journey prioritizes the
customer's perspective throughout this decision-making process,
strategizing the various touchpoints that will engage their attention
and provide the right information at the right time (Fontanella).

            There are four stages in the buyer journey:

 1. Awareness. In this stage, the buyer becomes aware of a
      challenge or desire that they want to address. This is the "pain
      point" that we discussed above, and it's what prompts an
      individual to find relevant information that will help them
      define and solve the problem. This is obviously a crucial
      moment for an organization to make customers aware of the
      solutions they have to offer--through advertising, social media

280 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
     posts/shares, clear information on their website, customer
     reviews, and referrals from family and friends. The goal is for
     customers to not only know about a product or service but
     also begin to know and trust the organization, which makes it
     more likely that they will move to the next stage of the buyer
     journey.
2. Consideration. In this stage, customers have gathered the
     information they need to define the problem, they are
     committed to solving it in some way, and they are weighing the
     available options. Ideally, an organization's messaging in this
     stage helps distinguish it from competitors, helping potential
     customers understand the benefits of their product, answering
     any questions, and clarifying the next steps a customer should
     take. Once again, clear information on the website with
     prominent CTAs (calls to action) is crucial. Other touchpoints
     might include email or text messaging, blog articles,
     promotional ads, live chat, brochures and promotional videos,
     and so on.
3. Decision. In this stage, a customer has decided on the method
     that they want to use to solve their problem, and they are
     evaluating which company they want to engage with. They
     might be looking for instructional resources, information about
     return policies, customer reviews, or opportunities to sample
     the product.
4. Repeat. Ideally, customers are satisfied with the product or
     service that they receive, and they are motivated to continue
     to engage with a particular company. They might even tell
     others about the positive experience they had and recommend
     the product or service to others. Touchpoints in this stage
     might include thank you messages, promotional ads and
     emails, social media posts that people can "like" and reshare,
     and blog articles that keep people engaged.

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 281
     Activity 9.5

        Think about your own buyer journey with a particular
     organization and outline the different touchpoints that
     moved you from awareness to the point where you have
     become a repeat customer. How did you first learn about
     this company? What was the "pain point" that you hoped
     this organization might help you solve? What strategies did
     this organization use to engage interest and build trust?

Digital Orchestration

Understanding the audience is crucial to effective communication,
but it's really only half of the challenge. Equally important is the
message itself, which must not only reach the target audience but
also catch their attention and compel them to take action. In fact, a
lot of planning goes into an organization's content strategy to craft
messages that strengthen its brand, consistently engage people at
different stages of the buyer journey, and work toward larger
missional and financial goals. This planning is called digital
orchestration, implying that messaging must be coordinated across
multiple channels to catch people's attention and direct their online
path to a specific landing page where they are prompted to take
action--to make a purchase, to provide contact information, to
make a reservation, to give a donation, to create an account, and so
on.

282 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
Websites

Typically, the foundation of an organization's digital orchestration
is its website. Most communication efforts across other channels,
such as social media, email marketing, text messaging, and even
print materials, are focused on driving traffic to the website, where
people can get to know more about the organization and what it
has to offer. This is where people will go first--before they make a
purchase, visit a store, or engage with the sales team in some way.
They want to know what the costs are, how a program or service
works, and what the benefits might be. Most likely they have specific
questions that they expect to be answered, and if they can't quickly
and easily find the information they are looking for, most people will
bounce away from a website--usually within less than 30 seconds
(Sims). However, if they do find what they are looking for and if
they like what they see, they are more likely to stay and browse
around, visiting different pages to see more about the background
of a company, its mission, its community connections, and other
types of products and services it offers--all things that help them
move through the buyer journey as they get to know and trust
the organization and take a step closer toward making a purchase.
In other words, the goals of a website are multifaceted but also
interconnected:

 1. To attract visitors in the target audience. We'll talk more
      about SEO in the next section of the textbook, but for now,
      suffice it to say that the type of content that a website has
      plays a key role in helping that website rank higher in the
      search engine results page (SERP)--the list of websites that
      appear when you search for something in Google. Web
      developers and content writers are very intentional about the
      language that they use, the information that they provide, and
      the way they label key elements of a web page, all of which
      make it more likely that people who are interested in their

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 283
      products and services will be able to find their website.
2. Give relevant information. Once an interested person finds

      the website, they should be able to quickly and easily find the
      information that they are looking for. Most of the strategies
      that go into creating an effective website focus on just this--a
      navigation map that makes sense, clear titles and headings,
      short blocks of text and bullet points that are easy to read,
      footers with contact information and social media links,
      hyperlinks that direct visitors to subpages with additional
      information. It's all about providing a positive user experience
      that helps people find the information they need and that
      makes it easy for them to take the next step--to get a quote,
      volunteer for an activity, make a purchase, visit the store in
      person, and so on.
3. Develop the brand. Of course, the website is also key in
      helping an organization develop its brand--to help people
      know more about its personality and missional goals and to
      help distinguish it from competitors. That's why websites
      aren't just text with chunks of information. They prominently
      feature the organization's logo and tagline; its mission
      statement; photos of the store, the friendly staff, and other
      customers enjoying their experience; any relevant
      certifications or credentials that demonstrate expertise;
      community partnerships and activities that might build
      emotional connections with the audience; an "About Us" page
      that focuses on personal stories; and so on. Even things that
      might seem more minor--the tone of the written content,
      color scheme, layout, and other design features of each
      page--are opportunities to make a positive impression on
      visitors and strengthen the brand.
4. Prompt action. The purpose of a website goes beyond giving
      information. The ultimate goal is to get people to respond in
      some way. While the ultimate goal might be to get potential
      customers to buy a product or service (or perhaps to
      participate in an activity or donate to a cause), often a website

284 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
     will build toward that goal with smaller calls to action
     (CTAs)--to request more information, to follow the
     organization on social media, to sign up for a newsletter, to
     sign up for an account or a free trial. Even blog articles on a
     web page that give focused information related to an
     organization's niche will end with a call to action, prompting
     users to read other related articles or to contact a service
     representative for more information about a particular topic.
     These CTAs are always displayed prominently near the bottom
     of a web page, and they are a helpful way to guide people
     through the customer journey.
5. Collect information. An effective website also collects
     information about visitors and their online experiences,
     providing aggregate data about which links are the most
     popular, how long people stay on specific pages, how many
     new people visited the site in a given period of time, and so on.
     These metrics help marketing teams understand what type of
     information is effective in increasing traffic to the website and
     what types of adjustments need to be made. Many websites
     also collect information about individual users. Often they will
     prompt visitors to provide their contact information--maybe to
     receive the organization's weekly newsletter or to be entered
     into a drawing. Other times, websites use cookies, which are
     "small text files" that are stored on a user's computer so that
     they can be identified the next time they visit the site (Nguyen
     and McNally). These individual data are used to provide more
     targeted information to specific users and to make it possible
     for organizations to reach out to people--through text
     messages or email campaigns--to update them about the latest
     blog post or promotional opportunity.

                                                        Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 285
Blogs

The goal of most organizations' content strategy is to stay "top of
mind" for people in their target audience. Of course, they want
to reach potential customers who haven't yet heard of or engaged
with their organization, but they also want to maintain connections
with existing customers. That's what digital orchestration does. It
continually develops messaging on a number of different platforms
to drive people to the website again and again. Blogs (as well as
other content like white papers and case studies) are a way of
keeping information on a website "fresh" so an organization can
advertise new content and increase traffic. While content on a
website's landing pages might not change very often, posting a
new blog article every week or two with interesting and useful
information will give people a reason to come back to the site.
Ideally, these articles help the audience in some way, guiding
decisions and processes, but they also help an organization develop
credibility, strengthen customer relationships, and drive traffic to
other parts of the website.

            As you probably already know, not all blogs are created
equal. The blogs that are most successful in engaging people's
interest and building a loyal audience have several key things in
common:

   They relate to the person's or organization's niche. To really
      build credibility in a specific area, blogs should all relate to that
      area--demonstrating expert knowledge and providing unique
      information that adds value for readers. For instance, a
      plumber would focus their blog on plumbing-related
      topics--the best strategies to unclog a sink, affordable pipes
      that won't erode, building codes and best practices to install
      plumbing, new product reviews, water heater maintenance.
      The list goes on, and as this person continually adds more blog
      articles and gains readers, the more likely those people are to

286 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
   hire or recommend this person for plumbing jobs. The key is to
   focus on useful content, not on self-promotion, which will
   quickly turn people away.
 They utilize keywords. Blogs are also optimized with meta
   descriptions and keywords so that they will rank higher when
   people search for that topic.
 They include relevant pictures, which make the article more
   visually appealing and can also aid in the reader's
   understanding of the content.
 They have clear and engaging titles. The point of a blog title is
   to pique readers' interest and let them know what they will
   learn from the article.
 They make content manageable. Subheadings, bullets, and
   short paragraphs all go a long way to making the content of a
   blog article manageable. If a reader sees a wall of text, they
   aren't very likely to read or follow along with the article.
   "Chunking" the content into smaller pieces makes it easier to
   process (University of Edinburgh). You can also make content
   manageable with simpler sentence structure and clear
   language that avoids jargon.
 They provide hyperlinks. Linking to other credible sources
   that support your article content builds your own credibility.
   Be sure it's a reputable news source or organization. Or it
   might be a study written by experts in a relevant field.
   Providing hyperlinks to supporting information shows that
   you've done your research, and it allows readers a path to get
   more information. Blogs might also have internal links that lead
   readers to other articles or landing pages on the same website.
 They have clear calls to action. Because blogs are largely
   marketing tools, they typically direct readers to take some sort
   of action at the very end of the article--to read more related
   articles, to contact a sales representative with questions about
   a specific product or service, or to visit the website's home
   page for more information.

                                                       Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 287
Social Media

Social media is a critical part of an organization's digital
orchestration. Like Mark Smith mentions in this Forbes article,
establishing a social media presence helps organizations connect
with people where they already are, allowing them to reach more
people while also strengthening their brand. Smith also mentions
the ways that organizations increasingly use social media for
customer service and as a direct path for users to buy products
and services. Monitoring the various social media channels while
creating new and meaningful content can be incredibly time
consuming, which is why many companies hire a social media
coordinator.

            Ideally, an organization's social media content is planned
out ahead of time. While they might post last-minute pictures of
an event or responses to breaking news stories, most of the social
media content is planned out on a social media calendar, usually put
together a month in advance so that posts are consistent, engaging,
and aligned with other communication efforts related to
promotions events, or blog posts. To keep content fresh and
interesting, a content writer might organize the calendar into
different content buckets or categories, which helps to diversify
content and build a company's brand (Huie). These buckets might
include information about upcoming events and promotions,
educational posts about a topic that is relevant to an organization's
expertise (perhaps providing a teaser for the most recent blog post),
human interest posts that help readers get to know the
organization's staff as well as the activities that relate directly to
the organization's mission, information about specific products and
services, success stories, or customer testimonials and reviews. This
type of content helps readers get to know and trust an organization
in different ways. Also, since most social media posts will link back
to the organization's website, it's a key strategy to increase audience
engagement and ultimately increase sales.

288 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
            A few strategies for successful social media posts include

   Posting to social media platforms where your audience is
      likely to be. It doesn't make sense to post to every social media
      channel. There are way too many, and you'd risk posting to
      channels that won't reach your target audience. For instance,
      some social media platforms are more popular than others
      (Dean). Similarly, people in different demographic populations
      use different platforms (Barnhart). For instance, female users
      are more likely to use Pinterest. Younger users are more likely
      to use Snapchat and TikTok.

   Post information that is appropriate to the platform. For
      instance, LinkedIn is focused on professional networking, so
      posts that are more personal or casual would seem out of
      place. Similarly, Instagram is typically used for high-resolution
      photos, while Pinterest is more about processes and how-to
      guides. Posting the right type of content on the right platform
      will help increase engagement (Accion Opportunity Fund).

   Keep it short. People won't read long posts. Be concise and get
      to the point quickly while also using language that is friendly
      and engaging.

   Use hashtags to extend your reach. Hashtags allow your post
      to show up in related groups and discussions so that people
      outside of your established followers can see and engage with
      your content (O'Brien).

   Post engaging photos and videos that align with the text. This
      will help your post stand out and increase audience
      engagement.

Email Campaigns and Text Messaging

Like social media posts, email campaigns and targeted text
messages are used to advertise promotionals and updated website

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 289
content in hopes of increasing web traffic and sales. However, unlike
social media posts, these messages are restricted to people who
have opted in--often by checking a box (or failing to uncheck a
box) during checkout that requests news and product updates or
by filling out some sort of intake form with your name and contact
information. You might recall that one of the secondary purposes of
a website is to collect information about visitors. That information
is used specifically to build mailing lists, often in a content
management system, so that an organization can easily distribute
updates such as newsletters, announcements, sales campaigns, or
teasers about a new blog article (Kinsta). Once again, the primary
goal of these messages is to engage people who have expressed an
interest in this type of information and to compel them to visit the
website for more information. Unfortunately, many companies use
deceptive tactics to build their mailing lists--enrolling people who
don't wish to receive updates and filling their inboxes with spam.
While this might grab some people's attention, it's more likely to get
sent to a junk folder and to create a negative impression with people
who end up getting annoyed by unwanted emails and texts.

            Just like other forms of digital communication that work
together to meet specific goals, there are some basic rules for text
and email messages. We'll look at more specific genre conventions
for different types of messages in a later chapter, but for now, the
main guidelines include the following:

   Keep it short and to the point.
   Use language that is friendly and engaging.
   Use pictures and other graphics to grab people's attention.
   Use clear titles.
   Provide clear CTAs and relevant hyperlinks to guide the action

      that you want readers to take.

            Digital orchestration is key to helping an organization
create effective messages that strengthen its brand and that meet
specific goals. While the specific content strategy is dependent on

290 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
the mission of an organization and the brand they want to create,
one thing that remains constant across all digital media
communication is a focus on audience and the rhetorical strategies
that will foster connections and compel action. While effective
digital writers must pay attention to specific marketing trends and
learn to use a variety of digital tools, these strategies build from
a fundamental understanding of rhetoric--reaching the right
audience at the right time with a message that compels action.

            Below is an example of digital orchestration by the
Department of Homeland Security. You'll see a screenshot of the
organization's website home page along with screenshots from
Facebook and Instagram, each with posts that provide links back to
the website. Also included is a screenshot of the website's footer,
with icons that connect to all of the organization's various social
media accounts. Users also have the option there at the bottom to
subscribe to the email list, in which they would receive emails about
the latest updates. The emails would also link back to the relevant
pages on the website.

                                                          Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 291
                                                                                        Department
                                                                                        of Homeland
                                                                                        Security
                                                                                        webpage, by
                                                                                        Department
                                                                                        of Homeland
                                                                                        Security
                                                                                        (CC0)

                                                                                        Department
                                                                                        of Homeland
                                                                                        Security
                                                                                        footer, by
                                                                                        Department
                                                                                        of Homeland
                                                                                        Security
                                                                                        (CC0)

292 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
                               Department
                               of Homeland
                               Security
                               Facebook
                               page, by
                               Department
                               of Homeland
                               Security
                               (CC0)

                               Department
                               of Homeland
                               Security
                               Instagram
                               page, by
                               Department
                               of Homeland
                               Security
                               (CC0)

Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 293
     Activity 9.6

        For this activity, you will reverse engineer the content
     strategy of an existing organization. It could be the same
     organization that you selected in Activity 9.5 or a different
     one.

        First, go to the organization's website and consider the
     existing content. How is the navigation of the website
     organized? How does the content on each page help meet
     key objectives? What CTAs exist to guide visitors through
     the site and persuade them to take specific actions?

        Now look to see what other collateral messaging the
     organization uses to draw people to the website. Does it
     have a blog? A section for press releases or white papers?
     Which social media platforms does it use (often identified
     in the footer of the website)? Are you aware of other email
     or text messaging campaigns? Consider how different types
     of messages work together to meet larger communication
     goals.

Going Viral

Many people aspire to have their digital content go viral--to reach
a large audience and gain notoriety from content that attracts more
and more followers. But let's consider the downside for a moment.
Setting out with the ultimate purpose of going viral can actually
weaken your brand because the focus is on popularity and views

294 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
instead of things that are more important--authenticity, core
mission, and deeper connections with the target audience. Lydia
Sweatt for VidIQ says it like this:

      It's hard to satisfy your audience and create viral videos
      simultaneously. One requires you to understand a specific
      group of people's likes, goals, and motivations. The other
      forces you to cast your net wider, so millions pay attention
      to your content.

                  But if you cater to millions, you cater to no one.
      You don't get to connect with a real community, so there's
      no shared interest to build off of. Plus, people can usually
      tell when you're in it for the views. You won't come across
      as genuine, inspiring, or relatable--qualities that put the
      "social" in social media.
   In other words, it's better to focus on your main objectives and
high-quality messaging that will engage people in the target
audience, and then if a social media post does go viral, it will be for
the right reasons, and it will be more likely to further your brand in
a positive way.

            Many organizations (and individuals) are increasingly using
social media instead of traditional marketing and advertising, so
finding strategies to reach a large audience is important. According
to Steve Olenski writing for Forbes, going viral to "boost your brand
presence and attract new customers quickly" isn't effortless, there
are strategies that can increase your chances of success. Not
surprisingly, the strategies listed in his article relate directly to
rhetoric:

   Create quality content that the audience will find engaging and
      meaningful.

   Know your audience, which should inform your content
      strategy and increase your chances of them liking and sharing
      your posts.

   Leverage the existing popularity of influencers and popular
      social media accounts. Because they've already developed a

                                                         Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 295
      following, people are more likely to view content that they
      share or repost.
   Make personal connections with audiences through the stories
      you share. They should be "relatable" and authentic.
   Be concise.
   Engage users with interactive content that allows them to
      participate.

While going viral might in some ways be happenstance--snapping
the right video or getting the right person to repost your
content--effective messaging still boils down to an understanding of
audience and the types of content that will capture their attention.
The next chapter on multimodality provides more ideas on how to
integrate design elements into a message to enhance meaning and
audience engagement.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a content strategist? What role do they
             play in the overall success of an organization? What
             do you think are some of the key considerations of a
             successful content strategy?

        2. How is brand different from mission? Why is it so
             important for businesses to cultivate a clear and
             consistent brand identity?

        3. What does it mean for an individual to cultivate a
             brand? How can this be done in genuine and
             authentic ways--beyond simply trying to create a
             positive image?

        4. What are some ways that a brand is developed?

296 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
      What types of things do you think are most harmful
      to an organization's brand? Can you think of specific
      examples?
 5. Why is an organization's conception of audience
      more complex in the digital realm? What are some
      strategies that organizations can use to help them
      better understand their target audience?
 6. Many novice writers struggle to be reader-
      centered. Why do you think that is? How might this
      lack of awareness affect how the audience responds?
      How can writers cultivate a deeper understanding of
      their audience?
 7. Why is targeted messaging to people in a target
      audience more effective than trying to create
      messages for a mass audience? What is your opinion
      of all of the data collection and user tracking that
      goes into creating targeted messages? Is it a help to
      users, or is it harmful?
 8. What do you think are some of the main advantages
      and disadvantages of primary research as businesses
      seek to understand their audiences? How can
      secondary research be useful?
 9. How is an audience persona similar to the second
      persona, discussed in chapter 5? How are they
      different? How do these characterizations enhance
      the effectiveness of a message?
10. What are different "touchpoints" that an
      organization might use throughout the different
      stages of the buyer journey to engage potential
      customers? How might the buyer journey coincide
      with an organization's branding? Can you give
      examples?

                                                 Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 297
        11. Why is digital orchestration so important for an
             organization and its communication goals? How does
             this type of coordination coincide with an
             organization's conception of audience? What might
             be some of the consequences of poor digital
             orchestration?

     Sources

                  Accion Opportunity Fund. "Choosing the Right
               Social Media Platform for Your Business."
               AOfund.org, n.d. https://aofund.org/resource/
               choosing-right-social-media-platform-your-
               business/.

                  Barnhart, Brent. "Social Media Demographics to
               Inform Your Brand's Strategy in 2022."
               SproutSocial.com, 2 Mar. 2022,
               https://sproutsocial.com/insights/new-social-
               media-demographics/#pinterest-demographics.

                  Chan, Goldie. "10 Golden Rules of Personal
               Branding." Forbes, 8 Nov. 2018,
               https://www.forbes.com/sites/goldiechan/2018/
               11/08/10-golden-rules-personal-
               branding/?sh=4c7b62e758a7.

                  Choi, Incheol, and Oona Cha. "Cross-Cultural
               Examination of the False Consensus Effect."

298 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
Frontiers in Psychology, 11 Dec. 2019,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.02747.

   Cione-Kroeschel, Jennifer. "Everything You Need
to Know About Content Strategist Jobs."
LiberalArtsEDU, July 2022,
https://liberalartsedu.org/content-strategist-jobs/.

   Coursera. "What is a Target Market? And How Do
You Define Yours." Coursera.org, 15 July 2022,
https://www.coursera.org/articles/target-market.

   Dean, Brian. "Social Network Usage & Growth
Statistics: How Many People Use Social Media in
2022?" Backlinko.com, 10 Oct. 2021,
https://backlinko.com/social-media-users#most-
popular-social-media-platforms.

   Digital News Report. Reuters Institute, n.d.,
https://www.digitalnewsreport.org/.

   Dontigney, Eric. "The Disadvantages of a Weak
Brand Name." Chron, n.d.,
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/disadvantages-
weak-brand-name-69640.html.

   Fontanella, Clint. "20 Customer Touchpoints That
Will Optimize Your Customer Journey." Hubspot.com,
Updated 15 June 2021, https://blog.hubspot.com/
service/customer-touchpoints.

   FOX 2 St. Louis. "Budweiser Features a Clydesdale
in Its 2022 Super Bowl Commercial." YouTube, 2 Feb.
2022, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=N_Z_baf5kuc.

   Gallup. https://www.gallup.com/home.aspx.

   GCF Global. "What Is Targeted Advertising?" n.d.,

                                        Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 299
               https://edu.gcfglobal.org/en/thenow/what-is-
               targeted-advertising/1/.

                  Henry, Zo. "Why Budweiser's `Puppy Love' Is the
               All-Time Most Popular Super Bowl Ad." Inc. 8 Dec.
               2022, https://www.inc.com/zoe-henry/three-
               reasons-budweiser-puppy-love-commercial-most-
               popular-in-50-years.html.

                  Huie, Laura. "10 Examples of Content Buckets and
               How to Use Them." Teachable.com, n.d.,
               https://teachable.com/blog/content-
               buckets#:~:text=Content%20buckets%20are%20cat
               egories%20of,promotion%2C%20conversational%2
               C%20and%20entertainment.

                  Indeed Editorial Team. "15 Digital Marketing
               Metrics for Businesses (and How to Use)."
               Indeed.com, Updated 31 Mar. 2022,
               https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-
               development/digital-marketing-metrics.

                  Kinsta. "What Is a Content Management System
               (CMS)?" Kinsta.com, 13 Dec. 2022,
               https://kinsta.com/knowledgebase/content-
               management-system/.

                  Long, Liza, et al. "Engaging in Reader-Centered
               Writing." Write What Matters. Idaho Pressbooks, n.d.,
               https://idaho.pressbooks.pub/write/chapter/
               reader-centered-writing/.

                  McLaughlin, Jerry. "What is a Brand, Anyway?"
               Forbes, 21 Dec. 2011, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
               jerrymclaughlin/2011/12/21/what-is-a-brand-
               anyway/?sh=2c4d46f72a1b.

300 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
   Mount Wachusett Community College. "Resources
for Survey Planning, Design, and Implementation."
MWCC.edu, n.d., https://mwcc.edu/about-mwcc/
offices/research/mwcc-survey-policies-and-
resources/survey-best-practices-and-tips/.

   Nashville Film Institute. "How Much Do
Influencers Make? Everything You Need to Know."
NFI, n.d., https://www.nfi.edu/how-much-do-
influencers-make/.

   Nguyen, Sara J., and Catherine McNally. "What are
Internet Cookies and How Are They Used?" All About
Cookies, 3 Nov. 2022, https://allaboutcookies.org/
what-is-a-cookie.

   Oaks, Susan. "`You' Approach & Constructive
Language." Lumen Communications for Professionals,
n.d., https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-esc-
communicationforprofessionals/chapter/you-
positive-
approaches/#:~:text=An%20audience%2Dcentered
%20tone%20foregrounds,those%20words%20in%2
0a%20sentence.

   O'Brien, Clodagh. "How to Use Hashtags
Effectively on Social Media." Digital Marketing
Institute, 8 Jan. 2022,
https://digitalmarketinginstitute.com/blog/how-
to-use-hashtags-in-social-
media#:~:text=Why%20are%20Hashtags%20Import
ant%3F,views%2C%20likes%2C%20and%20shares.

   Olenski, Steve. "7 Ways to Up Your Chances of
Going Viral on Social Media." Forbes, 6 Feb. 2018,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/steveolenski/2018/

                                        Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 301
               02/06/7-ways-to-up-your-chances-of-going-viral-
               on-social-media/?sh=51adcce017af.

                  Pew Research Center.
               https://www.pewresearch.org/.

                  Sellers, Amanda. "What Is the Buyer's Journey?"
               Hubspot.com, 21 July 2022,
               https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/what-is-the-
               buyers-journey.

                  Shewan, Dan. "Pain Points: A Guide to Finding &
               Solving Your Customers' Problems." WordStream, 15
               Oct. 2022, https://www.wordstream.com/blog/ws/
               2018/02/28/pain-
               points#:~:text=A%20pain%20point%20is%20a,as%2
               0your%20prospective%20customers%20themselves
               .

                  Simpson, Jon. "Finding Brand Success in the
               Digital World." Forbes, 25 Aug. 2017,
               https://www.forbes.com/sites/
               forbesagencycouncil/2017/08/25/finding-brand-
               success-in-the-digital-world/?sh=7377c29a626e.

                  Sims, Lisa. "How Long Do You Have to Get a
               Website Viewers' Attention?" Chron, n.d.,
               https://smallbusiness.chron.com/long-website-
               viewers-attention-72249.html.

                  Sloan, De햚n. "Every Budweiser Clydesdale
               Commercial Since 1996." Horse Nation, 10 Feb. 2022,
               https://www.horsenation.com/2022/02/10/every-
               budweiser-clydesdale-commercials-since-1996/.

                  Small Business Administration. "Market Research
               and Competitive Analysis." SBA.gov, n.d.,

302 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-
business/market-research-competitive-analysis.

   Smith, Mark. "Leveraging Social Media To Capture
Customer Data and Fuel Journey Orchestration."
Forbes, 7 June 2019, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
forbestechcouncil/2019/06/07/leveraging-social-
media-to-capture-customer-data-and-fuel-
journey-orchestration/?sh=2f8d2fe25598.

   SurveyMonkey. "Types of Survey Questions."
SurveyMonkey.com, n.d.,
https://www.surveymonkey.com/mp/survey-
question-types/#matrix.

   Sweatt, Lydia. "Why Chasing Viral YouTube Videos
Is Overrated [for Small Creators]." VidIQ, 16 Nov.
2022, https://vidiq.com/blog/post/chasing-viral-
youtube-videos-overrated/.

   Thorp, Charlotte. "The Importance of Target
Audience Personas and How to Develop Them."
Growth Business, 4 Dec. 2020,
https://growthbusiness.co.uk/the-importance-of-
target-audience-personas-and-how-to-develop-
them-19595/.

   Tormey, Lauren. "Chunking Your Content Makes it
Easier to Process." The University of Edinburgh, 4
Sept. 2020, https://blogs.ed.ac.uk/future-student-
experience/chunking-your-content/.

   University of Edinburgh. "Chunking Your Content
Makes It Easier to Process." University of Edinburgh,
n.d., https://blogs.ed.ac.uk/future-student-
experience/chunking-your-content/.

                                       Rhetoric in the Digital Realm | 303
                  USC Annenberg. "4 Research Methods for
               Audience Analysis." University of Southern Carolina,
               n.d., https://communicationmgmt.usc.edu/blog/
               4-research-methods-for-audience-analysis/.

                  Virginia Polytechnic Institute University Libraries.
               "Research Methods Guide: Interview Research."
               VT.edu, updated 21 Sept. 2018,
               https://guides.lib.vt.edu/researchmethods/
               interviews.

                  Worthy, Beth. "Why is Empathy Important to
               Customer Success?" Forbes, 12 Oct. 2022,
               https://www.forbes.com/sites/
               forbesbusinesscouncil/2022/10/12/why-is-
               empathy-important-to-customer-
               success/?sh=ff106a43e12d.

                  YouGov. https://today.yougov.com/.

304 | Rhetoric in the Digital Realm
10. Multimodality

Did you know that in the early days of the internet, there weren't
online videos or even pictures? Communication was almost entirely
text-based, and even the text wasn't formatted like it is now in a
variety of fonts, colors, sizes, and spacing options (Murphy). Can you
imagine? You'd land on a web page and be confronted with a wall of
text that you had to sift through in order to find the information that
you were looking for. By today's standards, that would be considered
a terrible website, and most people would quickly bounce off the
page due to boredom or frustration.

            Fortunately, the internet evolved rapidly to provide the
capabilities for web pages to be thoughtfully designed, pulling
together a variety of visual and even auditory elements that engage
visitors and help them quickly and easily find the information that
they need. In fact, digital communication is increasingly complex if
you consider the types of "texts" that can be produced using video
editing software, animation tools, live stream capabilities, and web
applications that make it easy to incorporate a variety of media on a
single web page without requiring HTML expertise. Understanding
how to effectively combine these design elements to enhance the
meaning of a message is not simply a nice skill to have; it's crucial
to effective digital communication. In fact, composition courses are
increasingly expanding instruction to go beyond text-based writing
and include multimodal writing strategies that integrate visual and
aural elements as well. This further develops literacy skills across
multiple platforms and allows the writer to think more deeply and
creatively about how to best convey information to the intended
audience.

            This chapter focuses on multimodality and the effects of
layering different modes together in a single message. The term
multimodality literally means more than one "mode" or method to
communicate meaning (University of Illinois Springfield). A message

                                                                              Multimodality | 305
often has words, for instance, and that is one mode. However, a
written message will also include things like font choice, font size,
font color, and other formatting effects, such as bold or italic font.
These are also methods of communicating, and they have a
significant effect on the way that someone reads and interprets the
meaning of the words, which is why it's so important to consider
your communication goals and how different modes--beyond word
choice--can influence your effectiveness. In this chapter, we'll study
the different modes that make up multimodality--linguistic, visual,
gestural, spatial, and aural. We'll also talk about a range of tools
within each mode as well as strategies for making a message
cohesive, engaging, and easy for readers to understand.

     Learning Objectives

          Know what multimodality is and what the different
             modes are.

          Be able to discern various examples of a particular
             mode.

          Understand how multimodality can enhance the
             meaning and persuasiveness of a message.

          Consider the creative possibilities for a given
             message and the ways that modes can be layered in
             countless ways to engage an audience and provide
             subtle nuances.

          Understand the rhetorical nature of multimodality
             and how modes can be used to target specific
             audiences for a particular purpose.

          Learn important rhetorical considerations that will
             guide your choices regarding multimodal messages.

306 | Multimodality
Understanding the Different Modes

The point of multimodality is to combine elements that will enhance
the effectiveness of a message with the intended audience, which
means that you have to be thoughtful about the way that you put
a message together. That's one important reason that this textbook
includes a unit on rhetorical literacy in addition to practical literacy.
Knowing how (the practical aspect of digital writing) is a different,
more surface-level skill than knowing why or to what effect (the
rhetorical aspect). For instance, most people know how to make
text bold, create a bar graph, paste an image into a document, or
even embed a video. Certainly, there are a wide range of platforms
available that require a great deal of training and experimentation
to understand how to do something specific. For instance, learning
how to use iMovie or WordPress or Moovly and understanding the
range of tools available would take some time and probably some
additional instruction. However, just because you can do something
doesn't mean that you should. (This is why we focus so heavily
on critical and rhetorical literacy before diving into the functional
aspect--to provide a framework that will guide your decisions.)
There are hundreds of websites out there that do a terrible job of
combining imagery and text and color--often trying to emphasize
too many things with the end result that nothing stands out. Visitors
are quickly overwhelmed or frustrated because it's difficult to find
the information that they are looking for. On the other hand,
websites and other types of messaging that fail to utilize various
tools, focusing instead on large blocks of text, also fail to engage
readers' attention or compel action. In other words, it's crucial to
think about multimodality from an audience's perspective,
combining elements in such a way as to capture readers' attention,
help them understand key ideas, build a sense of trust and
connectedness, and elicit a response that is consistent with your
underlying communication goals.

            Obviously, these objectives are more easily said than done.

                                                                              Multimodality | 307
As we've already discussed, in a digital era full of clickbait and pop-
up advertising, it can be difficult just to capture a reader's attention,
let alone to facilitate the deeper engagement required to read the
entire message and respond to the call to action. However, being
creative and intentional about how various modes are combined in
a single message will significantly increase your chances of success.
This section discusses all five modes, providing examples of each
one and a deeper discussion of how it might be used effectively.
Of course, each message provides an opportunity to be creative--to
combine elements in different ways. There isn't one "right" way, but
there are certainly some strategies that go against best practices.
We'll talk about those as well.

                                                                                        Multimodalit
                                                                                        y, by Cara
                                                                                        Miller (CC
                                                                                        BY)

Linguistic

Let's start with the most obvious mode of communication--written
308 | Multimodality
and spoken words. In chapter 8, we discussed the symbolic nature
of words. They represent objects as well as more complex ideas,
concepts, and processes. In our daily communication, these words
are our primary tools to express our meaning to others--in
conversation, in text messages, in emails, in letters, in blog posts,
and so on. Within this category, there are several elements that can
either clarify meaning or, if not done well, can create confusion
(Fillmore):

   Word choice. As the Writing Center at the University of North
      Carolina Chapel Hill points out, "Writing is a series of choices."
      Different words carry different connotations. For instance,
      calling someone "stubborn" has a more negative meaning,
      implying that the person is hard-headed and not easy to get
      along with. On the other hand, if you called that person
      "tenacious," suddenly those same qualities have a more positive
      connotation, implying determination and self-confidence.
      Additionally, in some cases, words and phrases can come
      across as vague to your audience so that they don't have the
      same depth of meaning as they might have with more precise
      wording. As a simple example, if you send a friend to the store
      with a shopping list with the word "vegetables" on it, who
      knows what you might get. That word can mean a lot of things.
      But if you write "carrots" or, more specifically, "baby carrots,"
      you're much more likely to get the item you want because the
      wording is much more precise. You'd also be sure in specific
      situations to select vocabulary that matches your audience's
      understanding. Using big words and jargon that others might
      not understand or using vocabulary that is too simplistic or
      immature for a given audience can hinder communication as
      well as the ethos of the speaker. Word choice is significant in
      the way that others interpret meaning.

   Grammar. Grammar dictates the way that words are
      structured within sentences to create complete thoughts. We
      can't put words in just any order, especially when it comes to

                                                                              Multimodality | 309
      more complex ideas and sentences. Following grammatical
      rules allows others to process information more easily,
      focusing more on the content of a message instead of the
      structure. Certainly, there are grammar rules that are more
      common and important than others. Subject-verb agreement
      and complete sentences are examples of grammar rules that
      help another person understand the meaning of a message.
      However, the rule that says you shouldn't end a sentence with
      a preposition isn't usually that important, especially in more
      informal contexts. Audience members will still understand the
      meaning and probably not think twice about the preposition.
      In other words, using effective grammar is contextual,
      depending on the audience, the occasion, and the method of
      communication. While verbal communication might naturally
      flow with starts and stops and incomplete sentences, some
      forms of written communication (especially emails or longer
      articles) tend to stick to the grammar rules. However, more
      informal messaging, such as text messaging or social media
      posts, breaks grammar rules intentionally to engage readers or
      communicate a specific tone. The same can be said of
      punctuation. While correct punctuation can be very effective
      and important in clarifying the meaning of written
      communication, occasionally rules are broken on purpose to
      enhance meaning. Importantly, though digital writing has
      expanded to include hashtags, emojis, and "texty" language,
      correct grammar still matters (Banner).
   Sentence structure. Sentence structure does relate to
      grammar and many of the considerations mentioned above. It's
      separated here because different types of sentences exist that
      are grammatically correct but that come across differently to
      audiences. You might already know that a lot of short, simple
      sentences create messages that seem choppy and disjointed,
      whereas long, complex sentences can be difficult to follow,
      especially when there are several strung together. Once again,
      the "right" sentence structure is somewhat contextual. For

310 | Multimodality
      younger audiences or for topics that are more complex or
      unfamiliar, it might be better to use shorter sentences (or even
      bulleted lists) to make it easier to understand. When you're
      writing a formal paper or communicating casually about
      general topics, it's more common to use a variety of sentence
      structures--both simple and complex--to create fluidity.
   Organization of sentences and paragraphs. Especially for
      longer messages, such as essays, articles, and speeches, the
      organization of information requires careful consideration so
      that one idea builds on the next in a way that is logical and
      easy for audiences to follow. For instance, the reason that
      academic essays have a thesis statement and topic sentences is
      that it makes the essay more cohesive and easier for readers to
      follow. They are given the main point in the thesis, and
      (hopefully) each topic sentence relates directly to that main
      idea. Similarly, blog articles might not have a formal "thesis,"
      but they do still have an introduction and a sentence or two
      that gives the main idea, often called a nut graph (Bethune).
      They also have paragraphs, often grouped together under
      various headings that expand on that one main idea. Even in
      shorter or more informal communication, organization is key.
      An email, for instance, wouldn't start out with a list of bullet
      points. Readers would be confused right away. Instead, it
      would begin with a short introduction clarifying the subject of
      the email and contextualizing the purpose of the bulleted list.

            While the linguistic mode is an important--often the most
important--tool for communicating meaning, it doesn't stand alone.
Other modes of communication are used alongside the linguistic
mode to enhance meaning. What's more, the linguistic mode isn't
always the most important. Consider, for example, the climactic
scene of a movie. Would you understand that scene more fully--and
be more emotionally connected--if someone else described that
scene to you or if you watched it for yourself? Or maybe think about
a class lecture that will last for a full hour. Would you find it easy to

                                                                               Multimodality | 311
pay attention and follow along with the topic if the instructor spoke
in a monotone voice the whole time? Probably not. The tone and
inflection in their voice paired with appropriate pauses, gestures,
facial expressions, and maybe even a few visual aids with text and
images would make that same lecture much more engaging and
easy to understand. In the next few sections, we turn to other
modes that go beyond linguistics to communicate meaning.

Visual

Another important communication method relates to the visual
mode--the things that people see that help them interpret the
meaning of a message. This can refer to simple visual cues as well as
more complex images and videos. As mentioned above, these visual
cues can greatly enhance a message to make it more engaging and
readable. Here are some examples:

   Font. Beyond the meaning of the words in a written message,
      there are always visual elements to be interpreted. For
      instance, there is always a font choice, even if it's a very basic
      font like Arial or Times New Roman, it's a visual element that
      coincides with the linguistic mode, and it might suggest a
      message that is more academic or serious. There are countless
      font choices, and each one carries a certain "personality" that
      may or may not be appropriate for a given message. For
      instance, a script font like Edwardian is more formal and
      sophisticated, and it would be very appropriate for a wedding
      invitation. It wouldn't be as appropriate for an academic essay
      or the banner at a kid's birthday party. Something playful and
      fun like Curlz might be better suited for a birthday party, but it
      would send the wrong message on a funeral bulletin or a
      political ad. In addition to font choice, there are other font
      strategies that you might use to emphasize parts of a message:

312 | Multimodality
   larger font, bold, italics, underlined words. These visual font
   elements demonstrate the importance of certain words or
   ideas when used appropriately. Similarly, larger bold font can
   be used for headings in a blog post or essay to help readers
   follow the larger structure of a text and easily find main ideas.
 Formatting. Another subtle visual cue relates to the formatting
   of a message. The simple act of breaking up a large block of
   text into separate paragraphs--with a space between text
   blocks and/or a tab at the beginning of a new idea--is
   extremely helpful in making a text more readable and easier to
   follow. Formatting also refers to things like line spacing (i.e.,
   leading), alignment, the horizontal spacing between letters
   (i.e., kerning), line breaks, inset text, and hanging indents.
   These are pretty basic formatting cues that we tend to take for
   granted because they seem so obvious, but when they are
   ignored, a message becomes much harder to read. An article
   that is right aligned, for instance, is harder to read and would
   likely frustrate readers. On the other hand, when you are
   intentional in your choices--even formatting choices that go
   against standard conventions--it can grab readers' attention
   and complement a message. An ad with right-aligned text, for
   instance, might be very helpful in balancing the elements on a
   page or in creating a sense of unbalance or tension with the
   audience.
 Color. Not only are colors effective in catching people's
   attention and enhancing the aesthetic of a message, but they
   are often used in symbolic ways to evoke certain emotions or
   moods (Incredible Art Department). Black and white or sepia,
   for instance, are sometimes used to evoke a sense of nostalgia
   or timelessness. Bright, vibrant colors can imply energy and
   positivity. What's more, color can be used strategically to draw
   the audience's attention to a particular text or part of an
   image. In Schindler's List, for instance, the film is in black and
   white except for the red coat that one of the Jewish girls is
   wearing, which forces audiences to pay attention to that one

                                                                            Multimodality | 313
      object and consider the significance. In a similar way, color can
      be used in text-based documents to draw readers' attention to
      headings or titles. Similarly, readers generally know that blue,
      underlined text contains a hyperlink that they can click on for
      more information. Finally, colors are also strategically used by
      organizations as a branding tool. They select a color palette
      that corresponds with their logo, and then they integrate those
      colors into their website and other marketing materials as a
      subtle way to reinforce their image.
   Images. Pictures and other graphics can significantly enhance
      a message. If a friend tells you about a trip that they took to
      the Grand Canyon, you'd probably understand their story
      based on the descriptions that they use, but it would be much
      easier and more effective to show you pictures from the trip so
      that you can see the rocks and canyons for yourself. Similarly,
      instruction manuals often come with pictures of the various
      parts so that you can better visualize how the pieces go
      together. Once more, the use of imagery in a message has
      several purposes. It helps audiences understand a particular
      scene or idea or process, but it also engages their attention
      and can be effective in evoking an emotional response. A good
      example is the SPCA (Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to
      Animals) commercial with Sarah McLachlan. It blends several
      modes together, including sound (the song), text on the screen,
      and imagery to evoke feelings of sympathy and compassion in
      the audience. All of these elements work together to meet that
      purpose, but an important element in that commercial is the
      imagery--the pictures of animals in cages, some of them who
      have clearly been abused--that evokes the strongest reaction.
      This pathos appeal using imagery isn't always about sympathy.
      An amusement park will use photos of people having fun on
      rides. A hotel will feature photos of clean, luxurious rooms and
      swimming pools. The purpose is to create a sense of desire in
      the viewer, who feels compelled to participate.
   Videos and GIFs. Like still photos, videos, GIFs, and animations

314 | Multimodality
      have a variety of purposes. They can be extremely helpful in
      conveying information. How many times have you gone to
      YouTube to find a video that provides a step-by-step
      demonstration of how to do something? Particularly when
      paired with verbal descriptions and instructions, a video
      provides richer details of an event or a process. Consider, for
      instance, football games on television that provide instant
      replays, zooming in on particular areas and using slow motion
      to carefully examine the details of a play. That video, along
      with the commentators' discussion and telestration
      capabilities, helps viewers understand exactly what happened.
      Also like still photos, videos are extremely effective in engaging
      an audience. Consider how popular YouTube and TikTok videos
      are in capturing viewers' attention. They also can be used to
      create emotional connections--perhaps even more so than still
      photos--because they depict detailed scenes and allow viewers
      to hear people's voices and other sounds, providing the sense
      that they are right there in the moment (Slice).
   Charts and graphs. In many instances, a bar graph, pie chart,
      or some sort of illustration can go a long way to clarify an idea
      or process. Particularly when it comes to numerical data, a
      graph or chart with colored lines is much easier for viewers to
      process than verbal or written text filled with a string of
      numbers. The same is true of tables, flow charts, figures, and
      illustrations. Audiences are much more likely to make sense of
      data when they are organized in a visual format like this.

Gestural

Like the name implies, the gestural mode allows meaning to be
interpreted based on the speaker's gestures--body movements and
facial expressions. This is an aspect of communication that is
missing in written text and phone conversations. You don't get to

                                                                              Multimodality | 315
see the physical gestures of the person speaking, which give you
a much clearer sense of that person's attitude toward the subject
as well as their implied meaning. In many instances, the gestures
and facial expressions are crucial in helping you understand the
meaning of a message. Consider, for instance, sign language, in
which the entirety of a person's message is encoded using physical
signs. Similarly, the game of charades is based on our ability to
communicate through body language and signals. In other
instances, physical cues might not embody the entire message, but
they can help you interpret another person's mood and even gauge
how your own message might (or might not) resonate with them.
This mode might include the following:

   Hand gestures. Simple cues like pointing a person in the right
      direction or giving a thumbs-up to let someone know that you
      are OK can go a long way in communicating information.
      Scuba divers, for instance, have a series of hand gestures that
      they use to communicate with each other underwater. In that
      case, the thumbs-up signal means that the person needs to go
      to the surface, whereas a flat hand across the throat signifies
      that the person is out of air--an incredibly important message
      that they would need their partner to understand. Hand
      gestures are also used in sign language to communicate a
      variety of ideas. In fact, just like written language, sign
      language has its own grammar, and it can vary significantly
      from one region to the next (National Institute on Deafness
      and Other Communication Disorders).

   Facial expressions. Another important gestural cue--whether
      in an online conversation, in a video, or in person--is facial
      expression. Sometimes a person's face says it all in terms of
      their attitude or mood. It can communicate information to
      others. A wink, for instance, might signal that a comment
      should be taken as a joke. A raised eyebrow might indicate
      surprise or suspicion. At the same time, it's probably important
      to keep in mind that facial expressions can be--and often

316 | Multimodality
      are--misread (Cimons). Someone's frown might be
      misunderstood for anger or sadness when they are really just
      daydreaming or concentrating. Another thing to consider is
      the effect that facial expressions can have on other people,
      often evoking similar emotions and facial expressions in the
      audience (Dimberg et al.).
   Body language. Body language can also be a form of
      communication. Your posture, stance, proximity to other
      people, and other body movements are all signals to other
      people about your attitude, feelings, and reactions. Think
      about the perspective of a teacher, standing in front of a
      classroom full of students. Maybe there are several students
      right up front, taking notes, raising their hands with questions,
      nodding along to the lesson. These are clear signals about the
      students' attitudes toward the teacher and the class. So too are
      the signals of students who are sitting at the very back of the
      classroom, arms folded across their chests, eyes fixed on their
      phones. This distinction might not seem important, but
      consider how much easier it is to communicate openly with
      someone who seems to be receptive to your message and has a
      positive attitude toward you versus someone who doesn't. In
      many instances, your body language will be the first thing that
      makes an impression on other people, and it can go a long way
      to build your image in a positive way--or not.

Spatial

The fourth mode is spatial, related to the spacing and overall layout
of a document and the connections this implies to readers. Even the
most basic black text on a white document has an arrangement that
influences the order in which readers take in information, and as
other elements are placed on the page, that placement determines

                                                                               Multimodality | 317
the way that readers understand the message. The primary
elements included in the spatial mode are the following:

   Arrangement. In some instances, the arrangement of elements
      on a page might be obvious. The title of a document should go
      at the top. Different sections or chapters in a longer document
      are usually separated by space to show the separation. In other
      instances, it might not be so clear, especially as more elements
      are added. When pictures or charts accompany the text, for
      instance, what's the most appropriate placement so that the
      visual elements effectively complement the text? What about a
      large web page that includes several different sections of text,
      photos, banner graphics, social media icons, and maybe even a
      video or two? The choices that you make to arrange these
      items on the page can aid in the viewers' ability to easily find
      and process information, or it can make it much more difficult.
      Of course, there are several design options to choose from
      (Babich), depending on the purpose of the website and the
      types of elements that you have to work with. Further, many
      websites are "responsive," meaning that the layout shifts for
      mobile users so that the information is still easy to read on a
      smaller screen.

   Proximity. In addition to the arrangements of objects and
      design elements on a page, proximity also influences the way
      that readers interpret a message. It's probably obvious that
      elements that go together should be close to each other. A
      caption that goes along with a photo, for instance, is usually
      directly underneath that photo. Similarly, groups of similar
      things tend to be grouped together. For example, items in a
      list, perhaps across the top of a website as a navigation menu
      or in bullets within the text, will likely be close together to
      signify that they go together. In contrast, additional white
      space can be used to separate items that don't go together, to
      signify a transition or distinction.

   Contrast. Using contrasting elements can be an extremely

318 | Multimodality
      effective way of drawing a viewer's attention to a particular
      focal point, perhaps through opposing colors, sizes, shapes,
      textures, or even white space. While this might seem like a
      simple task, knowing how and when to create contrast can be
      tricky. The main idea is to use contrast effectively to set
      elements apart or to highlight key takeaways while still
      maintaining an overall aesthetic that is pleasing to the eye and
      consistent (see repetition below).
   Repetition. Repetition refers to the use of the same element
      over and over in a composition. For instance, most designs
      have a specific color palette, often using two to five colors that
      work well together and can be used in certain instances to
      create contrast. However, the composition sticks to these basic
      colors to create a sense of uniformity. If too many colors are
      used, then it creates a sense of chaos, and nothing is
      emphasized effectively. The same principle applies to other
      elements like shapes and textures. Importantly, this type of
      repetition is often seen across a family of publications by the
      same organization, which helps to establish branding and
      familiarity with the audience.

Aural

The final mode is aural, referring to the many different sounds
that can bring meaning to a message. We'll talk in the next section
about the fact that all messages are multimodal, including verbal
messages. There are the actual words (linguistic) and then a range
of other aural cues that allow the audience to interpret the meaning
of the words more fully:

   Volume. For one thing, the volume with which someone speaks
      can significantly impact the way the message is interpreted. A
      louder volume implies a sense of urgency and importance,

                                                                              Multimodality | 319
      suggesting that the words demand your immediate attention.
      Similarly, if someone is yelling, it's obvious that they are
      excited in some way, perhaps angry, scared, or happy. On the
      other hand, someone speaking in a low whisper might be
      sharing something personal or secretive, which might also
      influence the way that you react to the information.
   Tone. A person's tone is also important. Most of us are familiar
      with sarcasm, in which a person really means the opposite of
      what they say. If someone says, "Well, that's fantastic" in a
      sarcastic tone, you know that they aren't really very happy. In
      the same way, a person's tone of voice can tell you a lot about
      their attitude toward the information--if they are joking,
      excited, somber, or serious.
   Pitch. As the pitch of our voice goes up and down, certain
      ideas within our sentences are emphasized in a way that gives
      meaning to our words. According to the University of
      Minnesota Libraries Publishing, "Pitch refers to how high or
      low a speaker's voice is....Each person has the capability to
      intentionally change their pitch across a range large enough to
      engage an audience." The chapter goes on to discuss the ways
      pitch can be used to emphasize certain ideas, communicate
      emotion, or signal to the audience that a transition is coming.
   Rhythm. In poetry and in music, rhythm is the speed at which
      a speaker moves through the text, and as you probably know, it
      can be extremely effective in engaging an audience, who find
      themselves moving to the beat. It's the pattern of stressed and
      unstressed syllables that creates rhythm. A faster rhythm is
      more energetic and tends to be happier, whereas a slower
      rhythm is often more sad, soothing, or sentimental. Not only
      can rhythm evoke an emotional response in an audience, but it
      can also be used to emphasize certain words and ideas,
      especially when the pattern is disrupted.
   Music. Have you noticed that the climactic scene of most
      movies has a song playing in the background? It might be an
      upbeat song as the good guy triumphs over evil, or it might be

320 | Multimodality
   a slower, crescendoing song that matches the intensity of
   feeling as two lovers reunite. Similarly, the SPCA commercial
   with Sarah McLachlan is so emotionally moving partly because
   of the song "Angel" that plays while pictures of dogs and cats
   are displayed, which reinforces the feelings of sadness a viewer
   feels and further compels them to take action. You probably
   already know that music can have a significant effect on a
   person's mood and emotional reactions (Heshmat). Upbeat
   music can energize and spark a more positive mood while a
   slower song can spark feelings of sadness or nostalgia. That's
   why pairing an appropriate song to fit an occasion or the
   underlying purpose of a message can have such a powerful
   effect.
 Sound effects. Many digital tools used for editing videos or
   even putting together a slideshow come with standard sound
   effects and allow you to upload others that you created on
   your own or purchased somewhere else. While some sound
   effects might be a bit hokey (think of the "bing," "bang," "pow,"
   "boing" that a lot of kids' cartoons include to draw a laugh),
   they can also be used in other ways to intensify a scene and
   sway the emotional reaction of the audience. A simple example
   are the laugh tracks that used to accompany popular sitcoms,
   signaling to viewers that a scene was meant to be funny and
   compelling them to join in. Movies and plays also use sound
   effects--train whistles, footsteps, door slams, gunshots--to add
   clarity to a scene and further engage the audience into the
   plot.
 Pauses. Sometimes just as powerful as the words and sound
   effects are the pauses in dialogue and other sounds. Consider
   the long silence that might follow the sound of a gunshot and
   all of the thoughts and emotions that might occur during that
   pause. Strategic pauses can also be used during a conversation
   or a speech to engage attention. A pause automatically builds
   suspense as the audience waits to see what the speaker might
   say or do next.

                                                                            Multimodality | 321
     Activity 10.1

        Find an example of an online video, ad, or website that
     utilizes a number of modes. Review the content and come
     up with a list of all of the multimodal elements that are
     used. This includes not just the mode (e.g., visual) but also
     the specific tool (e.g., photo or color).

        After you've created your list, consider how these
     elements work together in this message. How do the
     multimodal tools help engage the audience or clarify the
     meaning of the message? What kinds of feelings or
     emotions might they invoke that work toward a particular
     purpose?

        Keep in mind that not all messages are effective. It might
     be that the message you selected is ineffective in some way,
     maybe because some of the tools seem to contradict the
     larger meaning of the text or because there are too many
     elements vying for the audience's attention. Perhaps there
     aren't enough modes utilized to the fullest potential, and
     the message comes across as boring or vague. Consider
     how multimodal tools might have been used more
     effectively.

The Power of Multimodality

All messaging is inherently multimodal, requiring audiences to pay
attention to multiple features in order to gain a clear understanding

322 | Multimodality
of the speaker's intention. For example, text-based messages
include not only the linguistic mode but also visual elements related
to font, color, and formatting. Similarly, verbal messages (over the
phone, for instance) also include the linguistic mode along with
aural elements, such as volume, pitch, tone, and meaningful pauses.
Even a simple wave from a friend accompanies other visual elements
like the speed of the gesture and the context of their surroundings.
In other words, the categories provided above can be a helpful
framework, but it's also a bit deceiving, as a single message will
automatically span across different modes, bringing with it a variety
of subtle nuances. It's also important to point out that multimodality
isn't limited to the digital realm, which is a common misconception.
Hopefully it's clear by now that in-person conversations as well as
printed materials are also multimodal.

            Given the importance of multimodal communication, it's no
wonder that most people prefer to have important conversations in
person. With a range of linguistic, audiovisual, and gestural cues,
it becomes easier and quicker for an audience to interpret the
meaning of a message more fully because there are more cues
present (Drijvers and Holler). It's also easier for a conversation to
flow more naturally because visual and gestural cues help signal
when one person's turn is over and another person's begins.
Certainly, there are digital tools that make it possible to have
synchronous conversations with other people using a range of
audiovisual cues. Zoom and Google Meet, for instance, simulate
face-to-face conversions so that we get a better sense of the
communicator's meaning through facial expressions and gestures.
Screen sharing features make it possible to show pictures, text, and
videos while on a video call, which further expands the range of
modes available. However, there are still some significant limitations
to video conferencing, including the fact that participants aren't in
a shared space, they can't fully see each other, and there are often
problems with sound or video quality that can significantly interfere
with the conversation (Karl et al.). The minor lag that occurs in video
conferencing makes it more difficult to read the other person's

                                                                              Multimodality | 323
signals, which disrupts the normal flow of a conversation. What's
more, following the COVID-19 pandemic, many people complained
of Zoom fatigue, related to the fact that their facial expressions
seemed to be under constant focus, and they have to rely more
on exaggerated gestures to get their meaning across (Drijvers and
Holler).

            However, while all messages automatically rely on a range
of modes to create meaning, the benefit of understanding
multimodality is that you can be intentional about the ways that you
combine modes to engage audiences, clarify meaning, and compel
action. This is particularly true given the range of digital tools that
allow you to quickly and easily edit a video, create voice overs, and
add music or snippets of text to a video or animation. More than
ever before, professional tools are available to the masses to plan,
create, edit, and disseminate multimodal messages, but what sets
apart an effective message from one that gets "swiped" could be the
way that multimodal elements are layered to create one coherent
message that works toward a clear purpose.

Multimodality as a Rhetorical Tool

The best way to think about multimodality is with a focus on
rhetoric--the intended audience for a particular message and the
underlying purpose(s) of that message. What is it that you hope an
audience will do or think as a result of your message? What tools
are available in a given situation--whether in person or online--and
which ones would be most effective in enhancing your message or
might be a distraction or deterrence? As you've probably already
figured out, combining modes into a single, coherent message
requires quite a bit of strategy, focusing on the audience's
expectations and predicting their questions and reactions. Layering
as many modes on top of one another as possible isn't a strategy.
It would overwhelm an audience and make it difficult for them to

324 | Multimodality
attend to all of the different signals available. Pflaeging and Stckl
call this "multimodal rhetoric," defined as "functions and structures
realized by and constructed in the strategic conjunction of several
semiotic modes, which ultimately carry rhetorical action."

            While there aren't any set rules on how to combine
multimodal elements to create an effective message, there are some
important rhetorical considerations:

   Who is the audience? What type of modes will be most
      effective in engaging their attention and helping them
      understand the message? It's also important to consider what
      particular element will be most effective. For instance, you
      might decide that a photo is appropriate for this audience, but
      not just any photo will engage their interest and persuade
      them to act. Considering the target audience and your
      message, you'd have to determine what type of picture will
      resonate with their experiences, values, and perspectives.

   What are the genre conventions? Each genre has its own set
      of standards that align with the audience's expectations. A
      TikTok viewer, for instance, is expecting a short video while
      someone on Instagram is likely to expect vivid and interesting
      photos.

   What modes align most with your goals? For more complex
      content that might be harder for an audience to understand,
      pairing spoken words with bulleted text, charts, and other
      images can help them understand the information. If the main
      goal is persuasion, think about the types of content--whether
      it's a well-developed argument or a photo or a bar graph (or
      maybe all three)--that will be the most compelling.

   How can you leverage various modes to invoke different
      appeals? Do you remember the different rhetorical appeals of
      logos, ethos, and pathos? As you integrate different types of
      content using various modes, you can strengthen the
      persuasive effect of your message in powerful ways. Depending
      on the content, the genre, and the audience, one type of appeal

                                                                              Multimodality | 325
      might be more appropriate than another. What's more,
      different modes work better with certain types of appeals. For
      instance, written and spoken words often work well with logos
      appeals while images and music are often more effective as
      pathos appeals.
   Which modes are readily available on the platform you are
      using? Sometimes the affordances and constraints of a
      particular application will dictate some of the choices you will
      make.
   What type of resources do you have available? Do you have
      high-resolution photos or quality footage that would be
      effective? Do you have the means to obtain or create these
      media? Obviously, you can only work with what you have, and
      it's always better to use high-quality, original materials than
      stock photos or something low-quality.

            The main idea is to think creatively and about how different
modes might be combined to convey a message, to persuade your
target audience, and to compel action. Truly effective digital
communication utilizes a variety of communication tools, requiring
a deeper understanding of the rhetorical situation and the most
appropriate means of persuasion.

     Activity 10.2

        For each of the following scenarios, consider the best
     method of communication (in-person, text, email, social
     media post, etc.) and why. What modes are available to you
     in a given method that would allow you to communicate
     more clearly and effectively?

326 | Multimodality
     You missed an important assignment in one of your
        classes, and you want to talk to the professor about
        how you can make up for that assignment.

     You want to invite some of your friends to your
        birthday party, which is at a location they might not
        be familiar with.

     You need more information about how to put
        together the new entertainment center you ordered.

     You just got back from an amazing vacation in the
        Bahamas, and you want to encourage others to do
        something similar.

Discussion Questions

    1. What is multimodality, and why is it an important
        consideration when it comes to in-person or virtual
        communication?

   2. What are the five modes of communication? How
        are these categories limited in terms of the
        multimodal nature of communication? Can you give
        examples?

   3. How can the different modes be used to build an
        emotional connection with the audience? Give at
        least one example.

   4. For each mode, give at least one example tool (or
        strategy). Explain how that specific tool can be used
        to convey meaning. How might it be paired with

                                                                         Multimodality | 327
             other tools--either within that same mode or in
             another mode--to reinforce a message?
        5. What is multimodal rhetoric? What are some
             rhetorical considerations that would help you make
             effective choices when crafting a message?
        6. Why is the audience so important when you're
             considering your choices for a multimodal text? What
             types of things might you consider?
         7. How can the various modes be used to develop
             rhetorical appeals? Give some examples from the
             chapter as well as some of your own.
        8. In what ways has digital communication enhanced
             the opportunity to create multimodal text?
        9. Do you think digital communication can in some
             circumstances be more effective than in-person
             communication? Why or why not? In what ways is in-
             person communication limited in terms of the modes
             that are available? How is digital communication
             limited?
       10. Why do you think people tend to conflate
             multimodality with digital communication?

     Sources

                  Babich, Nick. "Top Website Layouts That Never
               Grow Old." Adobe, 8 Nov. 2019,
               https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/principles/web-

328 | Multimodality
design/11-website-layouts-that-made-content-
shine-in-2019/.

   Banner, Matt. "Why Grammar Still Matters in
Today's Digital Age." Grammarly blog, 14 Jan. 2021,
https://www.grammarly.com/blog/why-grammar-
still-matters-in-todays-
digital-age/?gclid=CjwKCAiAwomeBhBWEiwAM43YI
L9zn6M3VPVDwUw1d2DnOGNeX5P8ozwRfi_PZ9zi9
hseALC263DuIBoCdsgQAvD_BwE&gclsrc=aw.ds.

   Bethune, John. "Improve Your Blog Posts with Nut
Graphs." B2BMemes, 2 Dec. 2010,
https://www.b2bmemes.com/2010/12/02/
improve-your-blog-posts-with-nut-graphs/.

   Cimons, Marlene. "Facial Expressions May Be an
Unreliable Way to Read Emotions." The Washington
Post, 16 Dec. 2022,
https://www.washingtonpost.com/wellness/2022/
12/16/facial-expressions-emotions/.

   Dimberg, Ulf, et al. "Unconscious Facial Reactions
to Emotional Facial Expressions." Psychological
Science, vol. 11, no. 1,6 May 2016, https://doi.org/
10.1111/1467-9280.00221.

   Drijvers, Linda, and Judith Holler. "The Multimodal
Facilitation Effect in Human Communication."
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22 Sept. 2022,
https://link.springer.com/article/10.3758/
s13423-022-02178-x.

   Fillmore, Ann, and Johnny Cook. "Multimodal
Communication." In Critical Reading, Critical
Writing: A Handbook to Understanding College

                                                            Multimodality | 329
               Composition, Edited by English Faculty at Howard
               Community College, n.d., Pressbooks.
               https://pressbooks.howardcc.edu/
               criticalreadingcriticalwriting/chapter/232/.

                  Heshmat, Shahram. "How Listening to Music
               Affects Your Mood." Psychology Today, 8 Nov. 2022,
               https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/blog/
               science-choice/202211/how-listening-music-
               affects-your-mood.

                  Incredible Art Department. "Color Symbolism and
               Culture." n.d., https://www.incredibleart.org/
               lessons/middle/color2.htm.

                  Karl, Katherine A., et al. "Virtual Work Meetings
               During COVID-19 Pandemic: The Good, Bad, and
               Ugly." Small Group Res., vol. 53, no. 3, 343-365, June
               2022, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
               PMC8165498/.

                  Murphy, Mike. "From Dial-Up to 5G: A Complete
               Guide to Logging onto the Internet." Quartz, 29 Oct.
               2019, https://qz.com/1705375/a-complete-guide-
               to-the-evolution-of-the-internet.

                  National Institute on Deafness and Other
               Communication Disorders. "American Sign
               Language." NIDCD, 29 Oct. 2021,
               https://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/american-sign-
               language#:~:text=American%20Sign%20Language%
               20(ASL)%20is,grammar%20that%20differs%20from
               %20English.

                  Pflaeging, Jana, and Hartmut Stckl. "The Rhetoric
               of Multimodal Communication." Visual

330 | Multimodality
Communication, vol. 20, no. 3, 319-326, 19 June 2021,
https://doi.org/10.1177/14703572211010200.

   Ramachandran, Vignesh. "Standford Researchers
Identify Four Causes of `Zoom Fatigue' and Their
Simple Fixes." Stanford News, 23 Feb. 2021,
https://news.stanford.edu/2021/02/23/four-
causes-zoom-fatigue-solutions/.

   "Sarah McLachlan SPCA Commercial." YouTube,
n.d., https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=IO9d2PpP7tQ.

   Slice. "This is Why Video is the Most Engaging
Type of Content." Medium, 25 Aug. 2017,
https://medium.com/@slicevideo/this-is-why-
video-is-the-most-engaging-type-of-content-
e5ca46d5cef1.

   University of Minnesota Libraries Publishing.
Communication in the Real World: An Introduction to
Communication Studies. Lumen Learning, 2016,
https://courses.lumenlearning.com/suny-
realworldcomm/chapter/10-3-vocal-delivery/.

   University of Illinois Springfield. "What is
Multimodal?" n.d., https://www.uis.edu/learning-
hub/writing-resources/handouts/learning-hub/
what-is-multimodal.

   University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. "Word
Choice." University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
n.d., https://writingcenter.unc.edu/tips-and-tools/
word-choice/.

                                                             Multimodality | 331
11. Rhetoric and the
Ideological Turn

Think about your favorite story. It might be a movie or a novel or
even a memoir. Now think about the main things that you like about
this story. It might be the plot twists or the underlying premise
of the story that engages your imagination. Most likely, if it's your
favorite story, you have some sort of connection with the
protagonist--the main character of the story, whose internal
thoughts and feelings are revealed as the plot unfolds and with
whom the audience is invited to identify. When that main character
experiences loss or when obstacles emerge that prevent our "hero"
from reaching their goals, we feel their pain and anger. As the
climactic moment approaches, we feel anxiety as we hope for the
best but worry about defeat. And as is the case for many narratives,
we rejoice with the main character at the end when, against all odds,
they experience success.

            One of the most important, yet difficult, aspects of a good
story is characterization, referring to the level to which a
character's personality, motivations, feelings, and perspectives are
revealed. A well-developed character creates an emotional
connection with the reader, who begins to empathize with the
character's struggle and invests time and emotional energy into
their story. Even the villain of an engaging story can be developed
in such a way that the audience begins to understand and even
sympathize with their situation. They become more than the greed,
arrogance, or cruelty that might have characterized them at first.
On the other hand, a flat character can ruin a story because they
don't come across as genuine. Instead of fleshing out that
character's complex experiences, emotions, and motives, the story
focuses on a singular aspect of the character, leaving the audience

332 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
with very little understanding or concern about what happens to
them.

            Unfortunately, the digital realm has a terrible way of
flattening people so that all we focus on is a singular aspect of
their identity, whether it's their political affiliation or their stance on
a particular issue. Alongside political tensions that have increased
significantly since the pandemic, ranging from mask mandates to
vaccines to race relations to sexual identity, some people are very
quick to attack anyone who opposes their viewpoint, condemning
them for being selfish, greedy, racist, overly sensitive, or
intentionally divisive (Jrgensen et al.). This is especially true in
online spaces where tensions quickly escalate with a series of posts
designed to cut the other side down. Seldom do people listen to
try to understand the full complexity of another person's
perspective--the experiences, emotions, and motives that inform
their position on a topic. Rarely do people consider the larger
ideologies, assumptions, and social contexts that inform their own
position. We tend to assume that we are in the "right," and that
the other person, through their own ignorance and immorality, is
clearly wrong.

            Many people argue that our democracy has lost its ability
to discuss important issues in a rational and productive way. Henry
Giroux argues that as digital media emerged with an emphasis on
target marketing, individualism, and algorithms that insulate users
into an echo chamber of similar views, we've lost our focus on
public values and relationships necessary for a healthy democracy.
He says, "Instead of public spheres that promote dialogue, debate,
and arguments with supporting evidence, we have entertainment
spheres that infantilize almost everything they touch, while offering
opinions that utterly disregard reason, truth, and civility" (10).
Similarly, James Klumpp and Thomas Hollihan point to our "current
moment" as an especially critical time to refocus on "democratic
values" and the intellectual practice of analyzing public discourse to
understand the rhetorical strategies and ideologies that influence
our moral development and our behaviors. In fact, more than 30

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 333
years ago (1989), Klumpp and Hollihan wrote their landmark essay
"Rhetorical Criticism as Moral Action," arguing that rhetorical critics
must look beyond the persuasiveness of a message; they must also
interrogate the moral implications--the effect that a message has
on the experiences and opportunities of real people. In their 2020
follow-up to that article titled "Rhetorical Criticism and Moral
Action Revisited," Hollihan and Klumpp reiterate the importance
of their original argument in the context of increasing political
turmoil:

      The current moment prompts us to pause to evaluate how
      well academic critics are honoring democratic values and
      promoting a democratic culture. Democratic values,
      particularly comity and broad participation, have been
      under assault for the past several years in the United States
      and many of the same threats are undermining
      democracies around the world. Among the central values
      requiring attention and defense in our democracy are, in
      fact, values which shape our rhetorical interactions with
      our fellow citizens. The moral and rhetorical imperatives
      we pointed to 30 years ago have merged in ways beyond a
      theory of criticism; today's moral crisis fully implicates the
      rhetorical. (334)

            This chapter endeavors to make explicit connections
between public discourse, rhetorical strategies of persuasion, and
ideologies that demonstrate our values and inform our actions. It
emphasizes both critical and rhetorical literacy. In fact, language
and ideology are deeply intertwined, constantly revealing our
values, our beliefs about what is "true," and the way that we define
ourselves in relation to other people (Berlin). Understanding this
connection and doing the intellectual work of analyzing the
rhetorical strategies and ideologies embedded in public discourse
equips us to be more discerning about the information that we like,
share, repost, hyperlink, and ultimately accept as fact. It puts us
on the defensive against misinformation and disinformation as well
as the underlying motives to manipulate our emotions and destroy

334 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
our sense of reality. It allows us to examine our own messaging and
the ideologies that are embedded therein. And it creates a habit
of careful analysis and reasoned engagement that helps us move
toward "vibrant public spheres and a political culture that invites
deliberation, discussion, debate, and dissent" (Hollihan and Klumpp,
"Rhetorical Criticism and Moral Action Revisited" 335).

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the connection between rhetoric and
             ideology.

          Learn how to analyze rhetorical discourse for the
             ideologies embedded within.

          Be able to identify rhetorical strategies that are
             used to create emotional reactions in an audience
             and create division against an opposition.

          Learn about Burke's theory of identification and
             how it can be both a positive communication tool as
             well as a tactic of manipulation.

          Consider the way that ideology in language links to
             motives and compels people to behave in particular
             ways.

          Understand the shifts in rhetorical analysis as a
             result of the Ideological Turn and how these shifts are
             still relevant today.

          Consider the effect of digital media on people's
             ideologies and their ways of engaging with
             controversial issues.

          Be able to identify the logic of an augment based on
             its premises.

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 335
          Understand the principle of a logical fallacy and be
             able to identify weak and illogical arguments.

          Consider how Burke's theory of the "comic
             corrective" can be applied to your own way of framing
             specific issues.

Rhetoric and Ideology

In order to make the connections between rhetoric and ideology,
some review might be in order. Remember that rhetoric is about
effective communication, and often our communication goals
center on persuasion--compelling the audience to react in a certain
way. It's about prompting specific thoughts and behaviors. However,
not all persuasion is explicit. There isn't always a call to action at the
end of a message. Not all persuasion centers around a central claim
in which the speaker outlines clear and specific reasons. When we
think about the ways that ideologies are embedded in our language,
the focus tends to be on the subtle nuances and the beliefs that
are implied. The Merriam-Webster Dictionary defines ideology as "a
manner or the content of thinking characteristic of an individual,
group, or culture." These are the foundational beliefs we have about
the world--what we hold to be "true" or "right" or "normal." These
beliefs are implied in our communication with others, and often
we assume that others do or should share the same beliefs. We
tacitly, perhaps even unconsciously, impel the audience to adopt
these same beliefs.

            For instance, a couple that has been dating for a while will
often have different family members and friends ask, "When are you
two getting married?" It's a simple question that isn't an explicit

336 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
argument, but it does imply that the couple should be thinking
about getting married. There are also some assumptions embedded
in this question--that marriage is a good thing, that finding a partner
and getting married should be a priority. Culturally, there are also
a lot of assumptions built into what "marriage" means--that it's
typically between man and a woman, that most married couples
have children, that married couples eventually buy a home and
conform to established gender roles. Of course, not all romantic
relationships are this way, particularly in the last few decades as
ideologies have begun to shift, but couples who resist the more
conventional system of marriage are still met with questions and
well-meaning concern because their relationship doesn't conform
to what seems "normal."

            You can probably see how different ideologies can create
discord. The current political landscape, with so much tension and
debate surrounding numerous issues, has a lot of people worn out.
They're tired of rehashing the same arguments about the same
issues and confronting the emotional tensions that coincide with
such conversations. They might say things like "I don't want to
discuss anything political" or "Why does everything have to be so
political?" These statements signal their fatigue over the underlying
political agendas (and ideologies) and our tendency to reduce
complex problems to a matter of Republican versus Democrat.
However, on a much deeper level, everything is political, not in the
sense of right versus left but in the sense of demonstrating our
beliefs, values, interests, and identities, which connect us to certain
groups of people. In his book Politics for Social Workers, Stephen
Pimpare devotes an entire chapter to the reality that "everything is
political." He says,

      Politics is the way that we make people aware of problems,
      introduce ideas into the public sphere, create frameworks
      for thinking about issues and their relative importance,
      structure debates about policy, frame defenses of justice
      and fairness and equity, and build consensus for change.
      (49)

                                                   Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 337
   Pimpare goes on to explain that politics has a fundamental effect
on the quality of our lives and our communities and that even
when we do retreat from political debate, there are still political
implications of reinforcing the status quo.

            Similarly, our language, even when we veer away from hot-
button political topics, is inherently connected with our
ideology--our conception of how the world is and how it should be.
At the height of the "Ideological Turn" in rhetoric, when scholars like
Philip Wander and James Berlin argued that everything is political
and there is no way to avoid ideology even in the most "neutral"
spaces like a classroom, Berlin argued that our language is never
value-free: "Conceived from the perspective of rhetoric, ideology
provides the language to define the subject (the self), other subjects,
the material world, and the relation of all of these to each other.
Ideology is thus inscribed in language practices, entering all
features of our experience" (Berlin 479). In other words, all of our
communication points toward our values, beliefs, relationships, and
identities--what we hold to be "true," "right," and "normal." If we
are considering the ideologies embedded in a message, we'd look
beyond the immediate benefits to the speaker, also considering
what types of ideas and what types of people are valued.

            Let's look at another example. Within the last several years,
especially following the COVID-19 pandemic, the topic of mental
health has become more prominent and more normalized as people
are increasingly aware of the importance of this issue. Whereas the
idea of seeing a therapist used to be highly stigmatized, signaling
that someone was "crazy" or somehow inadequate, it has become
much more commonplace for people to openly discuss their mental
health needs and personal strategies. Much like going to a physician
for an annual checkup is considered to be a normal, beneficial
practice, having a counselor and implementing mental health
strategies has become a more "normal" aspect of personal wellness.
This means that when someone states that they are overwhelmed
by a project and need more time to have it completed or that they
are taking a "mental health" day, they are invoking a larger set of

338 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
values and cultural shifts. They are asserting the value of their own
mental health, but they are also tapping into bigger conversations
and historical contexts about the importance of mental health in
general, and they want their audience to respond in ways that
confirm that value and promote further awareness and sensitivity.
The ideology is embedded in the way that the speaker implies the
reality that mental health (along with the person with the mental
health needs) should be prioritized. However, someone who
responds that these issues are in a person's head or that they are
being overly "sensitive" or "fragile" is invoking a different set of
values, de-emphasizing the importance or the reality of mental
health challenges.

            Though this is just one possible example, it demonstrates
an interesting dichotomy that characterizes much of our everyday
speech patterns--an "us" versus "them," a "right" versus "wrong,"
and a "real" versus "imagined" way of framing a topic and our own
position, selected from a range of possible perspectives. We are
more likely to be persuaded and to persuade others when issues
are framed from the perspective of an in-group versus an out-
group, compelling audiences to identify with and make choices that
validate their belonging to the in-group. In his book A Rhetoric of
Motives, Kenneth Burke calls this phenomenon "identification" and
"consubstantiation." Though we are all separate individuals, we use
language to mark our identity as part of select groups (i.e., discourse
communities) with common interests, values, and goals (i.e., areas
in which we are "consubstantial"). Consider, for instance, a sports
team, which is its own discourse community imbued with unique
communication patterns. Members of the team share a common
goal of advancing their skills and having a successful season, and
to that end, much of their conversation is about game strategy.
This discourse community is defined not only by the topic of
conversation but also the specialized terms that are used and the
genres where communication happens--that is, team huddles,
locker room speeches, group chats, and so on. Going back to our
discussion about ideology, if we were to take a closer look at these

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 339
discussions, we'd certainly discover some underlying values and
assumptions of what is right or beneficial-- perhaps teamwork,
physical fitness, or competition. And according to Burke's theory
of identification, each individual on the team demonstrates their
belonging through a series of rhetorical choices, such as their
participation in the team huddles and their use of the accepted
jargon. It even includes the sports gear and apparel they wear.
They conform to the established communication patterns in order
to persuade others that they are "normal," that they are part of
the group. And it is that sense of belonging and common interest
that increases their likelihood of adopting specific perspectives and
behaviors that align with the in-group.

            It's not difficult to see how language can be used to create
solidarity with an in-group that is "right" in its view of "reality,"
purposely set up against an out-group, whose complex experiences,
perspectives, and beliefs are oversimplified and dismissed. Burke
originally considered his theory of identification as a positive
phenomenon that would create empathy and mutual understanding
for perspectives different from our own. He said, "Identification is
compensatory to division. If men were not apart from one another,
there would be no need for the rhetorician to proclaim their unity"
(A Rhetoric of Motives 22). However, he also warned that
identification could be twisted, used as a weapon to create division.
His "The Rhetoric of Hitler's `Battle'" (from the book The Philosophy
of Literary Form) provides a rhetorical analysis of how Hitler used
identification--the "us" versus "them" framework--to create
solidarity among the Nazis and dehumanize the Jewish population.
In a similar way, Thomas Hollihan and James Klumpp, in both their
1889 and their 2020 essays, analyze the rhetorical discourse of
authority figures to show how identification is a persuasive tactic
that invites the audience to be on the "right" side of an issue by
establishing common values and perspectives, pitted against a
common enemy.

            While language is often an intentional mechanism used to
further an agenda and reinforce particular ideologies, it's important

340 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
to point out that ideology exists in our language, even if we don't
have a particular agenda in mind. Our selection of words and topics
that merit discussion and our way of framing those issues will
always imply a set of values and beliefs. Consider, for instance,
our previous discussion about Philip Wander and the second and
third personas implied in a message. There is the ideal audience
who is pushed to the center, whose beliefs and perspectives are
valued as "normal" or idea. The third persona is the group in the
audience who is pushed to the periphery, either intentionally or
unintentionally, by the speaker because they don't share particular
qualities, perspectives, or abilities. For instance, the song "Stand
by Your Man" begins with the following lyrics: "Sometimes it's hard
to be a woman, givin' all your love to just one man." The message
is clearly geared toward women, but it makes some assumptions
about what it means to be a woman (second persona)--someone
who is devoted to a man. However, if we consider the third
persona--members of the target audience who are marginalized or
ignored by the message--we'd see that there are lots of women who
don't fit this ideal because they aren't (and possibly don't want to be)
in a relationship with a man. Chances are the song wasn't intended
to alienate these members of the audience. Nevertheless, like all
language, it promotes a certain perspective about what is true or
normal.

            Similarly, the way that we respond to the ideology in a
message tends to be automatic and deeply ingrained, reflecting
our own core beliefs that we are often unwilling to question or
reexamine. As opposed to forming a logical response, we fall back on
identifications and familiar ways of thinking and seeing. According
to Stephen Pimpare, this is even more true the older that we get:

      By the time we are adults, we have constructed a robust set
      of positions and beliefs. When thinking about the political
      world, we begin with those beliefs, those inherent biases,
      and then work backward (often unconsciously) to fit
      whatever facts we are being presented with into that
      preexisting schema. Our minds use this motivated

                                                   Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 341
      reasoning to protect us from cognitive
      dissonance--information that could unsettle our
      established beliefs or worldview. As a consequence, our
      brains literally process information differently depending
      on whether it fits with or challenges a preexisting
      belief....This helps explain why presenting people with
      evidence showing that they are incorrect about something
      can make them less likely to change their minds--they
      double down on their position, adopting a defensive
      crouch. (146)

            The point is that our language is steeped in ideology,
sometimes in subtle but nevertheless powerful ways. As we'll discuss
in the next section, language does more than reflect reality.
Rhetoric is so important because of its ability to shape reality, to
frame a topic in particular ways that change how an audience
understands an issue and affect the choices they make. It has
tangible consequences in the world.

     Activity 11.1

        Using Burke's theory of identification, consider the
     different ways that you signal your belonging to different
     groups. This might be as simple as the type of clothing that
     you wear to different events or the way that you position
     yourself in a room of people. It might also include activities
     that you're a part of, images or logos that you display on
     your car or walls, and words and phrases that you use in
     various contexts.

342 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
     Activity 11.2

        Choose an online text that advances a particular
     viewpoint or perspective. It doesn't have to be an explicit
     argument, nor does it have to be long. It could be a video,
     social media post, blog article, or speech. Read and
     annotate this text with identification in mind. Some
     questions to consider include the following:

          Who is the intended audience?
          What seems to be the purpose(s) of this text?
          What are some things that the audience is invited

             to identify? It might be a perspective, a common goal
             or problem, or an interest, belief, or value. Underline
             specific sentences where this occurs.
          If applicable, what are ways that other
             people--outside the in-group--are portrayed?
             Underline specific words and phrases and consider
             their effect on the audience.
          How successful is the text in persuading the
             audience?

Rhetoric and Moral Action

A common misconception is that words don't matter, that they are
nothing more than air. Kids on the playground like to say, "Sticks
and stones will break my bones, but words will never hurt me."
Teenagers and even adults when confronted by dialogue they don't

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 343
like will shrug and say, "Whatever," to show they aren't affected at all
by what was just said. But the whole purpose of this unit on rhetoric
is to show that words do matter. Through the power of language,
ideas take shape, personal connections form, perspectives change,
emotions swell, and people take action. Ideologies inform policies,
legislation, legal proceedings, codes of conduct, and individual
behaviors--all things that have tangible effects on people's lives. As
discussed above, Hollihan and Klumpp wrote two essays focusing
on the moral consequences of rhetoric, arguing that rhetorical
criticism is about more than unpacking the underlying purpose
and rhetorical strategies utilized to persuade an audience but that
it should also consider the ethical implications of the message:
How moral are the underlying motives of a message? How will it
affect audiences in positive or negative ways? What actions does it
compel, and how do those actions affect different groups of people?

      Morally engaged critics owe our democracy attention to
      the multiple forces at work in discursive practices that
      mislead the public, limit their ability to act in their own
      best interests, transform their disagreements into hostile
      uncooperative factions, and reallocate political, economic,
      and social power from the ordinary citizens to increasingly
      wealthy elites. Such citizen critics, when fervently but
      soundly engaged, seek to bend the curve of history in a new
      direction in which aroused public and resilient institutions
      regain democratic sensitivities and reclaim democratic
      civic virtues. (Hollihan and Klumpp, "Rhetorical Criticism as
      Moral Action Revisited" 334)

            In their original 1989 essay, Klumpp and Hollihan discussed
three shifts in rhetorical criticism that put the focus more squarely
on the moral consequences of rhetoric, and these ideas are still
incredibly relevant today. This first shift relates to our
understanding of rhetoric as being situated in a cultural and
historical context. An individual speaker has a purpose and a unique
way of persuading an audience, but their words are always part
of a larger "social milieu" that significantly enhances the meaning

344 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
of their words and the effect on the audience. "The question of
`Who is the author?' is thus answered with attention to the forms of
the culture from which the speaker draws, or the speaker becomes
interesting as an authority who speaks for society even as s/he
speaks to society; thus the shift to rhetor as socially grounded"
(88; emphasis original). In other words, a speaker presents ideas
and perspectives to an audience, but they also use language that
is inscribed with cultural significance, carrying a socially agreed
upon set of values and emotional responses. Michael Calvin McGee
coined the term "ideograph" to refer to words and phrases that
are imbued with meaning to generate particular responses from
an audience. They connect to larger ideologies and can be used
in rather vague and abstract ways to induce a reaction from an
audience. For instance, the word "equality" is an ideograph, deeply
embedded in historical events and cultural values, and when used as
part of a message--even when its meaning in that specific context is
ill-defined--it tends to automatically garner attention and support.
In summary, the first shift in rhetorical criticism examines the moral
consequences of a message by considering the larger cultural and
historical significance of the message and the way key words and
phrases are used to invoke particular reactions.

            The second shift identified by Klumpp and Hollihan
pertained to the power of rhetoric to create meaning, informing
the way that people perceive a topic or event. Instead of seeing
rhetorical discourse as a reflection of meaning that has already
taken place as part of an event, scholars began to see the power of
rhetoric to create meaning through selections (and deselections) of
details and word choice. It shapes our way of seeing and knowing
about the world, our sense of reality about how things are and
how they should be. According to this view, "rhetoric transform[s]
material contexts into social order" (Klumpp and Hollihan,
"Rhetorical Criticism as Moral Action" 89). It doesn't reflect a fixed
reality; it creates a sense of what is "real" or "true."

            The third shift in rhetorical criticism put more focus on
the motive of the speaker--their intended outcome regarding the

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 345
way that the audience perceives and responds to reality. You'll recall
from chapter 7 in this textbook that all rhetoric is grounded in an
exigence--an imperfection or problem that the speaker hopes to
remedy as a result of rhetorical discourse. In that view of rhetoric,
only the audience--through their response to the message--can
resolve the exigence. Rhetoric compels action, and it's through this
intended action that the ideology and ethical implications of a
message can be evaluated.

            The point in all three of these shifts is that rhetoric has a
significant impact on the lived experiences and material reality of
people in the world. Ideology has a direct influence on our views
of right and wrong, shaping everything from parenting strategies
to university admission standards to hiring practices to school
curriculum to legal proceedings. And because language is the
vehicle through which ideologies are established, language is the
place where we begin to examine social values and the material
consequences of rhetoric.

The Effect of Digital Media

Much has changed since the Ideological Turn of the 1980s, largely
as a result of the prevalence of digital media as the primary means
through which people receive information. It used to be that people
received most of their news from newspapers, which had more
information and were organized as an inverted pyramid with the
most important information near the beginning, which made it
easier for readers to process information (Xenos et al. 709). What's
more, the format of the newspaper allowed readers to take in
information at their own pace, perhaps going a bit slower and
rereading important information. The fact that it took more mental
energy meant that readers concentrated more and typically
processed information on a much deeper level than they would have
from a television news story (Xenos et al. 709).

346 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
            As you probably guessed, as digital media emerged and
grew in popularity, newspaper readership diminished. According to
recent statistics from the Pew Research Center, the circulation of
U.S. daily newspapers was 55.7 million in 2000 and has decreased
dramatically in the last two decades, down to 24.3 million in 2020.
In contrast, 68% of Americans report that they get their daily news
from social media platforms like Facebook, YouTube, X, and Reddit
(Shearer and Matsa). This number is especially high considering that
so many survey respondents in Shearer and Matsa's study admit
that they believe much of the information they get on social media
is "inaccurate," but they continue to use it for news information
because of the "convenience."

            In addition to the misinformation that is so prevalent
online, disinformation and misinformation permeate digital media,
intended to produce division and distraction. Market segmentation
and algorithms create an echo chamber effect that prevents users
from accessing the full spectrum of perspectives on key issues,
creating a false sense of "reality." All of these distortions and
cognitive shortcuts further entrench people in preset biases and
beliefs and make them more resistant to anything outside of their
own point of view. As Giroux argues, "Numbed into a moral and
political coma, large segments of the American public and media
have not only renounced the political obligation to question
authority but also the moral obligation to care for the fate and
the well-being of others" (14). Positive engagement in today's digital
realm requires users to proactively step outside of their perspective,
purposely seek out alternative voices, and engage thoughtfully with
rhetorical discourse to understand the underlying ideologies and
social consequences.

Logical Fallacies

The discussion regarding language, ideology, and underlying

                                                   Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 347
agendas points to an important skill that will help you discern the
logic of an argument without getting swept away in language that
is designed to distract and deceive: the ability to identify logical
fallacies. We've talked at length about rhetorical strategies (pathos,
ethos, logos) and rhetorical devices that are intended to persuade
an audience. In many instances, these are sound strategies that
present evidence and help audiences connect emotionally with a
specific point of view. However, many arguments aren't sound.
Whether intentionally or not, they present a line of reasoning that
isn't logical. Sometimes, there's no "reasoning" at all. Instead, the
rhetor uses emotionally charged words, hoping to evoke an
emotional response. These are called logical fallacies, which the
Purdue OWL defines as "illegitimate arguments or irrelevant
points...often identified because they lack evidence to support a
claim."

            We could spend an entire textbook discussing
argumentation and logic. For now, suffice it to say that a sound
argument is one that employs logical reasoning. It draws a
conclusion (the position or claim) based on evidence and/or
principles that are laid out for the audience to demonstrate that
they are true and that they logically lead to the conclusion. In
the case of inductive reasoning, specific events or examples are
used to draw a general conclusion (Miller and Poston). For example,
if you fail an exam every time that you cram the night before,
you'd probably eventually conclude that cramming for a test doesn't
work, and you'd find a different way to study. In contrast, deductive
reasoning (Miller and Poston) begins with a general idea or principle
(often called a major premise) and applies it to specific
circumstances (the minor premise) in order to draw conclusions.
For example:

  Major premise: All birds lay eggs.

  Minor premise: A parakeet is a bird.

  Conclusion: Parakeets lay eggs.

348 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
            Of course, arguments about social and moral issues can get
a lot more complicated than that. However, once someone gives a
reason that supports their position on an issue, then it's easier to
examine the premises that led to their conclusion. For instance, if
one of your professors says, "I don't accept extra credit because it
undermines student learning," then you can examine the major and
minor premises that led to that conclusion to discuss if they are
really true and if they inevitably lead to the conclusion:

       Major premise: Anything that undermines student learning in
          a classroom is bad. (Most people would probably agree that
          this is true given that the primary purpose of a class is
          learning, though some people might have different ideas
          about how important a particular class really is and what
          "learning" looks like.)

       Minor premise: Extra credit is an example of something that
          undermines student learning in a classroom. (This is
          especially open for debate. Some people might argue that it
          depends on the activity that leads to extra credit. Some extra
          credit assignments aren't very challenging or meaningful,
          but some can do quite a bit to engage students with course
          material and further their understanding of particular
          concepts.)

       Conclusion: Extra credit in the classroom is bad.
            You can see how examining the premises that lead to a

conclusion can be really useful in deciding whether they are true
and whether they are valid (i.e., they logically lead to the
conclusion). Premises are also helpful in examining the underlying
values of an argument. This argument about extra credit is obviously
valuing the importance of student learning and the integrity of
the grading system. That doesn't mean that this teacher doesn't
value students' mental health or retention rates, but it does imply
that when considering their policy regarding extra credit, they are
prioritizing student learning. The reasoning behind an argument
will help you uncover the beliefs and values implied in that position,

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 349
which makes it possible for you to analyze the implied ideologies
and your own position on the issue.

            A logical fallacy is so named because there is an error in
logic. The premises either aren't stated or they don't logically lead
to the conclusion. There are too many fallacies to name here, but
many resources exist that give a more exhaustive list of the fallacies
(LogicalFallacies.org). For now, let's focus on a few that are fairly
common, especially in heated discussions intended to shut down
the opposition instead of engaging meaningfully with the issue.

   Hasty generalization. This is especially common with
      inductive arguments that are built from specific examples. A
      hasty generalization comes to a general conclusion based on
      insufficient evidence--sometimes from just one or two
      examples. If, for instance, you talk to three women and they all
      say that they love cooking, it would be a hasty generalization to
      therefore assume that all women love cooking. It's easy to see
      how this could lead to stereotyping and prejudice.

   Ad hominem. This Latin term refers to arguments that attack a
      person instead of refuting an idea or position. These
      arguments often resort to name-calling or statements that
      attack a person's character, thereby ignoring the issue at hand
      and the premises that led to a specific conclusion. Many
      political ads resort to this type of fallacy. They assert that the
      opposing candidate is lazy, underhanded, or in some way unfit
      for office, which is a way of sidestepping deeper discussions
      about key legislative or fiscal issues.

   Straw man. This type of argument misrepresents the
      opposition in some way, often by making their reasoning look
      weak or immoral. The speaker can then easily "refute" this false
      account of the opposing view instead of engaging with their
      stronger reasons. For instance, if someone opposes a tax
      referendum that would increase teacher pay, it would be a
      straw man fallacy to say that the person hates teachers or
      doesn't care about education.

350 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
 Bandwagon. The arguer claims that a particular position is the
   "right" one simply because it's the most popular. Saying that we
   should get rid of speed limit laws because nobody follows the
   speed limit is an example of a bandwagon fallacy.

 Post hoc (also called false cause or causal fallacy). In this
   instance, an arguer assumes that since one event happened
   before another, the first event caused the second event. There
   might be a correlation between the two things (often occurring
   together based on a range of complex factors), or they might
   not be related to each other at all. A valid argument must
   demonstrate how one thing causes another. For instance, if
   you had Fruit Loops for breakfast and then got an A on an
   important test, it would be a post hoc fallacy to say that the
   Fruit Loops caused you to ace the test. Certainly, it might have
   helped that you had breakfast (a correlation), but other factors
   like how well you studied, how well you slept, and how much
   you were able to focus during the exam would also have to be
   taken into account.

 Appeal to pity. This type of argument attempts to persuade an
   audience based on making them feel sympathy or pity. Using
   your puppy-dog eyes to convince a friend or family member to
   lend you money is an appeal to pity.

 Appeal to authority. This fallacy claims that a position is the
   right one because an "expert" on the subject agrees. However,
   in this case, the person's expertise is not relevant to the issue
   at hand, or it's exaggerated. Having a celebrity or public figure
   endorse a brand of detergent is an example. While this person
   is popular and may have expertise on certain subjects, they
   aren't an expert on detergent and aren't qualified to make a
   credible claim.

 Circular argument (also called "begging the question"). The
   term refers to the fact that an argument makes the same (or a
   similar) statement for both the premise and the conclusion. In
   other words, the argument doesn't develop clear reasons; it
   simply restates the conclusion in different ways. For instance,

                                                Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 351
      saying that we shouldn't enforce the death penalty because it's
      wrong to put a criminal to death is a circular argument. The
      reason and the premise are saying the same thing, and there
      isn't any explanation about why the death penalty is wrong.
   False dilemma. In this situation, the arguer makes it seem like
      there are only two possible options or positions for a
      particular problem or issue, ignoring that there are
      other--often more reasonable--alternatives. For instance, to
      say that you can only afford a new car if you get a second job
      would be a false dilemma because it ignores all of the other
      financing options.
   Slippery slope. This type of argument is based on cause and
      effect, identifying a highly improbable sequence of events that
      will unfold following a specific decision or starting point. It has
      the "snowball effect" of making a problem seem really big and
      potentially out of control if we make the wrong decision. It
      would be a slippery slope if you say that you can't miss one
      homework assignment because it will lead to more and more
      missed assignments and failed tests, causing you to eventually
      fail out of school and end up homeless on the street.
   Equivocation. An equivocation uses vague language to confuse
      listeners, to make the other side look guilty, or to avoid telling
      the truth about a topic or event. For instance, if you said you
      had a healthy lunch because you had a salad, your audience
      might feel deceived if they later discovered you had a taco
      "salad."

352 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
                                                                                        Logical
                                                                                        Fallacies 1, by
                                                                                        Mark Klotz,
                                                                                        on Flickr (CC
                                                                                        BY-NC 2.0)

            The list goes on. Probably many of these seem pretty
familiar, reflecting the types of statements you've seen people make
in social media posts, interviews, or even political debates. For our
purposes, it's not that important that you memorize the entire list of
fallacies. What's more important is that you recognize an argument
(especially if it's your own) that isn't logical, that relies on these
strategies to trick or manipulate the audience in some way, or that
lays out illogical premises that don't match the conclusion. While
these fallacies might seem obvious, people are often vulnerable
to logical fallacies when the argument aligns with their cognitive
biases--their preconceptions and tendencies to oversimplify
complex situations and ideas. Because of their own ideologies, they
take shortcuts when presented with information that confirms their
own assumptions, which means they don't take the time to examine
the logic behind certain arguments. That's why logical fallacies are
often effective, even though they might seem so obvious.

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 353
     Activity 11.3

        Review the information about inductive and deductive
     argumentation. Practice writing your own inductive
     argument, beginning with a set of examples and building
     toward a conclusion, as well as a deductive argument that
     lays out general premises to make a statement about a
     specific situation.

        You should also practice deconstructing an argument
     statement, which is a statement that gives both a claim and
     a reason. It can be a statement that you make up or that
     you find online. See if you can use that statement to
     construct the major and minor premises that led to that
     claim and then evaluate whether or not you agree that the
     premises are true and that they automatically lead to the
     conclusion.

     Activity 11.4

        This YouTube video has examples of logical fallacies from
     various television shows and commercials (Brown). It names
     each type of fallacy before showing the clip with the
     example. Review the clip and then see if you can explain the

354 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
     fallacy in each example. In other words, what makes a
     particular clip a slippery slope or an ad hominem?

        Alternatively, you can find your own clips or make up
     your own examples of logical fallacies and take turns with
     other students to see if you can guess which logical fallacy
     they are using.

Raising Your Awareness

The point of this chapter is to help you raise your level of
consciousness when it comes to the ideologies that are embedded
in the language that we use every day and to be equipped to logically
and rationally engage in discussions with people about right versus
wrong. On one hand, this is an internal exercise that first and
foremost should challenge you to examine your own values and
beliefs, how those ideologies are communicated through language,
and what the consequences are as you interact with other people
who listen and respond to your words. At the heart of rhetorical
analysis and our discussion of rhetoric as moral action is a focus on
people. Certainly, that means understanding your own perspectives
and experiences and how that has led to specific opinions,
viewpoints, and behaviors, but it also means seeking to understand
the perspectives and lived experiences of other people, especially
those people who are vastly different from you in some way.
Whereas our tendency is to flatten the personhood of people in
"out-groups," who might seem far removed from our daily lives, true
analysis (and problem-solving) requires you to ask questions and
seek to more fully understand the complexity, the value, of other
people and their perspectives.

                                                  Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 355
            In one of his most classic theories, Kenneth Burke identifies
"systems of meaning" that people use to frame the "human
situation." "Out of such frames we derive our vocabularies for
charting of human motives. And implicit in our theory of motives
is a program of action, since we form ourselves and judge others
(collaborating with or against them) in accordance with our
attitudes" (Attitudes 92). Burke says that one popular way of framing
a situation is through the lens of victim and villain, thereby setting
up our position on the side of good in the battle against a clear
enemy. As we've already discussed in this chapter, this is a very
common strategy used in rhetorical discourse to rally support and
ultimately villainize anyone with an opposing opinion. Burke
identifies this tendency as scapegoating when we villainize members
of the out-group and blame them for problems outside their control
(Permanence and Change). Fortunately, Burke points to another
frame--the "comic corrective," which operates on a higher level of
consciousness to see the misguided notions of the victim/villain
dichotomy. Accordingly, the comic attitude "should enable people
to be observers of themselves, while acting. Its maximum would not
be passiveness, but maximum consciousness" (Attitudes 171). This
is not so much a comedy in the traditional sense, as if you'd be
laughing with amusement. It's more about recognizing the inherent
limitations in all of human thinking. As Jessica Chaplain writes,
"Comedy involves the recognition of a shared humility in that all
people, no matter how much they do know, cannot know
everything. Comedy requires the ability to recognize and describe
human foibles and mistakes in non-essentializing terms" (5). The
point, then, is to use Burke's theory of "identification" to find
connections and common ground with other people and to find
ways to rise above the dichotomous ways of thinking, speaking, and
being that focus solely on "right" versus "wrong" or "good" versus
"evil." The world we live in and the people we encounter are far more
complex.

356 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
Activity 11.5

   Write a reflection about your own way of framing the
human experience. Are there any situations in which you
tend to simplify the issue into the victim versus villain
dichotomy? What might it look like for you to take more of
a comic corrective approach?

   You can also think about issues in which you already have
a comic corrective approach. What are these issues? Do
you find that other people tend to use the victim versus
villain frame when discussing these issues? How might you
respond to further the conversation in productive and
positive ways?

Discussion Questions

    1. The chapter gives several ways that people tend to
        "flatten" the opposition and oversimplify opposing
        viewpoints. Discuss some of the theories used in the
        chapter to explore this phenomenon. What is the
        danger of oversimplifying alternative perspectives?

   2. In their 2020 article, Hollihan and Klumpp argue
        that our current historical context is a critical
        moment to reevaluate public discourse and the way

                                             Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 357
             that we engage with debate. What do they mean by
             this? What examples can you provide? In what ways
             has digital media exacerbated political turmoil and
             division?
        3. Define ideology. Describe how ideology is
             embedded in the language that we use every day.
             Why do scholars like Berlin and Wander argue that
             it's impossible to have rhetoric that is neutral?
        4. Explain Burke's theory of identification. How is
             language often used to create identifications with an
             audience that will shape their thinking and compel
             specific behaviors?
        5. How does Pimpare say that our brains process
             information differently when we are confronted with
             information that contradicts our preexisting beliefs?
        6. This chapter discusses three shifts in rhetorical
             criticism during the Ideological Turn of the 1980s that
             put the focus on the ethical consequences of
             rhetorical discourse. What are those three shifts?
             How does each one relate to ethics? In what ways is
             each shift still relevant today?
         7. Describe the difference between inductive and
             deductive reasoning and give your own examples of
             each one.
        8. What are the qualities that make an argument
             logical?
        9. What are the qualities that make an argument
             illogical? Define what a logical fallacy is, and give
             some examples from the text. How do these fallacies
             connect to issues of rhetoric and ideology discussed
             previously in the chapter?
       10. Describe Burke's theory of the "comic corrective."

358 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
        What does that mean? How can it be used to raise
        your consciousness regarding the ideologies that are
        embedded in language and to inform your own
        response?

Sources

             Berlin, James. "Rhetoric and Ideology in the
          Writing Classroom." College English, vol. 50, no. 5,
          Sept. 1988, pp. 477-494, https://www.jstor.org/
          stable/377477.

             Brown, Nicole. "Fallacy Examples." YouTube, 14 July
          2015, https://www.youtube.com/
          watch?v=c5QdzqbCxgI.

             Burke, Kenneth. A Rhetoric of Motives. University
          of Berkeley Press: Berkley, 1945.

             ------. Attitudes Toward History. Third ed.
          Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.

             ------. Permanence and Change. New Republic:
          New York, 1935.

             ------. The Philosophy of Literary Form: Studies in
          Symbolic Action. Vintage Books, New York, 1957.

             Chaplain, Jessica Lauren. "No Laughing Matter:
          Revisiting Kenneth Burke's Comic Approach to
          Criticism." 2018. Appalachian State University,

                                             Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 359
               Honors Thesis. http://libres.uncg.edu/ir/asu/f/
               Chaplain_Jessica_2018_Honors%20Thesis.pdf.

                  Giroux, Henry A. "The Crisis of Public Values in
               the Age of the New Media." Critical Studies in Media
               Communication, vol. 28, no. 1, Mar. 2011, pp. 8-29,
               https://doi.org/10.1080/15295036.2011.544618.

                  Hollihan, Thomas A., and James F. Klumpp.
               "Rhetorical Criticism as Moral Action Revisited:
               Moral and Rhetorical Imperatives in a Nation
               Trumped." Western Journal of Communication, vol.
               84, no. 3, 2020, pp. 332-348, https://doi.org/
               10.1080/10570314.2019.1704856.

                  "Ideology." Merriam-Webster Dictionary, 2023,
               https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/
               ideology#:~:text=plural%20ideologies,an%20individ
               ual%2C%20group%2C%20or%20culture.

                  Jrgensen, Frederik, et al. "Pandemic Fatigue
               Fueled Political Discontent During the COVID-19
               Pandemic." PNAS.org, 21 Nov. 2022,
               https://www.pnas.org/doi/10.1073/
               pnas.2201266119.

                  Klumpp, James F., and Thomas A. Hollihan.
               "Rhetorical Criticism as Moral Action." Quarterly
               Journal of Speech, no. 75, 1989, pp. 84-97.

                  LogicalFallacies.org. "Logical Fallacies."
               Logicalfallacies.org, 2023,
               https://www.logicalfallacies.org/.

                  McGee, Michael Calvin. "The `Ideograph': A Link
               Between Rhetoric and Ideology." The Quarterly
               Journal of Speech, vol. 66, no 1, 1980, pp. 1-16.

360 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
   Miller, Chris, and Mia Poston. Exploring
Communication in the Real World. Pressbooks.pub,
2020, https://cod.pressbooks.pub/
communication/.

   Pew Research Center. "Newspapers Fact Sheet."
PewResearch.org, 29 June 2021,
https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/fact-
sheet/newspapers/.

   Pimpare, Stephen. Politics for Social Workers: A
Practical Guide to Effecting Change. Columbia
University Press: New York, 2022.

   Purdue Online Writing Lab. "Logical Fallacies."
Purdue.edu, n.d., https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/
general_writing/academic_writing/
logic_in_argumentative_writing/fallacies.html.

   Shearer, Elisa, and Katerina Eva Matsa. "News Use
Across Social Media Platforms 2018."
PewResearch.org, 10 Sept. 2018,
https://www.pewresearch.org/journalism/2018/
09/10/news-use-across-social-media-
platforms-2018/.

   Wander, Philip. "The Third Persona: An Ideological
Turn in Rhetorical Theory." Central States Speech
Journal, vol. 35, no. 4, 1984, 197-216,
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10510978409368190.

   Xenos, Michael A., et al. "News Media Use and the
Informed Public in the Digital Age." International
Journal of Communication, vol. 12, 2018, pp. 706-724.

                                 Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn | 361
362 | Rhetoric and the Ideological Turn
PART III

FUNCTIONAL LITERACY

                                                                      Functional Literacy | 363
364 | Functional Literacy
12. Best Practices for Digital

Writing

It's probably not surprising that younger generations--millennials
and iGens--are more likely to use and have a more intuitive
understanding of technology than older generations. According to
a study from the Pew Research Center, millennials are ahead of
other generations when it comes to owning a smartphone (93%),
using the internet (nearly 100%), and subscribing to social media
(86%) (Vogels). Other studies report equally high numbers for Gen
Z, also known as the iGeneration (Dorsey; Treatt), a group that is
often assumed to be more tech savvy than other people because of
the significant amount of time that they spend on digital devices.
However, exposure to technology doesn't necessarily enhance a
person's functional digital literacy--their ability to use a wide range
of platforms effectively. In fact, a recent WorkLife article asserts
that it's often a misconception that younger people are innately
better at technology (Pickup). In referencing a 2022 study by HP
Inc., Oliver Pickup notes that 20% of employees between the ages
of 18 and 29 felt "judged" when they experienced technical issues
at work: "While young professionals may be more accustomed to
digital environments, and certainly social media platforms, this
doesn't always carry over to professional tools," said Debbie Irish,
head of the Human Resources Department for HP in Ireland and
the UK (qtd. in Pickup). Irish goes on to assert the importance of
training, especially for younger professionals who don't have the
same experience with specific platforms and have less self-
confidence to ask for help. Another study by the World Economic
Forum reports that less than half of young employees have the
digital skills they need to be successful, and many employers don't
offer the type of training that would help raise their skill level
(Moritz and Stubbings).

                                                   Best Practices for Digital Writing | 365
            While it's impossible to prepare beforehand for every
possible digital tool you might encounter--either academically or
professionally--it is possible to cultivate a problem-solving mindset
that allows you to adjust to new technologies that you encounter
and figure out the most effective ways to use them to meet your
specific purposes. Jill Castek et al. define digital problem-solving
as the "nimble use of skills, strategies, and mindsets required to
navigate online in everyday contexts, including the library, and use
novel resources, tools, and interfaces in efficient and flexible ways
to accomplish personal and professional goals" (2). This is a very
broad definition that encompasses several different kinds of skills:
finding useful information relevant to a particular topic, evaluating
the credibility of information, learning how to use various
technologies, and being able to discern which technology or
platform is most appropriate in a given situation, troubleshooting
problems as they arise with an attitude of confidence and patience.

            In fact, one key cognitive dimension of digital problem-
solving relates to a person's ability to self-regulate, which is the
mental process a person goes through when they are solving a
problem or working to complete a task. It's the ability to identify
your goals, understand the steps that are involved in working
toward those goals, and monitor your progress along the way so
that you know when it's time to move on to the next step. Castek
et al. also assert the need to move beyond the cognitive dimensions
of digital problem-solving to also include the "affective motivational
domains" (1). In other words, they are interested in understanding
how a person's goals drive their use of technology and how their
attitudes toward technology affect their problem-solving abilities.
Someone with strong digital literacy skills might not always already
know how to accomplish specific tasks. The real skill is in knowing
how to apply what they already know to new situations, how to
find the solutions they are looking for, how to imagine the creative
possibilities of a specific tool to help them reach certain goals,
and how to apply critical thinking and rhetorical insights to their
everyday use of technology.

366 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
            Like you might expect, the best practices for learning a
new technology revolve around open-mindedness, curiosity, and
knowing how to utilize resources to get the help you need.
Obviously, knowing how to look up information on YouTube is a big
help for many of your technology issues. Chances are that experts
in a particular field or the creators of a particular platform have put
how-to videos on YouTube to help novice (and even more advanced)
users work through specific problems or tasks. For instance,
SquareSpace is an increasingly popular platform for putting
together a website, and there are a number of YouTube videos that
walk new subscribers through how to set up their account and
how to use the various tools. Similarly, there are numerous tutorials
for Photoshop, InDesign, and even word processing applications
like Microsoft Word and Google Docs. Using YouTube videos and
also resources available online can make a huge difference when
it comes to learning a new technology or troubleshooting specific
problems. Other best practices are pretty obvious: Be willing to
ask for help. Be patient with yourself as you encounter challenges.
Give yourself plenty of time to do research and to practice with the
platform.

            As we've stressed in the previous two units of this textbook,
there is an important difference between knowing how and knowing
why--utilizing deeper critical and rhetorical thinking to understand
your audience, your underlying communication goals, the
affordances and constraints of a particular technology, and the
underlying ideologies and moral consequences of using specific
technologies. For instance, at the time of this writing, the ChatGPT
language model has stirred up quite a bit of conversation about
the opportunities it provides to create marketing content, write
academic papers, and compose more creative pieces like songs and
poetry (OpenAI). It seems pretty easy to use ChatGPT. You pose the
question and then it crafts a response based on information from
its databases. But a more critical perspective looks deeper into the
moral consequences of having artificial intelligence do our writing
for us. A rhetorical perspective would understand the limitations of

                                                    Best Practices for Digital Writing | 367
ChatGPT when it comes to inaccuracies as well as the more subtle
nuances of audience and purpose.

            The point is that functional literacy works in tandem with
critical and rhetorical literacies in order to make the most effective
use of technology. This chapter, in particular, focuses on best
writing practices for digital platforms, and it does so from a
rhetorical perspective, focusing on the cognitive habits and
information-gathering processes of the audience to inform the way
that online texts are written. The same principle of knowing why
applies to the concept of digital writing practices. It's not that
difficult to create a website, to subscribe to a social media account
and post messages, or to write text messages and emails. Most
people know how--or they could easily find out how--to do these
things. The real skill comes in knowing why one platform is more
appropriate for a given message than another or why specific
writing strategies might be more effective with a particular
audience than others. While it's easy to post a blog article, you
probably know that there are a lot of poorly written blog posts
available online that don't follow best digital writing practices and
don't consider the needs and perspectives of the audience. As we
move into this final unit of the textbook, we'll unpack some of
the more "basic" digital writing strategies that are applicable to
most online platforms, and as we move forward into the remaining
chapters, we'll drill down into specific genre conventions or
different platforms and explore more technical aspects of writing
and publishing in online spaces.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand how functional literacy relates directly

368 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
             to critical and functional literacy.
          Learn how readers evaluate and process

             information that they encounter online.
          Understand System 1 and System 2 thinking and the

             features that distinguish each one.
          Consider how specific writing strategies can be

             used to engage readers' attention.
          Learn best practices for clear writing that helps

             readers quickly and easily understand your main
             ideas.
          Learn how to be concise.
          Understand what it means to have a professional
             tone and how it can be used to enhance credibility.
          Learn the principles of effective social media
             monitoring.
          Learn to be direct with a call to action at the end of
             your messaging.

System 1 and System 2

As you already know, good writing is reader-centered, considering
the needs, perspectives, and expectations of the intended audience.
In fact, all of your choices in a particular message should (ideally)
enhance the audience's understanding and engagement, which in
turn, increases their likelihood of responding favorably to your
message, either by seeing your perspective on a given topic or
taking some sort of action. In digital writing, that means that you
must also consider your readers' thought processes, which begins
the moment that they encounter your message and make the split-

                                                   Best Practices for Digital Writing | 369
second decision to read it more carefully or move on to something
else. The reality is that readers are pretty impatient when it comes
to their reading habits. As we'll see in this section, most people
bounce away from a message if they don't immediately see what
they are looking for. And because users are constantly bombarded
with digital messaging, they are more easily distracted.

            To really capture and hold people's attention, you have
to be strategic with the way that information is presented, and
this is where it will be helpful to understand System 1 and System
2--"fast" thinking and "slow" thinking. In his book Thinking, Fast
and Slow, Daniel Kahneman describes the two types of thinking
that drive people's daily activities and decision-making. System 1
thinking is "fast" thinking. It's impulsive and makes quick decisions
based on habits and first impressions. Kahneman describes System
1 as "operating automatically and quickly with little or no effort and
no sense of voluntary control" (20). System 1 thinking is also typically
based on emotional responses and decisions that are comfortable
or familiar. Unfortunately, System 1 is almost always running. It
guides most of our decisions throughout the day, which allows us to
prioritize tasks and conserve time and energy.

            A good way to describe System 1 thinking is to think about
your daily routine. Most of us have a schedule that we follow from
one day to the next or from one week to the next, and once we are
familiar with that schedule, we can almost run on autopilot to go
from one task to the next. Driving to work or school, for instance,
is pretty routine for most people, and it doesn't take a whole lot of
critical thinking--at least not on a normal day with normal traffic
and weather patterns. You don't have to invest a whole lot of mental
energy into the act of driving. In fact, many people sing along to
music, have conversations, and think about other things entirely
while they are driving, which means that when they arrive at their
destination, they probably can't recall the specific places where they
had to stop at a red light or the moments when they decided to
change lanes. They were on autopilot. The same thing occurs in the
morning when you are getting ready for the day, when you order

370 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
from your favorite restaurant, when you are making a meal that
you've made lots of times before. The same is also true at a store
when you are deciding between one product brand and another.
You probably don't put a lot of time into researching the pros and
cons of each item. You probably make a snap judgment based on the
information that is easily accessible, like the price or the packaging.

            System 2, in contrast, is the more logical, critical-thinking
process where you more deeply engage with a particular topic or
event, carefully evaluate your options, and make choices that are
grounded in evidence and reason. Kahneman says, "System 2
allocates attention to the effortful mental activities that demand
it, including complex computations. The operations of System 2
are associated with the subjective experience of agency, choice,
and concentration" (21). He goes on to explain that people tend to
associate themselves with System 2--"the conscious, reasoning self
that has beliefs, makes choices, and decides what to think about
and what to do" (21). The problem is that System 2 is lazy. It takes
quite a bit more time and mental energy to engage meaningfully
in a particular activity and to go through the intellectual task of
taking in and evaluating information, and System 2 is reluctant to
put in that kind of effort. Fortunately, it's also not always necessary
for you to engage System 2. The process of brushing your teeth (or
deciding whether to brush your teeth) and making a selection from
the dollar menu at McDonald's aren't activities that require a lot of
deep, critical thinking.

            However, many activities do require System 2 thinking.
Kahneman explains, "When System 1 runs into difficulty, it calls on
System 2 to support more detailed and specific processing that may
solve the problem of the moment. System 2 is mobilized when a
question arises for which System 1 does not offer an answer" (24).
There are some obvious instances when this might occur. Take our
driving example above, which is normally pretty routine and can
be easily accomplished from System 1. However, if you run into
a serious downpour, heavy traffic, or hazardous road conditions
because of ice, then System 2 engages. You'd probably turn off your

                                                    Best Practices for Digital Writing | 371
radio and avoid other distractions or conversations so that you can
more fully "focus" on driving. Or if you pull up to the McDonald's
drive-thru and discover that they are out of the number-two combo
meal that you always order, suddenly you have to look more
carefully at the other options and weigh out your choices.

            There are also instances when people probably should
engage System 2 thinking, but they don't because they don't
necessarily encounter an immediate problem. For instance, if you're
in a meeting or in a class, and you can get by with nodding along
during the discussion without really listening to or trying to process
or apply the information that is presented, then it's possible that you
might not engage System 2. Only when you sense that it's necessary
to engage System 2--maybe because there will be a test over the
material presented in class or because you have to complete a
project based on the information in the meeting--will you do so. In
other words, if you perceive that the information is important or
relevant in some way, then you will engage more deeply. But how
and under what circumstances different people discern information
as being important is wildly inconsistent. Some people will be more
interested in the topic than others. Some people have better mental
habits that allow them to plug in when others are talking. And so on.

                                                                                        System 1 and
                                                                                        System 2
                                                                                        Thinking, by
                                                                                        Cara Miller
                                                                                        (CC BY)

            Understanding people's thought processes--System 1 and

372 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
System 2--can significantly enhance your digital writing strategies.
If your goal is to get readers to engage System 2, in which they
engage with your message and think critically about the information
that you are presenting, you have to first capture the attention of
System 1, which is no easy task in today's digital realm. According to
the Nielsen Norman Group, which specializes in understanding the
user experience and the types of information that creates positive
user engagement, most web users will only stay on a page for 10
seconds if they don't immediately see the "value proposition"--or
the reason that the information provided is relevant and important
to their needs. "The first ten seconds of the page visit are critical
for users' decision to stay or leave" (Nielsen, "How Long."). That's
because they are operating in System 1 to quickly analyze the
information provided. In System 1, a user might actively be looking
for specific information or they might happen on a page that initially
piqued their interest, but if they don't immediately perceive that
the information is relevant--based on the title, the pictures, a quick
glance at topic sentences--then they will bounce away without
engaging System 2. However, if their initial impression of the page
is that it is relevant and interesting, then System 2 is mobilized,
and they are likely to stay on the page for much longer to read and
process the information provided.

            The Nielsen Norman Group article ends with this key
takeaway from their research: "To gain several minutes of user
attention, you must clearly communicate your value proposition
within 10 seconds" (Nielsen, "How Long"). Your message might not
be relevant to everyone, but the people in your target audience must
immediately discern that your message is relevant, interesting, and
important in some way. The best practices identified in this chapter
are geared toward just that--helping readers understand the value
of your message so that they will engage their System 2.

Activity 12.1

               Best Practices for Digital Writing | 373
        Write a reflection about your own System 1 and System 2
     thinking. In your daily routine, which tasks tend to fall
     under System 1 because they are automatic and require
     very little intentional thought? Which tasks require you to
     engage System 2, applying a deeper level of attention and
     critical thinking?

        Now evaluate your System 2 thinking a little more. Under
     what circumstances do you tend to activate System 2
     thinking? Are there moments when you should activate
     System 2 but you don't? Are you too quick to dismiss
     information as irrelevant and unimportant?

        When it comes to digital messaging, what type of
     information catches your attention? Think beyond the
     content itself to consider the structure and the overall
     approach to the message.

Be Clear

Given that a reader won't engage System 2 unless they perceive
that the information presented is relevant to their needs, you have
to be as clear as possible to let readers know what the content is
about and what they will gain from reading it--that is, the value
proposition. Also, remember that System 2 is pretty lazy and that
you only have a few seconds from the moment someone lands on
your page to convey that value. If the language is difficult to
understand or if the main idea of the page is buried somewhere in
the fourth paragraph, readers won't engage.

            This section provides some basic strategies for making sure
that your digital writing content is clear, but first, a quick reminder

374 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
about rhetorical context. Many of the best practices listed in this
chapter are helpful guidelines for a variety of digital texts, and
they align with the audience's expectations in most circumstances.
However, what we've learned about rhetoric and the use of effective
communication is that it's highly contextual. It's important for you
to think clearly about your audience and their expectations for a
given message. For instance, academic articles are often published
on digital platforms, and in that case, the audience--with specialized
knowledge in a given field--would expect the text to be long and
more complex, with language that other people might not
completely understand. Similarly, an email to colleagues in a
particular department would likely rely on more technical language
in order to communicate key ideas.

            The point is that the writing must still be clear--easy to
follow and with easily identifiable main ideas--but your approach
to clear writing might be different from one context to the next,
depending on your audience and also your message. We'll talk more
in-depth about genre selection and conventions in later chapters.
While some of these best practices might be applied a little
differently depending on the circumstances, the general principles
are consistent. Below are important guidelines to make sure your
writing is clear:

   Put the main idea of the text in your title. Many web genres
      have titles--blog posts, web pages, some social media ads, and
      emails. The very first thing that readers look at when deciding
      whether the information is relevant to them is the title, so
      don't be cryptic or overly creative. A short, clear title that
      identifies the value proposition will be more effective in
      grabbing the attention of people in your target audience. For
      instance, a blog titled "10 Best Vacation Spots in Indiana" gives
      a very clear picture of what the article will be about. On the
      other hand, the title "Pack Your Bags" doesn't immediately
      convey the main idea of the article and would be less likely to
      get the attention of readers, even those readers who might

                                                    Best Practices for Digital Writing | 375
      otherwise have been interested in the article. The title didn't
      seem relevant to their needs.
   Use headings and subheadings. Especially for longer texts,
      breaking it up into smaller sections with headings and even
      subheadings can be a very effective way to help readers stay
      engaged and follow along with the main ideas. Once again, it's
      important that headings be descriptive so readers have an idea
      of what the section will be about. Headings are especially
      common for blog articles and web pages, but they can also be
      effective for longer emails. Put headings in bold so they are
      easier to spot.
   Put the most important information near the beginning. It's
      okay to hook readers into a longer blog article with a clever
      opener, but pretty quickly, the intro paragraph should identify
      the main idea. For shorter social media posts and emails, it's
      usually best to lead with your main point in the very first
      sentence.
   Keep the language and sentence structure simple. That
      doesn't mean that you have to "speak down" to your audience
      or craft overly simple sentences that are short and choppy. It
      does mean that you'd avoid jargon that might alienate or
      frustrate some people in your target audience. You'd also avoid
      consistently long, complex sentences that are difficult to
      untangle. Generally speaking, digital writing tends to be pretty
      conversational. Writing that is overly formal or advanced is not
      only more difficult to understand, but it doesn't create
      emotional connections with readers and probably doesn't
      communicate the type of brand that you are trying to build.
   Use precise language. A lot of beginning writers tend to be
      fairly vague in their writing, which always leaves lingering
      questions in the minds of readers and has less of an impact
      than writing that is more specific. Vague writing always invites
      the question "Can you be more specific?" For example, let's
      consider a blog article about the importance of wearing a seat
      belt. If the article begins with a "recent" narrative in which the

376 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
   author was "severely injured" in a car accident because they
   weren't wearing their seat belt, you probably have enough
   information to generally understand the main idea. However,
   you'd probably also want to know more about "how recent" the
   incident was and also what made the injury so severe. Similarly,
   if the blog cited "recent studies" about the efficacy of seat
   belts, you'd want to know which specific studies the author is
   referring to. While it's probably not necessary to include every
   minute detail, good writing is always specific and uses
   language that is precise.
 Use hyperlinks. Adding hyperlinks to relevant information is
   an easy way to clarify information, build credibility, and point
   readers toward additional resources. So if a blog does mention
   a particular study or article, a hyperlink to that specific study
   gives readers a chance to read the study for themselves and
   understand how it supports a particular idea presented in the
   blog. All platforms are slightly different, but the idea of a
   hyperlink is that you aren't breaking up text with a long URL.
   You select appropriate words and phrases within the text to
   become the hyperlink. Highlight those specific words, click the
   "insert link" icon, and then paste the URL of the outside web
   page into the dialogue box.
 Repeat keywords. No, we're not talking about SEO yet.
   Repeating certain keywords and phrases that capture the main
   idea of the text will help readers follow along. Those keywords
   would obviously appear in the title, and then when it's
   repeated in the introduction and in subsequent paragraphs, it
   helps readers to make important connections and see how one
   idea builds on the next. Obviously, you don't want to be overly
   redundant, but you do want to be mindful of your keywords
   and how they can be used to enhance readers' understanding.

                                                 Best Practices for Digital Writing | 377
Be Concise

Another important best practice for digital writing is to be concise.
Avoid long sentences and long blocks of text. You can probably
resonate with the fact that large text blocks can be overwhelming
and discourage readers from engaging with the text. In fact, most
readers don't actually read a web page word for word; they scan
(Nielsen, "How Users Read"), only taking in about 20% of the
information on the page (Nielsen, "How Little"). Finding ways to
tighten up your sentences and organize information into smaller
sections improves readability and helps readers persist through the
main points of your message.

   Condense information. This is often easier said than done, but
      many times, writers include unnecessary details and
      information that could easily be cut and still convey the same
      overall meaning. You'd also avoid redundancies, find ways to
      shorten wordy sentences, and eliminate "filler" words that
      don't add meaning. The Writing Center at the University of
      North Carolina at Chapel Hill has some excellent suggestions
      for condensing long sentences. Chapter 18 of this textbook also
      provides useful strategies.

   Organize information into chunks. While paragraphs in print
      publications might be fairly long (sometimes up to 10 or more
      sentences), paragraphs on digital writing platforms are
      short--around two to five sentences. In addition to keeping
      paragraphs short, longer articles are also broken down into
      different sections with clear headings. This is called "chunking"
      your content, and it makes the key ideas easier to follow. Limit
      the length of each section to just a few paragraphs.

   Use hyperlinks. Once again, hyperlinks can be a helpful tool to
      keep texts short. Instead of elaborating on specific details from
      a separate web page, creating a hyperlink to that page allows
      readers to find the information for themselves and eliminates

378 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
      clutter in your message.
   Use bullets. Another strategy for increasing the readability of

      your texts is to create bulleted lists where appropriate. Since
      readers tend to scan long paragraphs, often missing the key
      information embedded, the bulleted list makes it easier for
      readers to quickly see all of the key points in a list.
   Write in an active voice. Active voice puts the emphasis on the
      person or thing that is doing the action, whereas passive voice
      emphasizes the person or thing that is acted upon. Active voice
      tends to be shorter and easier to understand. For instance,
      "Jenny made a cake last night and then ate a big piece before
      bed" is in active voice and it puts the focus on Jenny and her
      actions. It's much easier to understand than the passive
      version: "The cake was made last night by Jenny, and a big
      piece was eaten by Jenny before she went to bed." It's always
      better to use active voice when you can.
   Eliminate "be" verbs when possible. Often "be" verbs (am, is,
      are, was, were, be, being, been) are wordier and less
      meaningful than alternative verbs and phrases. For instance,
      instead of saying, "We will be eating dinner at 5 p.m.," the
      sentence "We will eat dinner at 5 p.m." is slightly shorter and
      creates a stronger verb more relevant to the main idea of the
      sentence. Here are a number of other strategies for eliminating
      "be" verbs, created by Beacon Point.

Be Professional

It probably goes without saying that you want your content to come
across as professional. That doesn't mean that it has to be stuffy
or boring. It does mean that the writing would demonstrate your
maturity and understanding of writing strategies that build your
credibility and invite readers to engage. While there might not be
a set definition of what makes writing "unprofessional," the effect

                                                    Best Practices for Digital Writing | 379
is that it comes across as self-centered, unfocused, or lazy. For
instance, writing that doesn't seem to have a clear main point,
meandering from one topic to the next and interweaving personal
stories and opinions, might be okay for a personal journal or diary,
but it would come across as unprofessional on a web page because
it isn't considerate of readers' needs and expectations. Similarly,
writing that is filled with grammar and punctuation errors would
come across as unprofessional because it seems lazy--and it makes
it much harder to read a message. In general, best practices for
professional writing include the following:

   Avoid slang. While there might be occasion (rhetorically
      speaking) to use slang in a blog article or social media post,
      you'd probably want to avoid it most of the time--especially
      words and phrases that are only familiar to a narrow group of
      people. Using slang alienates some readers who don't know the
      meaning of the slang terms. It also might not be appropriate
      for articles or web pages with a more professional purpose.

   Avoid language that is inappropriate or offensive. Always.
      This is a hard and fast rule. Cuss words and other language
      that comes across as rude, sexist, racist, homophobic, ageist,
      and so on should always be avoided, even if you're writing a
      simple text message to a friend, and the inside joke seems
      harmless enough. You never know who will see that message
      or how your language might be taken out of context.

   Stick to your purpose. Stay focused on one clear main idea
      and the evidence and reasoning that helps to develop that idea.
      Personal asides and other tangents can be very frustrating to
      readers who are looking for specific information.

   Be respectful. Part of being professional is being
      accommodating to different ideas and perspectives and to
      treat alternative viewpoints with respect. Posts or emails
      written in anger or with little regard for differing opinions will
      come across as childish and self-centered. That doesn't mean
      that you must always agree with other people or that you can't

380 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
      verbalize your own position on a topic, but your writing should
      invite calm, reasoned engagement from other perspectives
      instead of being dismissive or condescending.
   Proofread. Correct grammar, punctuation, and spelling can go
      a long way to build credibility. That's not to say that every
      single comma must be in the correct spot or that you'll lose
      readers' attention if you have one fragment sentence, but
      writing that is full of errors is hard to read, and it gives the
      impression that you didn't put as much time and energy into
      the message as you could have.

Be Engaged

Successful digital writing that truly engages audiences and develops
a strong brand demonstrates a level of author engagement--your
effort to be involved in conversations with people as they respond
to your content. This is called "monitoring," and though it might
not be part of your original content, the way that you respond
to comments, questions, and complaints becomes part of a public
thread that other people can see, and it can have a significant
influence on their perception of you and your brand.

            At a minimum, monitoring means that you keep tabs on and
respond appropriately to comments on your digital channels--web
pages, blog articles, social media accounts--which helps you
understand how your audience is reacting to your content and
maintain a positive brand identity. The advantage of so many of
these platforms is that they offer the opportunity for readers to
participate in the conversation and for writers to engage with their
audience on a deeper level. Even simple metrics like the number
of views, shares, and likes help you understand how people are
responding to your message, but more than that, you should pay
attention to the comments that people post--this includes positive
feedback as well as questions and even negative comments. This

                                                    Best Practices for Digital Writing | 381
allows you to offer additional information and to try to understand
and address the more negative comments. Below are a few best
practices for monitoring audience engagement:

   Respond thoughtfully to at least some of the positive feedback.
      You might not be able to respond to everyone, but having a
      presence in the discussion thread lets people see that you are
      engaged in the conversation.

   Provide complete and specific answers to relevant questions.
   Be respectful as you engage with negative comments. You

      might not be able to come to an easy resolution in every
      circumstance, but your effort can go a long way toward
      building trust and goodwill, if not with that specific person
      then at least with other people who read the discussion thread.
   Avoid the urge to delete every negative comment. That makes
      it seem like you are hiding something or unwilling to engage
      with anyone with a different perspective.
   Delete comments that are offensive in nature. This includes
      comments with profanity as well as comments that are
      threatening or that resort to name-calling. In some instances,
      you might even screenshot the post before you delete it, so
      you can report it to the platform administrators.
   Consider ways to monitor discussions about your brand in
      other places. This might include customer reviews, posts
      where you are tagged in a photo, brand hashtags, and @
      mentions.

Be Direct

One final suggestion for many of the posts that you write is to be
direct. Often there is a particular way that you will want audiences
to respond, especially if your post is related to some sort of
campaign or marketing strategy. You might want your audience to

382 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
click a link to get more information, to sign up to receive your
newsletter, to purchase a particular product, to schedule a meeting,
or to go to your website. Even when you send an email to colleagues
or clients, there is often a response that you are looking for--maybe
a deadline that a project should be completed or the answer to a
question that you have. Whatever it is that you want the audience to
do as a result of your message, be direct about it. Most blog articles,
web pages, and even emails end with a CTA (call to action) that tells
readers exactly what you want them to do next and gives them all
of the information they need to take that action. You're much more
likely to get the response you are looking for with clear and direct
instructions.

     Activity 12.2

        Social media platforms are full of posts that you can use
     to critique and improve your own writing. Find a social
     media post or blog article that relies heavily on written
     content and evaluate it for the best practices identified
     above. The exercise will probably work better if you identify
     content written by a company or organization as opposed
     to an individual on a personal account.

        Now review the content of the post you've selected. Is it
     clear? Concise? Professional? Engaged (in the discussion
     thread)? Direct about CTAs? What are the post's strengths?
     What could still be improved? Write a revised, improved
     version of the post that follows each of the best practices.

                                                   Best Practices for Digital Writing | 383
     Discussion Questions

         1. The beginning of the chapter noted that functional
             literacy works in conjunction with rhetorical and
             critical literacy. What does this mean? How is
             functional literacy (learning how) informed by both
             critical and rhetorical literacy?

        2. Which elements of the rhetorical situation seem
             especially relevant to this section on best practices
             for digital writing? Why?

        3. What is System 1 thinking? How does it work? Give
             some examples.

        4. What is System 2 thinking? How does it work? Give
             some examples.

        5. In what circumstances does System 2 activate? In
             particular, how can digital writing strategies be used
             to engage readers' System 2 thinking?

        6. What is the value proposition? Why is it important
             to be clear and upfront about the value proposition of
             a text? Can you find examples online where this is
             done well?

         7. What are some other important strategies for
             making sure that your message is clear and easy for
             your intended audience to understand?

        8. What are some key strategies for concise writing?
        9. In the context of this chapter, what does

             "professional" writing mean? Why is it important?
       10. What is social media monitoring and why is it

             important? What are some ways that an author can
             effectively engage with their audience?

384 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
   11. What is a CTA, and why is it important to include in
        digital messaging?

Sources

             Beacon Point. "8 Strategies to Eliminate `Be'
          Verbs." Bacon Point, 9 May 2018,
          https://beaconpointservices.org/8-strategies-to-
          eliminate-be-verbs/.

             Castek, Jill, et al. Defining Digital Problem-Solving,
          2018, https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/cgi/
          viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=digital_equit
          y_toolkit.

             Dorsey, Jason. "Gen Z and Tech Dependency: How
          the Youngest Generation Interacts Differently with
          the Digital World." JasonDorsey.com, n.d.,
          https://jasondorsey.com/blog/gen-z-and-tech-
          dependency-how-the-youngest-generation-
          interacts-differently-with-the-digital-world/.

             HP, Inc. "Are We There Yet?" HP.com, 19 Aug. 2022,
          https://h20195.www2.hp.com/v2/getpdf.aspx/
          4AA8-2370EEW.pdf.

             Kahneman, Daniel. Thinking, Fast and Slow. Farrar,
          Straus, and Giroux: New York, 2011.

             Moritz, Bob, and Carol Stubbings. "Global Youth

                                              Best Practices for Digital Writing | 385
               Expect Better Access to Skills. Here's How
               Businesses Can Respond." World Economic Forum, 15
               July 2022, https://www.weforum.org/agenda/
               2022/07/youth-workers-skills-access-business/.

                  Nielsen, Jakob. "How Little Do Users Read?"
               Nielsen Norman Group, 5 May 2008,
               https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-little-do-
               users-read/.

                  ------. "How Long Do Users Stay on Web Pages?"
               Nielsen Norman Group, 11 Sept. 2011,
               https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-long-do-
               users-stay-on-web-pages.

                  ------. "How Users Read on the Web." Nielsen
               Norman Group, 30 Sept. 1997,
               https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-users-
               read-on-the-
               web/#:~:text=People%20rarely%20read%20Web%2
               0pages,out%20individual%20words%20and%20sent
               ences.&text=Share%20this%20article%3A,read%20
               word%2Dby%2Dword.

                  OpenAI. "ChatGPT: Optimizing Language Models
               for Dialogue." OpenAU.com, 30 Nov. 2022,
               https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt/.

                  Pickup, Oliver. "Gen Z Workers Are Not Tech-
               Savvy in the Workplace--and it's a Growing
               Problem." Worklife.news, 14 Dec. 2022,
               https://www.worklife.news/technology/
               myth-buster-young-workers-are-not-tech-savvy-
               in-the-workplace-and-its-a-growing-problem/.

                  Treatt. "Introducing the iGeneration." Treatt.com,

386 | Best Practices for Digital Writing
2 Dec. 2020, https://www.treatt.com/news/
introducing-the-igeneration.

   Vogels, Emily A. "Millennials Stand out for Their
Technology Use, But Older Generations also
Embrace Digital Life." Pew Research, 9 Sept. 2019,
https://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2019/09/
09/us-generations-technology-use/.

   The Writing Center. "Writing Concisely."
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2023,
https://writingcenter.unc.edu/tips-and-tools/
conciseness-handout/.

                                  Best Practices for Digital Writing | 387
13. Writing the Genres of the

Web

The previous chapter identified some of the best practices for
digital writing that will help engage readers' interest and make it
easier for them to pick out the main ideas in a text. Most of those
general principles are consistent across different web genres, but
the reality is that not all web writing is the same. Writing strategies
and accepted standards differ depending on what it is that you are
writing--depending on which genre. A genre is a type of writing, a
category that can be distinguished because it has certain qualities.
Often when you think of a genre, you might think of a type of
literature--for instance, fantasy, science fiction, romance--and you
can tell which genre it is because of the type of story that it is and
the way that the plot unfolds. Or you might think about types of
music--for example, country, rap, heavy metal, classic rock. Again,
you'd probably be able to identify the genre of a song pretty quickly
based on the melody, the instruments involved, and the lyrics.
Webster's Dictionary defines genre as a "category of artistic,
musical, or literary composition characterized by a particular style,
form, or content." However, even that definition is too narrow to
accurately capture the idea of a genre because it doesn't have to be
"artistic" or "literary." A text message, for instance, is a genre with
defining qualities that separate it from other writing styles--the
use of emojis, acronyms, GIFs, and short conversational messages.
Text messages tend to be less formal, reserved for close family
and friends, which helps dictate what is appropriate. In contrast,
a rsum is a completely different genre, written for a different
audience and purpose and with very different elements of format,
tone, and content. If you'd never written a rsum before, you'd
have to learn how to format your document appropriately and what
type of information should be included. You'd also pay attention to

388 | Writing the Genres of the Web
writing style and tone, which is more formal and serious in nature.
You'd never (hopefully) write a rsum with emojis, text acronyms,
or memes. Your rsum wouldn't be taken seriously.

            In a similar way, there are a variety of web genres with
specific features that help distinguish one from another, and those
features correspond with particular purposes and audience
expectations. In fact, like all rhetorical considerations, your
selection of genre and your choice to follow certain genre
conventions relate directly to your purpose and audience. The
School of Writing, Literature, and Film at Oregon State University
calls genre a "typified rhetorical action," meaning that certain
features are repeated across different genres "because audiences
expect certain things to happen or they want certain kinds of
experiences" (Pflugfelder). In other words, the audience is more
receptive to a message when it follows conventional patterns that
they are familiar with. While there might certainly be occasions
to stray from particular genre conventions in specific rhetorical
situations, following the accepted standards helps build your
credibility with the audience, enhances readers' understanding of
the message, and increases the chances that the audience will
respond favorably.

            This chapter takes a closer look at the most common web
genres and the conventions and rhetorical considerations of each
one. It also provides a deeper explanation of genre convention,
which will allow you to identify these conventions in other types of
writing that aren't discussed here. The main idea is to consider the
audience's needs and expectations and how certain conventions will
create more positive and compelling reader experiences.

     Learning Objectives

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 389
          Understand what a genre convention is and how it
             is used to meet rhetorical objectives.

          Think deeper about the social function of genre
             conventions and the ways that they aid in the reader's
             experience with a text.

          Identify the conventions of writing genres that you
             are familiar with and be able to apply the concept of
             genre convention to genres that may be new to you.

          Understand the rhetorical functions of a website
             and how individual components of a website work
             toward these larger goals.

          Learn the specific genre conventions of a website
             and how each one aids in the reader experience and
             helps move them through the customer journey.

          Learn content strategies for other types of digital
             writing, including blogs, social media posts, and email
             campaigns. Be able to identify the conventions of
             each genre.

          Consider ways to learn the conventions of other,
             more specialized genres that you encounter.

Defining Genre Convention

Before we look at specific web genres, it might be helpful to take
a closer look at genre conventions in general and why they are so
important for all kinds of writing. If a genre is a particular category
of writing, then a genre convention is a particular feature that is
definitive of that genre, helping readers to easily understand what
it is and how it should be read. You might remember from chapter

390 | Writing the Genres of the Web
8 in this textbook that rhetoric is inherently social. It facilitates
human relationships and activities, which is why so much emphasis
is placed on the audience. A genre is also social. New genres emerge
alongside new technologies and new ways of interacting with other
people. An X post, for instance, is a relatively new genre that has
expanded the ways people can communicate and the variety of
audiences they can communicate with. It enhances communication,
and because it continues to address specific needs, people still
use it. In contrast, handwritten letters and postcards, though not
completely out of fashion, aren't nearly as popular as they once were
because new genres (and technologies) have taken their place. They
aren't needed because newer and faster ways of communicating are
available.

            So when we consider various genres and the conventions
that define each one, it's helpful to think more deeply about their
social function--the activity or type of communication that a
particular genre affords. In discussing the rhetorical interplay
between genre and medium, the Purdue OWL explains that "genre
is a form of writing with set functions determined by its social need"
("Genre and Medium"). For instance, a grocery list developed out of
the need to remember a large number of items that you need to
purchase, and so the list--along with its classic convention of short,
bulleted items, separated on different lines--emerged as a way to
quickly and easily identify the things you want to purchase.

            Perhaps the social function of a genre and its
corresponding conventions becomes easiest to understand when
we consider a genre that doesn't follow the standard convention.
What if you were asked by a friend to go to the store to purchase a
few items, and they handed you a grocery list they had created, but
instead of following the typical format of each item on a separate
line, their "list" had everything running together so that it looked
more like a paragraph. And instead of having just the name of each
item they need, they wrote everything out in sentence form,
explaining more about the item and why they need it. You'd have
an entire page full of words, and it would be incredibly difficult to

                                                       Writing the Genres of the Web | 391
pick out the items on their list. It would take you a long time to
read through everything, and because everything is run together,
chances are that you'd miss some of the things on their list.

            Another classic example of genre is the job rsum.
Obviously, the content of a rsum is very personal, tailored to
highlight individual qualifications and experiences and also adapted
to a specific audience/employer. You might also have noticed if you
have used some sort of template to create your own rsum that the
layout might change slightly depending on your design preferences
and the types of information that you want to highlight. However,
there are some basic features that all rsums have in common.
You can probably name several off the top of your head. They are
typically written in black type with a legible font like Arial or Times
New Roman. They have the person's name and contact information
at the top. They have clear headings for professional experience,
education, special skills, and references. They are short, typically
no longer than a single page. These are fairly simple conventions,
but they are important. They facilitate the rhetorical purpose of the
rsum by making it easier to quickly highlight key qualifications
and skills that will be persuasive to an employer. They also make it
easier to write the rsum, since the formatting and basic content
are already established. What's more, these genre conventions make
it easier for the audience to read and interpret the rsum.
Assuming an employer would be familiar with the genre of a rsum,
they can quickly scan the document and easily pick out key
information that will help them move forward in the decision-
making process.

            As you can see, a single genre often includes several
conventions that make it distinct, and these conventions include a
lot of different elements including formatting, tone, organizational
structure, and the content itself. Understanding the underlying
reason for various conventions and how they aid in the reader
experience will enhance your writing in a few different ways. First
of all, it will be more readable because it adheres to writing patterns
that readers are familiar with, so they can more easily pick out your

392 | Writing the Genres of the Web
main ideas. Any time you come across a new genre, you will likely
struggle at first to understand what the conventions are and how
to adapt your writing so that it seems authentic but still adheres
to the audience's expectations. However, cultivating an awareness
of genre will help you make this transition, as it will play a key
role in the writing and revision processes. Second, genres provide
greater opportunity for creativity and deep critical thinking. That
might seem counterintuitive given that genres create parameters
that seem to limit your creative options, but the reality is that a
genre is a productive lens that guides your writing and thinking
process. In terms of the rhetorical situation, genres are created
to meet particular purposes that respond to certain exigencies;
therefore, focusing on the genre conventions will enhance your
ability to write something meaningful. Finally, following genre
conventions increases your credibility because it signals to readers
that you are experienced in this genre and have thought about
their needs and expectations. Even conventions that seem relatively
minor will demonstrate your expertise and attention to detail,
which will go a long way to spark goodwill and similar generosity in
your audience.

     Activity 13.1

        Make a list of all of the different genres that you write in
     each day. This might include anything from the more
     mundane texts, such as lists or text messages, to
     documents that are longer and more complex. Which
     genres are you most familiar with? Which ones are you still
     learning? See if you can identify the social function of each
     genre.

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 393
        Now pick one or two of the genres from your list and see
     how many conventions you can list for each one. Be sure to
     include formatting rules as well as conventions related to
     formality, tone, organizational structure, and content. How
     do these conventions aid in the readability of texts in that
     genre?

Emails

We'll begin with a genre that most people are already familiar
with--the email. From a rhetorical standpoint, your approach to an
email depends largely on the context of your message--who your
audience is and the subject of your email--but generally speaking,
emails are considered more formal than text messages and should
avoid being overly informal or using "texty" language and emojis.
From a professional standpoint, there are a couple of different types
of emails that you might have to write. The first and most obvious
is a work-related email to a colleague, client, or vendor, in which
case you obviously want to be friendly but also to the point. Just
like other types of digital writing, emails should be fairly brief if
possible with content broken down into individual paragraphs and
bulleted information for enhanced readability. You might also need
to hyperlink to websites and other documents that are pertinent
to the conversation. You'd probably also have some sort of call to
action (CTA) at the end, even if just to invite that person to let you
know if they have more questions or to request that they get back
to you about a specific question or issue.

            The second type of professional email is a marketing tool,
a message that is part of a targeted campaign, and it's a way of
reaching out individually to leads that your company has acquired.

394 | Writing the Genres of the Web
Remember that one of the functions of a website is to generate
leads. Companies then use that list of current and prospective
customers to send targeted emails, often giving them more
information about a specific promotion, letting them know that the
latest blog post is available, inviting them to an event, and so on.
Obviously, these types of emails can get annoying, and people will
quickly "unsubscribe" or assign them to their spam folder if they
don't find the information to be useful. That's why you should be
very intentional about the type of content (and how much content)
that you send and focus on the leads that have expressed genuine
interest in your organization. For emails that are part of a concerted
marketing campaign, several genre conventions can be applied:

   Have a clear subject line. Just like blog articles and social
      media posts will engage attention with a specific and catchy
      title, so will an email title. Since most people get hundreds of
      emails each day, you want to create a title that will grab their
      attention and says something specific about what the message
      entails. While different email platforms vary, you'd generally
      want your title to be shorter than 60 characters so it doesn't
      get cut off.

   Write preview text. Some email platforms also show preview
      text, sort of like a subtitle that provides additional information
      or a slightly different hook, typically 45 characters or less
      (Slater).

   Keep it short. Once again, less is more. A couple of short
      paragraphs are all you really have to engage the reader so that
      they understand the value of what you are offering and feel
      compelled to take action.

   Have a clear CTA. Since these emails are often used as an
      internal marketing tool to draw people to your site, the call to
      action does just that. It prompts readers to click a link so they
      can read the new blog article, get more information about a
      product or event, and so on.

   Provide contact information. A professional signature should

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 395
      include the sender's name, company logo, phone number, and
      email address so that the reader can easily follow up with
      questions.

Websites

Almost all businesses maintain a website as the "front door" to their
organization, realizing that before most customers set foot in the
store (if there is a physical space), they will go to the website to
get information about store hours, products, mission, and so on. It's
the first impression most people will have about the organization,
so providing useful content, organizing information effectively, and
using rhetorical strategies to engage readers will create a positive
user experience and strengthen the organization's brand. Even
individuals sometimes maintain websites for personal or
professional reasons, knowing that they will reach a much wider
audience and have access to design tools that will create a positive
connection.

            As we discuss the various other web genres--blogs, social
media posts, emails, and so on--it's important to keep in mind that
these are often used as collateral marketing tools that serve the
primary function of guiding people back to the website, where they
can learn more information about a particular event or product,
make a purchase, schedule an appointment, and so on. Leland
Dieno, an entrepreneur and expert in digital marketing, says, "Your
website is the center of your digital ecosystem," meaning that
everything else revolves around the content you provide there. It's
the place where users will go to find information, and if it's
organized well, it will create a clear path to help them learn about
your organization and respond positively to your call to action,
whatever that might be. Kunjan Mehta explains it like this:

      Web development can help you create a clear path for
      where you want your customers to go, how they will get

396 | Writing the Genres of the Web
      there, and what the goals are for your audience. Everything
      else you do stems from these aspects and connects back
      to your website. No matter what else is involved with your
      digital ecosystem, the ultimate goal is to direct all online
      activity back to your website.

            Website development is a very big topic, and there are
many nuances in functionality (which continue to evolve quickly
with new integrations and plugin updates) and differences from
one web platform to the next. Many businesses pay web developing
companies thousands of dollars to create and update their website,
but advancements in digital tools and user-friendly platforms have
also made it possible for people to create and maintain their own
website--if they are willing to take some time to learn how. While it's
beyond the scope of this textbook to discuss the "how-to" aspect of
the different web hosting platforms, there are numerous resources
available that do. For instance, WebsiteBuilderInsider has created a
resource guide for web development that discusses many different
aspects of the planning stages (Brandon). There are also a number
of articles online, like this one by Niel Patel, that give an overview of
the different website platforms and the pros and cons of each one.
Once you decide on a platform, there are also numerous YouTube
videos, created by the hosting services as well as experienced users,
to help you get started and to troubleshoot various issues.

            The main goal of this section of the textbook is to help you
think more clearly about the purpose of the website and how to
develop content to help you meet that purpose. We'll also discuss
best practices in website design.

Functionality

A website has a number of different purposes, and while the specific
functions of a website will obviously vary from one circumstance

                                                       Writing the Genres of the Web | 397
to another, at its core, a website is typically designed with five key
purposes in mind:

 1. Attract visitors. One of the main functions of a website is to
      attract people's attention, to engage them with the information
      presented and the overall mission and service that is provided.
      We'll talk in more detail in the next chapter about SEO and
      ways to optimize a website so that users can easily find your
      web page. For right now, we'll focus on the idea of inbound
      marketing, which relates to strategies that web developers and
      content writers use to draw people to their sites (Hubspot). As
      opposed to outbound marketing tactics that push content out
      to a broad audience (think billboards, magazine ads, television
      commercials), inbound marketing works harder to identify the
      wants, needs, and values of the target audience and to create
      web content that is relevant to those expectations. As content
      is developed, there is special consideration given to users' pain
      points and the potential search terms (keywords) they might
      use to find information about how to solve those problems.
      This is one way that a website becomes "optimized" so that a
      website becomes easier to find and use (Fitzgerald). Other
      strategies include

        Creating unique meta descriptions for each web page. A
            meta description is the information that appears on the
            search engine results page (SERP) (Google Search Central),
            and it includes the URL, a title of the page that users can
            click on to get to the web page, and a "snippet" of text that
            gives a description of the content on that page (Riddall). By
            providing relevant and interesting information and a call to
            action, a website is much more likely to attract visitors.
            The image below is an example of a meta description of
            what a snippet might look like if you searched for the best
            beach destinations in the United States. It even includes a
            picture to entice visitors.

398 | Writing the Genres of the Web
                                                                                       Woman
                                                                                       Lying on
                                                                                       White Sand
                                                                                       Beach, by
                                                                                       Riccardo
                                                                                       under a
                                                                                       Pexels
                                                                                       license,
                                                                                       Snippet text
                                                                                       by Cara
                                                                                       Miller.

       Creating meta tags for other content on the page--titles,
           alt tags for images and graphics, headers (Hughes).

       Creating a Google Business Profile that provides contact
           information, business hours, customer reviews, and other
           helpful information for potential customers (Caplan). It not
           only builds awareness about a business but also builds
           credibility and provides a path directly to the website.

2. Provide useful content. This goes hand in hand with the
     purpose listed above--to attract visitors. Many of the strategies
     used to attract visitors have to do with meta descriptions and
     strategies that make a website visible to potential customers.
     However, there are many SEO practices designed to mislead
     users so that it looks like a web page has relevant and
     interesting content. For instance, keyword stuffing is an
     attempt to rank higher on the SERP by continually repeating
     keywords and phrases over and over (BigCommerce
     Essentials). Even if this were to position a web page higher on
     the SERP (which it doesn't), it creates a negative user
     experience because a page that uses this strategy is often
     difficult to read and doesn't provide the types of information
     that a visitor is looking for. So they will very quickly bounce off
     the page. Successful content writers carefully consider the
     needs and expectations of their target audience. They think
     through the types of information that users will be looking for,

                                                     Writing the Genres of the Web | 399
      the questions that they might have as they navigate the site,
      and they are intentional about making that information easy to
      find and easy to understand. In fact, a large part of an
      organization's content strategy revolves around pinpointing
      the type of content that users are looking for and making it
      easy to find (Forsey). This relates directly to the meta
      descriptions you provide for each page, but it also includes
      choices regarding website navigation, titles and subheadings,
      the way information is organized on a page, and the design
      choices you make. It also relates to the language you use and
      your effort to be upfront and specific. This will not only engage
      visitors but create a positive experience and help build trust
      with potential customers.
3. Strengthen your brand. An obvious function of a website is to
      communicate the unique identity and mission of an
      organization to the audience. It's an opportunity to fully
      develop your story--the history of the organization, profiles of
      organizational leaders and staff members, the mission of the
      organization, customer testimonials, and so on. Remember
      that a brand is your image--the way that you want others to
      perceive you. It relates directly to the way that people perceive
      your values, personality, work ethic, community culture. When
      visitors have positive experiences and impressions on a
      website, it not only strengthens their perception of the
      organization, but it increases the chances that they will leave
      positive reviews, share information about the organization, and
      use their personal social media accounts to like, share, and
      repost content that will shape others' perceptions of the
      organization as well. Since we talked at length about branding
      in chapter 9, we won't rehash it here. Suffice it to say that an
      organization's efforts at branding can sometimes be explicit,
      related to things like its logo and tagline, mission statement,
      history, credentials and certifications, staff photos and profiles,
      charity involvement, and customer reviews. It can also relate to
      more subtle cues--how easy it is to find information on the

400 | Writing the Genres of the Web
     website, how well information is organized, how company
     policies are communicated, the tone of the language and
     overall design, and of course, how satisfied customers are with
     the service they receive when they do engage with an
     organization.
4. Prompt action. Remember that rhetorically, websites are
     developed with a purpose in mind--a particular way that the
     speaker wants the audience to respond. To that end,
     everything on the website should be working toward that end
     goal to compel readers to respond. However, an effective
     website will also give a call to action (CTA) that explicitly tells
     readers what they should do next and then points them in the
     right direction (Optimizely). Of course, different messages
     might have different CTAs depending on their purpose and
     where visitors might be in their buyer journey. Some CTAs
     might simply prompt readers to "read more" about a particular
     service or concept or to "schedule an appointment" or "get a
     free quote" to help move them forward in the buyer journey.
     Others might want readers to sign up for a newsletter, share
     something on social media, volunteer for an event, sign up for
     a free trial, or "buy now." Web pages that direct readers about
     what they should do next and provide a clear path to take that
     action are much more likely to meet their communication
     goals.
5. Generate leads. It's probably not a first priority to collect
     contact information of potential customers, but one important
     function of a website is to generate leads so it's easy to
     communicate with current and potential customers about
     services, events, and product updates (Boyarsky). For instance,
     many websites have contact forms where users can put in their
     information (an email probably and maybe an email address or
     mailing address) in order to get more information or to receive
     a response about a question or problem. Other websites have
     pop-up windows inviting users to subscribe to a newsletter or
     sign up for a free trial. Using these and many other strategies,

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 401
      user information is collected and stored in a spreadsheet or a
      lead management platform that makes it easy to deliver
      content directly to users via email, text message, or mail. This
      can be a very effective way to drive more traffic to your
      website and create consistent engagement with people in your
      target market. On the other hand, many websites use
      deceptive strategies to collect user information (Baydin).
      Maybe a visitor wants to get more information about a product
      or service, but they are required to put in their email address
      in order to access that information. Deceptive lead generation
      strategies trick users into providing their contact information
      or they collect this information without user permission,
      through some sort of third-party organization that sells leads.
      That's when people receive what they consider to be spam
      emails and text messages and feel bombarded, even harassed,
      by marketing schemes they don't care about. Those are the
      types of experiences that create negative impressions and
      undermine the brand that you are trying to create.

Genre Conventions for a Website

Genre conventions are always connected to purpose, allowing
readers to quickly and easily engage with the ideas of a text. Website
conventions are no exception. However, a visitor arrives on a web
page--via a Google search or a link on a social media post or in an
email--chances are they are looking for specific information. They
are interested in learning more about the product, service, mission,
event, or concept highlighted on that page, but as we've already
discussed, most visitors don't spend much time at all reading a
web page. They scan headlines and subheadings. They skim through
bulleted lists. They might quickly scan the navigation bar at the top.
And if they don't find what they are looking for, they will bounce
away. The best practices for a website listed below are reader-

402 | Writing the Genres of the Web
centered, geared toward engaging visitors and making it easy for
them to quickly find the information they need.

   Streamline the content. Be selective as you prioritize the
      information on a page and the number of pages on a website.
      Though larger organizations might need larger websites with
      more menu items and web pages, big websites are often more
      difficult for users to navigate because there is more content to
      sift through, and it's often harder to find the information they
      are looking for. Having a streamlined site map with a few key
      menu items and shorter web pages that are easy to read will go
      a long way to keep readers engaged. In other words,
      sometimes less is more.

   Put the most important information first on the page. This is
      called an inverted pyramid structure (Purdue OWL, "The
      Inverted Pyramid"). Putting the most important information
      first will help it stand out to readers, who can then read on to
      get more detailed information about that particular topic as
      they move down the page. However, if they have to scroll or if
      the key information is buried within large chunks of text,
      readers are much less likely to stay on the page. And if they
      don't stay to read the entire page (as most readers don't), then
      they will have at least gotten the main idea. Clearly labeled
      titles and subheadings (in larger, bold font than the rest of the
      text) will also help.

   Be intentional about organization. According to The Web
      Project Guide, successful website organization entails three
      things: grouping like content together, creating a logical
      navigation system, and providing clear labels (Vilhauer et al.).
      Often a useful way to organize content on your website is
      through categories, where pages are grouped together
      because they have similar content. For instance, many
      websites have an "About" section on the main navigation menu
      at the top of the home page. This could include a drop-down
      menu with several content pages: mission statement, employee

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 403
      profiles, company history, and so on. Figuring out how similar
      items should be grouped together is the first step. Then you
      need to create a site map, demonstrating the organizational
      structure of your site and using clear menu labels. This
      Creately.com website provides free tools that allow users to
      create their own site map, or you can always draw it out on a
      piece of paper.
   Focus on readability. This includes all of the strategies that
      guide a reader through the content of a web page so it's easy
      for them to pick out the main idea: Headings, subheadings,
      bulleted lists, short paragraphs, simple sentence structures,
      and word choice that is clear and specific. Readability also
      relates to the formatting choices that you make. For instance,
      websites tend to use a font that is sans serif, which makes it
      easier to read. Similarly, higher-level text like titles and
      subtitles might be in bold and in a larger font than the rest of
      the text. Items should be spaced appropriately so that things
      aren't crammed together, but readers can still tell which items
      go together.
   Be specific. People visiting the site are looking for certain
      types of information about products, services, upcoming
      events, pricing, and so on. It's your job to carefully consider the
      information that readers are looking for and to provide that
      information so that it's clear. Readers will quickly become
      frustrated with vague, flowery text that doesn't really tell them
      anything. Product descriptions, for instance, would go beyond
      a list of adjectives to also include product dimensions, items
      that are included, capabilities, other outside items needed for
      use, and any other information that would help them
      determine whether they want to buy the product. Certainly,
      there's a balance between streamlining content and providing
      enough detail. The point is to use the space that you have to
      give content that is meaningful for readers, and to provide
      opportunities to get more information.
   Use hyperlinks. Hyperlinks help visitors make connections.

404 | Writing the Genres of the Web
   This can be especially helpful as they are navigating your site.
   Internal links to relevant pages guide readers to more detailed
   information on your website about a specific topic. Similarly
   hyperlinks at the bottom of a web page that coincide with the
   call to action to schedule an appointment or get more
   information increase the likelihood of a user taking that action.
   External links to credible, relevant web pages are also useful in
   building your own credibility and providing important
   information to readers without taking up more room on the
   page. Obviously, you'd want to be strategic about hyperlinks,
   limiting the amount on a given page so readers aren't
   overwhelmed. You'd also want to be selective about the words
   that you choose for a hyperlink so that it's fairly clear what
   type of information readers will find if they follow the link. For
   example, let's say that a fitness blog has the following
   sentence: "There are many different methods for increasing
   your stamina during a workout." If the words "different
   methods" or "increasing your stamina" were hyperlinked (as
   evidenced by the telltale blue, underlined text), then readers
   would expect that it links to more information about what
   those methods are. On the other hand, if they are taken to a
   product page with running shoes for sale, they'd likely be
   confused and probably a little frustrated.
 Use visuals. Consider the types of pictures and other images
   that will help engage readers. Visuals have several different
   purposes on a web page. On one hand, they can be used to
   help clarify information. A map or a pie graph, for instance, is a
   visual that can be used to support written content on a page
   and help readers more easily process that information. The
   same might be said for a table, chart, or photo. A company that
   sells cars, for instance, would obviously include pictures of the
   car that they are trying to sell so that readers have a clearer
   understanding of what it looks like. Visuals can also be used for
   branding--to help visitors get a clear sense of the personality
   or mission of a person or organization. For instance, a

                                                    Writing the Genres of the Web | 405
      children's hospital would likely use photos of doctors working
      with children, particularly pictures where the children are
      smiling. These types of photos would go a long way to
      demonstrate the level of care and compassion the hospital
      provides. It would also be a very persuasive element that would
      make visitors more likely to bring their children to that
      hospital or to donate money. Visuals serve several different
      rhetorical functions, which is why they are so important to
      include on your website.
   Think aesthetics. A website that is visually appealing is much
      more likely to engage readers. As discussed in chapter 10,
      various design elements can be used to help convey meaning.
      Color choice, font size, font design, graphics, and images can
      all be used to direct readers' attention and help them more
      easily read and understand the information. But design choices
      also affect the overall user experience and develop the ethos of
      the organization. According to this Crowdbotics article about
      the "Aesthetic of Modern Web Design," the aesthetics of a
      website includes the overall layout with different components,
      menus, buttons, images, icons, colors, fonts, and so on. It also
      incorporates interactive features, such as sounds, animations,
      and symbols. Together, these features create a user-friendly
      appearance and leave an impact on the intended audience.
   Provide clear calls to action. Almost every page on a website
      has a call to action that explicitly invites users to take the next
      step to find out more information, to donate money, to buy a
      product, to read a full article, and so on. These might be as
      buttons or clear statements with a hyperlink at the bottom of
      the page.
   Keep content updated. One way to quickly lose credibility is to
      have information on your website that is clearly outdated.
      Maybe there are links that no longer work or information that
      is no longer relevant. Perhaps the calendar of events still hasn't
      been updated and still includes information from previous
      months. This is a cue for readers that maintaining the website

406 | Writing the Genres of the Web
 isn't a big priority for you and that much of the information
 might not be accurate. In addition to updating the information,
 swapping out new pictures or videos is a great way to keep the
 website fresh, demonstrating an active online presence and an
 effort to continually engage with your target audience.

Activity 13.2

   Identify a local organization or company that you are
familiar with and write down a few things that you know
about this company. What do they do? What do you think is
their mission? What are some ways that you would describe
this company's brand?

   Now visit the website and consider the messaging that is
available there. How does the website develop the
organization's brand? In what ways does it help visitors
navigate the site? What key information is available on the
site that would be important for first-time visitors?

   Now draw a rough sketch of the organization's site map.
This should include the main menu items that are available
from the home page as well as secondary and tertiary pages
that stem from those menu items.

   How are content items organized into similar groupings?
Does this make it easier to navigate the website? Are there
any pages that seem to be missing or out of place?

   Finally, evaluate the site and its use of the genre
conventions listed above. See if you can find an example of
each genre convention and explain how you think this

                                                 Writing the Genres of the Web | 407
     might be useful in helping the organization meet its overall
     communication goals.

Blogs

While blogs are often housed as part of a larger website and utilize
similar genre conventions, they are listed here as a separate genre
because their rhetorical function is a little different. For most
organizations, the purpose of a blog is to further develop their brand
with the target audience, strengthen their credibility in a particular
area of expertise, solidify connections with readers through
meaningful content, and increase traffic to their website (Cardenas).
One of the genre conventions listed above for a website is to keep
the content "fresh." However, this might be difficult to do on the
larger website since the overall mission and service offerings aren't
likely to change very often. Posting blog articles every week or so is
a great strategy for keeping the content fresh, offering readers new
and relevant information, and getting people to come back again
and again to your website, where they are more likely to not only
read the article but also follow your call to action at the end to
get more information, share your blog post with others, or buy a
product.

            Before we get into the genre conventions of a blog post,
let's talk about niche. All successful blogs have a particular niche or
an area of focus (Connell). It helps build their brand as an expert
in a particular field or topic, and it keeps readers in the target
audience, who are also interested in learning about that particular
topic, engaged. For instance, there are quite a few travel bloggers
on various platforms who write about their experiences in various
travel destinations, providing travel tips and an overview of things

408 | Writing the Genres of the Web
to do and see. Their "niche" is travel, which means that if they
suddenly began posting about DIY projects around the house or
gardening tips, their audience would be confused. Their brand as a
travel expert would be weakened by messaging that doesn't relate.
This is a mistake that many novice bloggers make--trying to write
about a lot of different things, which makes their blog somewhat
eclectic and scattered. It might do a good job demonstrating their
own interests and experiences, which might engage that person's
immediate family and friends, but it won't be as effective in
attracting other followers.

            Obviously, whatever niche you pick should relate directly to
your brand--either your individual brand if you are developing your
own website and blog or your organizational brand. A hardware
store, for instance, might develop a blog around DIY projects and
home repairs, which is a way of developing expertise in that area
and showcasing the products they have available for those jobs.
Readers get useful information about how to do these types of
projects, and they are more likely to visit the store to get
individualized advice or buy specific tools. Similarly, a daycare might
focus on a blog about childhood development and best practices for
engaging with different age groups. A university might write a blog
about student success, with topics related to academics, financial
aid, housing, and so on. A local yoga studio might write a blog about
different yoga techniques, benefits, basic exercises, and underlying
principles, which would be of great interest to people who are
interested in trying yoga. It provides them with useful content and it
positions the yoga studio as an expert in this area who is genuinely
interested in helping people be successful.

            While it's important to have a focused niche, you also want
your topic selection to be broad enough that there are lots of new
and interesting things to write about in that area. That way, you
can easily post a new blog article every week or so. All of the
examples above could be developed into very robust and dynamic
blogs because there is so much room to write about various topics.
The university blog about student success, for instance, is a very

                                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 409
flexible niche. Blog articles could be about time management, how
to decode a syllabus, how to schedule classes, how to understand
graduation requirements, how to effectively study for an exam, how
to get a meaningful internship, and on and on. Specific article topics
in that larger niche would be never-ending and provide lots of
meaningful information for current students, prospective students,
and parents, who would develop a deeper connection with the
university as they continue to engage with the blog. As you are
considering your own niche, a good test would be to see whether
you can come up with 10-15 article ideas within that niche. If you
can't, it might be a sign that your niche is too narrow and that you
need to expand it a little more. For example, student success is a lot
more broad of a niche than study skills. DIY is a much broader niche
than window replacement. It might take some time to land on the
right niche that is narrow enough to build your brand and yet broad
enough that there are lots of things you could write about.

            Once the overall niche is established, there are several
standard genre conventions that most blog posts follow, which,
once again, are directly related to the primary goal of engaging
readers and persuading them to take some sort of action. Every
genre convention is rhetorical in the fact that it influences the way
that a reader will respond to the message. Some important genre
conventions for a blog article include the following:

   Stay focused. A blog article should clearly relate back to the
      niche you've established and it should stay focused on the
      topic that it advertises in the title and the introduction. While
      blogs come in varying lengths, some as short as 300 words and
      others as long as 2,000 words, they should stay focused on the
      topic at hand and avoid unnecessary tangents. While longer
      blogs might spend more time developing background
      information or elaborating on each subpoint, everything
      should clearly work together to develop one main idea that you
      think will be of value to your target audience.

   Chunk your content. While staying focused on one key idea,

410 | Writing the Genres of the Web
   it's also useful for readers if blog articles are broken down into
   subsections with clear headings that make it easy to follow
   along with the structure of the article. For instance, a blog
   article about the cognitive benefits of yoga might begin with a
   brief hook about the obvious physical benefits of yoga and then
   transition into the little-known fact that it also benefits
   cognition. It might then have a section that defines "What Is
   Cognition," followed by subsections that identify some of the
   main cognitive benefits: "Improved Memory," "Better Focus,"
   "Enhanced Problem-Solving." Each of these headings would
   help categorize different parts of the article so that it's easier
   to follow. Each section might then have three to five short
   paragraphs focused on that particular subtopic.
 Be concise. Once again, you want to be concise with your
   writing. Keep paragraphs short with two to four sentences
   each. Use bullets when appropriate. Use simple sentence
   structures, and find ways to eliminate unnecessary words and
   phrases. Certainly, it might happen that you need to add words
   to your blog post to hit your desired word count (as blog
   articles should generally be consistent from one post to the
   next), but that doesn't mean filling up the article with "fluff."
   Instead, you'd add examples, statistics, or descriptions that add
   meaning and keep readers interested.
 Have an engaging, specific title. Blog titles engage readers
   because they are clear about the value proposition--the thing
   that readers will gain from reading the article. For instance, an
   article titled "Ten Best Travel Destinations on the East Coast"
   or "Reduce Your Debt in Three Easy Steps" are both very
   specific titles that tell readers exactly what the articles are
   about and how readers will benefit from reading them. This, in
   turn, is more likely to attract readers than titles that are vague
   or obscure.
 Use hyperlinks. Your blog article should be well researched
   and be transparent about where your information came from.
   Yes, you are building your own brand as an expert in a

                                                     Writing the Genres of the Web | 411
      particular area, but it also greatly enhances your own
      credibility when you are able to link to other credible sources
      that support your ideas. The key word here is "credible,"
      meaning that you might connect to a recent study, a reputable
      organization, another well-known expert, a recent new article,
      and so on. You wouldn't link to content that is old or where it is
      difficult to identify who the author is. You'd also avoid websites
      with a clear financial motive or bias. You might also avoid
      linking to a competing blog or company website that might
      steal readers' focus. Hyperlinks can also be used internally as a
      way to link readers to relevant information on the website or
      previous blog articles about a particular topic. You'd want to be
      sparing with this to avoid too much self-promotion and writing
      that comes across as disingenuous, but a couple of internal
      links here and there could be useful to further engage readers.
   Write in a friendly, conversational tone. Blogs are generally
      less formal than the content of an organization's website,
      which gives you the freedom to be more conversational. This is
      a great way to engage readers and build a rapport. If done well,
      it can also help develop your brand in particular ways.
      Generally speaking, a more conversational tone is more
      accessible. You'd avoid jargon and long-winded complex
      sentences that might otherwise come across as pretentious.
      You'd also have the opportunity to use language that's a little
      more lighthearted and fun. However, you'd still want to
      maintain a level of professionalism, maintaining a focus on the
      main idea of the article and providing relevant information and
      hyperlinks to supporting information. Depending on the
      context, you might also want to avoid first person, which is
      completely appropriate for a personal blog but would come
      across as confusing and a little too informal for an
      organization's blog.
   Post pictures and other visuals. Once again, pictures that are
      relevant to the content provided can be a great way of
      engaging readers and deepening their level of understanding.

412 | Writing the Genres of the Web
      Charts, tables, and other graphics can also be a great way to
      break up written text.
   Proofread. Yes, a blog is more informal, but that doesn't mean
      you can relax your standards for correct grammar, spelling,
      capitalization, and punctuation. Proofreading errors can be
      incredibly distracting, making it difficult to understand a text
      and diminishing the credibility of the author. Do your due
      diligence and proofread carefully.
   Update often. While other parts of a website tend to be more
      static, meaning they aren't updated very often, a blog is meant
      to be dynamic with new content added consistently. Be sure to
      date your blog posts and provide new content every couple of
      weeks. This is crucial to reader engagement as well as other
      communication goals related to branding, increased traffic to
      your website, and the overall customer journey.
   End with a CTA. Remember that a lot of digital messaging ends
      with a call to action, explicitly directing readers to the next
      steps they should take and providing a clear path to take that
      action, usually in the form of a hyperlink. Many companies
      have boilerplate information that goes at the bottom of a blog
      article, meaning that it's repeated word-for-word every time,
      perhaps reminding readers of their overall mission, the ways
      that they can help customers with specific tasks, and directing
      them to resources where they can find more information and
      get in touch with an associate.

Social Media Posts

You're probably familiar with the ways that individuals use social
media platforms to post personal updates and photos, documenting
important events or finding ways to connect with a larger group
of family members and friends. While chapter 2 in this textbook
dives into the positive and negative effects of social media usage

                                                       Writing the Genres of the Web | 413
from a personal perspective, this section focuses more on the genre
conventions of social media posts from a professional perspective.
Not surprisingly, the majority of businesses both large and small use
social media as a key aspect of their marketing strategy because
it's a quick and inexpensive way to engage with customers, and
it leverages algorithms and user-driven data to provide targeted
marketing to the people who are most likely to be interested in
their products and services (Turner). Also, as the LinkedIn article by
Josh Turner confirms, the advantages go both ways. Customers also
benefit from the ability to quickly connect with a business, and it
affords a platform for them to share useful content and reviews with
their own followers.

            One reason that social media marketing is so popular is
because it's an incredibly effective way to reach people in the target
audience with updates and engaging content that will (ideally) drive
them to the website. Thus, companies are very intentional about
their social media presence, selecting platforms where their target
audience is likely to be and planning out content that will effectively
grab their attention. Since there are literally hundreds of social
media platforms, it doesn't make sense that an organization would
have an account on every single one. Instead, they'd do some
research into the target market to find out which social media sites
are most popular (Dean) and how certain demographics tend to
use which platforms (Barnhart). For instance, a yoga studio would
probably be most interested in targeting women in their thirties
and forties, so they would focus on the social media platforms that
women in their target market use.

            Another key aspect of social media marketing is
consistency. Some businesses post on social media every day in
order to continuously engage with new and existing customers.
However, they need meaningful content to post. That's why many
organizations create a social media calendar where they plan out
the content they will post for the next month, often to promote
upcoming events or report on recent organizational news (Kenan).
However, to fill in the gaps in between events, many organizations

414 | Writing the Genres of the Web
will utilize content buckets, where they consider the different types
of content they want to feature each month (Chickering). For
instance, one bucket might be employee profiles, another bucket
could be customer testimonials, and yet another bucket could be
product highlights or an expert tip of some kind. However many
buckets there are, content would be created so that a certain
number of posts go into each bucket and then are placed on the
monthly calendar to ensure that there are a variety of posts with
unique content from one day to the next.

            Finally, social media posts must be appropriate for the
specific platform. For instance, LinkedIn is a social media platform
geared toward professional advancement, highlighting career
opportunities and professional development, so it wouldn't be an
appropriate place to highlight the latest yoga technique. The same
goes for platforms like Tinder or Flixster. The content of your post
should match the overall theme of the platform. Similarly, you'd
want to match the specific genre conventions of a specific platform.
There are far too many to list out here, so some general guidelines
are listed below. Before posting on a social media platform you
aren't familiar with, you should get a clear sense of the types of
the format that is most appropriate. X and Facebook, for instance,
are more conducive to text-based posts, while Instagram is focused
more on photos. YouTube is obviously geared toward videos. While
you want your message to stand out to your target audience in a
positive way, creating messaging that isn't appropriate for a given
platform will likely create confusion and weaken your credibility.

            Specific platforms aside, there are some best practices for
social media posts that span across all platforms:

   Be concise. Yes, this is a theme across all digital writing, but
      it's especially true for social media platforms where readers
      tend to continuously scroll through their feed. You want to
      catch their attention right away and make it easy for them to
      quickly get the main idea of your post--probably in a sentence
      or two. X is a good example of a platform that limits the

                                                       Writing the Genres of the Web | 415
      amount of characters you can use for each post, pushing users
      to be as succinct as possible. Other platforms don't impose
      those limits, but they do collapse longer posts so that users
      have to click "read more" to see the entire post. Often readers
      don't, and if they do, they will quickly move on if they are
      confronted with a wall of text.
   Use hashtags. You probably don't want to overdo it with 7 to 10
      hashtags, but having two or three hashtags (indicated by the #
      symbol) is a great way to connect the content of your post to
      other groups and to spread your message to larger audiences.
      Most platforms have a way for you to research popular
      hashtags for given topics so that you can use them
      appropriately.
   Title your post. Individual social media posts don't usually have
      a title, but professional posts often do because it focuses
      readers' attention and provides the same value proposition
      that a blog title does.
   Use appealing images. Readers are more likely to read your
      post if you engage their interest with a picture. For instance, a
      travel agency that posts an ad about "Affordable Beach
      Bungalows" would probably garner a lot more interest if they
      featured tropical pictures of happy vacationers lounging on
      their own bungalows. Some posts also use short videos and
      influencer testimonials to grab people's attention.
   Give full URLs. Unless you have a button at the bottom of the
      post (which is often a good idea), social media platforms don't
      use hyperlinks. If you want to link to a website, you have to
      give the full URL.
   Give a call to action. Once again, social media posts often give
      a call to action for people to learn more, which often links to a
      website or email address.
   Be engaged. As people in your audience engage with your post,
      commenting on the content, asking questions, giving reviews,
      then you should occasionally respond. You might not be able to
      respond to every single comment, but your presence will

416 | Writing the Genres of the Web
 create a positive impression that you are genuinely interested
 in connecting with people. You might also receive more likes
 and followers if you are intentional about making connections
 with other people and organizations that are in your
 community or that are somehow complementary to your
 organization. They, in turn, would be more compelled to follow,
 like, and share your social media posts.

Activity 13.3

   Do a little bit of research about a company and its digital
marketing efforts. This could be the same company that
you selected for the website activity above or it could be
something different, but it should be an organization that
has a large enough digital media presence that it has a blog
as well as social media accounts on a couple of different
platforms. It might also be a company that you receive
emails (or text messages) from, so you get a larger sense of
this company's content strategy.

   What strikes you about the consistency across these
digital messages? In what ways are they similar or obviously
working toward similar purposes? How do they link to one
another? What makes each piece distinct? And how do
specific genre conventions aid in reader engagement and
readability.

   Now create another piece of collateral messaging for this
company--perhaps a social media post or an email about an
upcoming event or sale. You could also consider additional
topics for the company's blog and maybe even outline one.

                                                  Writing the Genres of the Web | 417
     Do your best to fit in with the established brand of this
     organization and to follow the genre conventions outlined
     above.

A Final Note about Genre

Of course, this chapter didn't cover every digital writing genre.
There are simply too many to cover. What's more, the idea of genre
gets even more complex when you consider the countless genres
in specialized fields. For instance, while there are some basic
principles that hold true for all websites, there are also different
types of websites that have their own set of conventions. A
university website, for instance, is substantially different from that
of a restaurant, local charity, or used car dealership. A university
would obviously post pictures of campus life, give details about
the application process, and post specialized information about
different majors and graduation requirements. When you look
across a bunch of different university websites, you'll see that most
of them are organized in very similar ways and that they use very
similar language to explain these concepts. Another example might
be fitness blogs or churches' Facebook posts. These too will be
unique, having particular qualities that are unique that that more
narrowed genre.

            The point is that if you are confronted with a genre that you
aren't familiar with--as will probably happen at some point--then
you can easily gather information from other examples in that genre
and evaluate which elements seem to define it. What types of
content are typical? What about graphic elements? Tone of voice?
Design elements? Organizational structures? Once you understand

418 | Writing the Genres of the Web
the concept of genre, then you can evaluate new forms of writing
and apply those genre conventions with confidence.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a genre? What is the purpose of identifying
             standard elements of a particular genre? How do you
             think understanding genre can help you become a
             better writer?

        2. Define a genre convention and give some examples
             from a genre of your choosing. How do specific
             conventions aid the reader's experience and facilitate
             larger rhetorical goals?

        3. What does it mean to say that a genre convention
             serves a social function?

        4. What are the major rhetorical functions of a
             website? Give examples to show how specific
             elements on a typical website work toward these
             larger goals.

        5. Identify the primary genre conventions for a
             website. Which ones were you already familiar with?
             Which ones are new or perhaps less obvious?

        6. What does it mean that a blog writer usually
             develops a niche? How does this relate to things like
             branding and audience engagement?

         7. Why is social media marketing so popular for many
             businesses? What are some content strategies that
             help keep audiences engaged?

        8. Name some of the genre conventions that are
             consistent across different forms of digital writing.

                                                       Writing the Genres of the Web | 419
             Which ones are unique to genres such as emails, blog
             posts, and social media posts?
        9. How can you apply the concept of genre
             conventions in order to learn to write effectively in
             new genres as they emerge?

     Sources

                  Barnhart, Brent. "Social Media Demographics to
               Inform Your Brand's Strategy in 2022."
               Sproutsocial.com, 2 Mar. 2022,
               https://sproutsocial.com/insights/new-social-
               media-demographics/#pinterest-demographics.

                  Baydin, Alex. "3 Takeaways on the FTC's
               Crackdown on Lead Gen & Deceptive Marketing."
               Performline.com, 5 Sept. 2019,
               https://performline.com/blog-post/3-takeaways-
               from-ftcs-crackdown-on-lead-generators-and-
               deceptive-tactics/.

                  BigCommerce Essentials. "What is Keyword
               Stuffing?" BigCommerce.com, 2023,
               https://www.bigcommerce.com/ecommerce-
               answers/what-is-keyword-stuffing/.

                  Boyarsky, Katherine. "10 Simple Ways to Optimize
               Your Website for Lead Generation." Hubspot.com, 17

420 | Writing the Genres of the Web
June 2022, https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/
optimize-website-for-lead-generation.

   Brandon, David. "The Ultimate Website Building
Resource Guide." WebsiteBuilderInsider.com, 21 June
2022, https://www.websitebuilderinsider.com/the-
ultimate-website-building-resource-guide/.

   Caplan, Bryan. "How to Create a Google Business
Profile." ConstantContact.com, 1 Nov. 2022,
https://www.constantcontact.com/blog/how-to-
create-a-google-my-business-profile/.

   Cardenas, Nicole. "What is the Purpose of a Blog?"
Axiapr.com, 28 Aug. 2020, https://www.axiapr.com/
blog/what-is-the-purpose-of-a-
blog#:~:text=A%20blog%20serves%20the%20purpo
se,for%20corresponding%20social%20media%20pla
tforms.

   Chickering, Talius. "What Are Content Buckets?"
Issuu.com, 21 July 2021, https://issuu.com/blog/
content-buckets.

   Connell, Adam. "How to Choose a Niche for Your
Blog in 2023 [+100 Niche Ideas]." Bloggingwizard.com,
1 Jan. 2023, https://bloggingwizard.com/choose-
perfect-niche-for-your-blog/.

   Creately. "Website Planning Templates: Website
Planning Guide," Creately.com, 8 Dec. 2022,
https://creately.com/guides/website-planning-
templates/#sketch-your-sitemap.

   Crowdbotics. "Aesthetics in Modern Web Design."
Crowdbotics.com, 28 July 2020,
https://www.crowdbotics.com/blog/aesthetics-in-

                                      Writing the Genres of the Web | 421
               modern-web-
               design#:~:text=Aesthetics%20refers%20to%20the%
               20visual,%2C%20colors%2C%20fonts%2C%20etc.

                  Dean, Brian. "Social Network Usage & Growth
               Statistics: How Many People Use Social Media in
               2022?" Backlinko.com, 10 Oct. 2021,
               https://backlinko.com/social-media-users#most-
               popular-social-media-platforms.

                  Fitgerald, Anna. "Website Optimization for
               Beginners: Ultimate Guide to Site Improvement."
               Hubspot.com, 13 July 2022,
               https://blog.hubspot.com/website/web-
               optimization.

                  Forsey, Caroline. "How To Develop a Content
               Strategy in 7 Steps: A Start-To-Finish Guide."
               Hubspot.com, 23 Nov 2023,
               https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/content-
               marketing-
               plan#:~:text=What%20is%20content%20strategy%3
               F,engaged%20even%20after%20a%20purchase.

                  Google Search Central. "How to Write Meta
               Descriptions." Google.com, n.d.,
               https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
               appearance/snippet.

                  Hubspot.com. "What Is Inbound Marketing?"
               Hubspot.com, 2023, https://www.hubspot.com/
               inbound-marketing.

                  Hughes, Brian. "Why Meta Tags Are Still Relevant
               to SEO--And the Best Way to Use Them."
               Entrepreneur.com, 3 Jan 2020,
               https://www.entrepreneur.com/science-

422 | Writing the Genres of the Web
technology/why-meta-tags-are-still-relevant-to-
seo-and-the-best-way/
344233#:~:text=The%20right%20meta%20tags%20c
an,your%20site%2C%20which%20reduces%20frust
ration.

   Kenan, Jamia. "A Complete Guide to Creating a
Social Media Calendar." Sproutsocial.com, 20 Feb.
2023, https://sproutsocial.com/insights/social-
media-calendar/.

   Merriam-Webster. "Genre." Merriam-Webster,
Incorporated, n.d., https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/genre.

   Mehta, Kunjan. "7 Reasons Why Businesses Should
Integrate Their Website with a Digital Ecosystem."
LinkedIn.com, 20 Jan 2020,
https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/7-reasons-why-
businesses-should-integrate-website-digital-
mehta/.

   Optimizely. "Call to Action." Optimizely.com, 2023,
https://www.optimizely.com/optimization-
glossary/call-to-
action/#:~:text=What%20is%20a%20call%20to,of%
20a%20button%20or%20hyperlink.

   Patel, Niel. "21 Resources to Help You Build a
Company Website in Less Than an Hour."
NielPatel.com, 2023, https://neilpatel.com/blog/
build-a-company-website/.

   Pflugfelder, Ehren. "What Is a Genre? Definition &
Examples." Oregon State University, 2023,
https://liberalarts.oregonstate.edu/wlf/what-
genre.

                                     Writing the Genres of the Web | 423
                  Purdue Online Writing Lab. "Genre & Medium."
               Purdue University, 2002, https://owl.purdue.edu/
               owl/subject_specific_writing/
               professional_technical_writing/
               business_writing_for_administrative_and_clerical
               _staff/genre_and_medium.html.

                  ------. "The Inverted Pyramid Structure."
               Purdue.edu, 2022, https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/
               subject_specific_writing/
               journalism_and_journalistic_writing/
               the_inverted_pyramid.html#:~:text=The%20inverte
               d%20pyramid%20structure%20simply,in%20the%2
               0following%20nut%20graphs.

                  Slater, Carin. "The Ultimate Guide to Preview
               Text." Litmus.com, 28 July 2021,
               https://www.litmus.com/blog/the-ultimate-guide-
               to-preview-text-support/.

                  Turner, Josh. "Social Media Stats That Small
               Businesses Must Know to Shape Their Strategy."
               Linkedin.com, 8 Apr. 2022,
               https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/social-media-
               stats-small-businesses-must-know-shape-strategy-
               turner/.

                  Vilhauer, Corey, et al. The Web Project Guide: From
               Spark to Launch and Beyond. Blend Interactive, 2023,
               https://webproject.guide/organize/.

424 | Writing the Genres of the Web
14. Basic Design Principles

An important concept in the world of digital writing is the user
experience (UX), which the Nielsen Norman Group defines as "all
aspects of the end user's interaction with the company, its services,
and its products" (Norman and Nielsen). This is obviously a broad
area that extends beyond content writing. It includes things like
market research, product design, price structures, customer
service, and even the larger organizational structure in place to
optimize workflow and attend to specific customer needs. However,
as we've discussed in previous chapters, the user experience usually
begins online when someone in the target market first lands on the
organization's website. There are lots of things that have attracted
them to the site--a social media ad, a flier they received the mail,
a meta description on their search engine results page (SERP).
Whatever it might have been, it sparked an interest, probably
related to some sort of problem or desire that this person wants to
address. And as we've also discussed previously, once they are on
the website, it takes only a few seconds for them to judge whether
or not the potential reward is worth their effort. (See System 1 and
System 2 discussion in chapter 12). And while this snap decision
happens quickly, it's actually a pretty nuanced decision-making
process based on a number of visual cues--colors, pictures,
navigation menu, page layout and readability, and so on. Several
design elements come together to create an impression in the user's
mind about the company itself, about how relevant their offerings
are to the user's needs, and about how easy or difficult it will be to
get the information they are looking for.

            All of this relates to design--how things are organized to
enhance the user experience and create a positive impression,
which in turn increases their chances of staying on the page longer,
navigating through other pages of the website, and progressing
through the various stages of the customer journey. (Hopefully, you

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 425
are making the connection back to our unit on rhetoric: purpose,
audience, message.) Not every person who lands on a web page will
fit into the target audience, primarily because the service, product,
or experience being offered doesn't match their needs; but for those
who are in the target audience, engaging their attention is directly
related to rhetorical strategy. Yes, this is about word choice and
organization of written content, but it's also so much more. In fact,
the concept of "design" could be taken a couple of different ways.
On the one hand, web design encompasses the organizational
structure and functionality of a website--how pages are organized
in similar groupings on the navigation menu, how easy it is to
navigate from one page to the next, how hyperlinks and buttons
are used to direct users to specific information. It also relates to
the usability of the website so that pages load quickly and so that
structures are in place to aid users in specific tasks, whether that be
filling out a form or making a purchase. Effective web design makes
these processes intuitive for users and provides useful feedback
along the way, maybe to show what they have in their shopping cart
or to generate a receipt and tracking number for their purchase.
Obviously, this type of web design is complex, and it extends outside
the scope of this textbook on digital writing; nevertheless, it's an
important topic that directly relates to the overall success of a
website. Content writers and web designers often work very closely
together to create effective messaging, and it's helpful for writers
to have a sense of this bigger picture. This web design guide from
Adobe (Babich) is a good place to start, as is this LinkedIn article by
Andy Crestodina.

            On the other hand, design can also include visual elements
and page layout. While this is certainly relevant to the aesthetics of
a page, these design considerations go beyond the simple purpose
of making something look good. When done well, the visual design
of a page adds to the readability of the content, creates emotional
connections with the audience, builds trust, and has a significant
impact on the user experience. Consider the difference between a
simple web page with black font on a white background and a page

426 | Basic Design Principles
that has color, bold headings, pictures, buttons, and graphics. Even
if the written content were exactly the same, users would be much
more likely to engage with the page that has more dynamic design
elements because it's more interesting and readable, and it comes
across as more professional.

            This chapter focuses on these visual elements of design
that enhance digital writing and facilitate a more positive user
experience. In particular, we will look at principles of design that
should guide some of your choices when it comes to the overall
layout of a page and the way specific visual elements work together
to focus the user's attention and hold their interest. The goal is to
be able to apply these principles to your digital writing projects,
ranging from the simple structure of an email or social media post
to something more advanced like a blog or web page.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand how design choices influence the user
             experience.

          Relate the concept of page design to foundational
             concepts of rhetoric.

          Identify the foundational principles of web design
             and be able to apply them effectively across a number
             of digital genres.

          Consider the importance of page design from the
             user perspective, considering how certain design
             strategies will help them process information and
             easily navigate a web page.

          Understand the basics of several other prominent
             design theories, including Gestalt design principles,

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 427
             color theory, and typography.
          Take a closer look at design considerations and

             strategies that are unique to digital writing.

From Content Strategy to Page Design

As always, it's important to keep in mind two critical aspects of
your message as you begin designing the layout: your audience and
your purpose. These two things should be at the forefront of your
mind as you make design choices. Specifically, what do you want
your audience to know after reading this page? What do you want
them to do? A successful designer will think carefully about these
rhetorical purposes and use basic design principles to engage the
audience's attention, to draw their eyes to certain parts of the page,
and to create a sense of order and direction that helps the reader
process the information and follow the steps you've outlined for
them. In this section, we'll look at the fundamental principles of
design and the different ways they might be applied to a web page,
blog post, or social media ad. Then in the next sections, we'll drill
down to consider some of the design strategies that are particular
to digital writing.

Page Structure

Often the first design decision relates to the bigger picture of the
overall page structure--which different elements (or modes, if you
think back to our chapter on multimodality) will be placed on the

428 | Basic Design Principles
page and where they will go. While the layout of a page is partially
about aesthetics and creating a positive first impression, it's also
about usability. Your job is to direct the reader's attention to the
most important items on the page and help guide their process for
taking in information and responding appropriately to key prompts.
Remember that design principles are based on the user
experience--how people perceive the meaning of a message based
on the selection and arrangement of design elements. In this
Elementor blog post, Alina Khazanova reminds us that design
principles are based on research in the areas of psychology and
behavioral science (among others), which provide insight into the
cognitive process of a user and the design strategies that will
increase their likelihood of engaging with your message. With that
in mind, there are several design principles that should inform the
way that you structure elements on a page:

   Limit the amount of information on the page. Too much
      information becomes overwhelming for readers and limits
      their ability to respond appropriately. Think about the key
      purpose of the page, and highlight the most important
      information related to that purpose. If there are several pieces
      of information on the page, then consider how they might be
      "chunked" together to help readers more easily process the
      information.

   Emphasize the most important information. This goes hand in
      hand with the principle of visual hierarchy, discussed below.
      It's important to draw readers' attention to key ideas and
      action items. Readers are more likely to pay attention to things
      that are higher up on the page, bigger, and set apart from
      other information through spacing or color contrast.

   Stick with what readers know. Khazanova suggests using
      "familiar scenarios and logic" that will make a page more
      intuitive for readers, who are used to certain page structures
      and design elements. This allows them to focus less on trying
      to understand how your web page works and more on the

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 429
      information you've provided. For instance, most users would
      expect the navigation menu to be at the top of the page and to
      be the same from one page to the next. They'd expect
      appropriate spacing and sizing of information, so it's easy to
      tell how things are connected. They'd expect the call to action
      to be prominent and clearly stated.
   Create a page that has balance. According to Steven Bradley in
      this Smashing Magazine article, "Balancing a composition
      involves arranging both positive elements and negative space
      [white space] in such a way that no one area of the design
      overwhelms other areas." The elements work together to
      create a page that is visually pleasing and "stable." While some
      items on the page might have more "weight" because of their
      size and visual appeal, a balanced page arranges elements on
      the page so that, if there were a vertical line down the center
      of the page, both sides have equal weight, perhaps with several
      smaller elements on one side to balance a larger element on
      the other side. Bradley's article gives examples of both
      symmetrical and asymmetrical balance, along with some
      examples.

                                                                                        Ad layouts,
                                                                                        by JuralMin,
                                                                                        on Freerange
                                                                                        under
                                                                                        Equalicense.

430 | Basic Design Principles
            Designers use several different techniques to plan out the
overall layout of a page. For instance, Paul Boag says that all
websites operate on a grid system, with evenly spaced columns
and rows. This grid system helps with the alignment of items on
the page, which helps with balance and makes it easy to plan your
layout. Similarly, designers also use wireframes to plan out the
elements on the page (Technology Transformation Services). This
typically uses boxes (to represent images) and dummy text to plan
the placement of various elements on the page and to get an overall
impression of the layout before you invest time in putting it
together.

            For some examples of different types of page layouts, take
another look at Paul Boag's article on WebsiteSetup.org. It not only
provides layout options, but it explains how the different options fit
with different types of content and purposes.

Visual Hierarchy

The visual hierarchy and overall structure of a design go hand in
hand. While an effective page structure creates visual appeal and
makes the information easier to navigate, visual hierarchy directs
readers' attention to the most important elements on the page,
often because of their placement as well as their size. This is why
article titles are at the top of the page and the font is much bigger,
often set off in bold, colored lettering. Readers will see it first,
and it helps frame their perception of everything else on the page.
Another thing that will draw readers' attention to specific elements
is contrast--setting an item apart visually using color and negative
space. For instance, call-to-action buttons are often set apart from
the rest of the text so they are easier to see, often using a button
icon in black or some other bright color that stands out against the
background.

            Setting up a page with a clear visual hierarchy also

                                                                  Basic Design Principles | 431
improves readability because it guides readers through the content,
providing cues for what to pay attention to first, second, and so
forth, which improves their ability to quickly scan the page. Once
again, having a visual hierarchy that draws on familiar patterns will
help readers more quickly move through the information. Babich
identifies the F-shaped pattern and the Z-shaped pattern as two
very common ways to organize information on a page that fits with
readers' "natural scanning patterns."

                                                                                        Visual
                                                                                        Hierarchy,
                                                                                        by Cara
                                                                                        Miller (CC
                                                                                        BY)

Grouping Similar Items

Several of the Gestalt principles of design relate to the way people
will naturally group items together based on visual cues, which once
again helps them understand how items relate to each other and
engage with the content of a page more quickly. Let's look at some

432 | Basic Design Principles
of those principles and how they affect the reader's perception of
content:

   Proximity. According to the Gestalt principle of proximity,
      readers will naturally group items together if they are close to
      each other. Take, for instance, a photo caption, which is usually
      placed directly underneath the photo, close enough to it so
      that readers will naturally perceive it as being connected with
      the photo.

   Common region. Similar to proximity, the principle of common
      region is about the way that items are grouped together
      because of the way they are set apart in a particular
      area--often in an enclosed box or with a background that is a
      different color than the rest of the page. The navigation menu
      for most websites is usually at the top, and the items are set
      apart in a different background color. Also many web pages are
      set up so that as users scroll, they can quickly identify different
      content areas, which are set apart with different background
      colors.

   Similarity. Finally, items will be perceived as similar if they
      have similar design features, perhaps with the same border,
      color scheme, and font. They would also be the same size so
      that readers perceive them as having equal weight.

            An example of how similar items might be grouped
together might be helpful. The USA.gov home page uses all of the
elements discussed above to make it immediately clear to readers
how items relate to one another. The navigation menu at the top is
set apart in a white background, separated from the banner graphic
below. And because each of the menu items is close together and in
the same basic black font, it's clear right away what their purpose
is and how they relate to one another. Similarly, as you scroll down
the page, different content items are grouped together, and they
are easy to spot because of the background shading (the white box
with "How do I..." for instance). Also, items within each grouping use

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 433
similar design elements, using the same font style and size as well
as color choices. The content section below, for instance, uses three
pictures that are all the same size, evenly spaced, and directly below
the text that describes what each link is about. This, in tandem
with the "Life Events" heading that would naturally draw readers'
attention first, helps readers to clearly see the relationship between
the photos, which underscore the different ways the organization
helps the community.

                                                                                        USA.gov
                                                                                        homepage,
                                                                                        by USA.gov
                                                                                        (CC0)

Consistency

Many of the design principles we've already discussed relate to
consistency (also known as repetition) so that readers know what to
expect and can easily read and interpret the content provided. This
434 | Basic Design Principles
relates to a lot of different choices, from organizational structure to
smaller design considerations like color, spacing, and font. Perhaps
the best way to think about the importance of consistency is to
imagine a page that isn't consistent--that uses different font shapes
and sizes and lots of different colors throughout. Not only would it
be unattractive and difficult to determine what to look at first, but it
would be harder to understand the relationship between elements,
as discussed above, because the similar features that connect
elements would be missing. Consistency also relates to the branding
of an organization. The website should be strategically designed
using a color scheme and design patterns that align with the overall
image the organization is trying to create, and using these same
structures consistently within a page and from one page to the next
helps develop that brand. Below are a few specific ways to develop
consistency:

   Page structure and organization. As discussed above, you can
      create consistency by utilizing organizational patterns that
      readers are already familiar with, which will make your site
      more intuitive for users. Once you've decided on a structure,
      then you'd try to be consistent with that structure throughout.
      For instance, the navigation menu should be the same from
      one page to the next. If you have a blog with different articles,
      each article would be laid out in similar patterns.

   Color scheme. Often the color scheme is consistent with other
      branding elements like the logo and other marketing materials
      so that everything looks like it goes together. Color is also an
      important element that can evoke readers' emotional
      responses, so it should be used appropriately to build the
      brand. A kids' laser tag facility would obviously use bright,
      electric colors to create a feeling of excitement in the
      audience. In contrast, a funeral home would obviously use
      more subtle, soft colors.

   Font. Because readers group similar items together based on
      design choices, it's important to be consistent with font--page

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 435
      titles, headings, second-level headings. These would probably
      all be the same font style and color. Headings of equal
      importance would be the same font size with the same amount
      of spacing between.
   Other design elements. Whatever treatment you give to one
      element, you should apply it to all similar elements. If, for
      instance, one of your call-to-action buttons is a black
      rectangle with sharp corners, they should all look like that so
      they are easier to spot. If one callout box has a drop shadow,
      they should all have drop shadows.

                                                                                        Consistency,
                                                                                        by Cara
                                                                                        Miller (CC
                                                                                        BY)

            While not everything on every page has to be exactly the
same (see below about variety), creating consistency between key
elements makes the overall design seem more unified, and it creates
a more even and intuitive experience for the user.

436 | Basic Design Principles
Variety

An effective design uses a variety of design elements to engage
readers as well as to clarify information. Chapter 10 in this textbook
discussed multimodal messages and the power that various
modes--images, text, color, video, sound--have to help clarify and
enhance the meaning of a message. For that reason, and because it's
more visually appealing and interesting, you should think about how
to use a variety of elements to draw readers' attention.

            Importantly, you can still be consistent while drawing on
a variety of design elements. Take color, for instance: a web page
would be boring and more difficult to read if it were just one color
throughout. However, if you use the same two or three colors
consistently--across various types of texts and content areas--then
you have a variety of colors that direct readers' attention without
being overwhelming. Another way to use variety is through imagery,
breaking up text blocks with photos and other graphics elements
(icons, pie charts, tables, cartoons) that are relevant to the overall
message and that help inform the readers' interpretation of the
message.

            Once again, it's important not to go overboard. When too
many things are happening on a page, it's overwhelming for readers.
Nothing is emphasized because there are too many elements to
look at. Being strategic about the elements that should go on a
page and how to utilize variety with a couple of different modes of
communication will go a long way.

Quality

It should probably go without saying that the elements that you do
include on a page should be high quality, creating a professional
look and feel. This relates to all of the design principles we've

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 437
discussed up to this point, but here let's focus specifically on
pictures and videos. A quality photo, for instance, is one that is
in focus and is a high enough resolution so that it isn't pixelated
or blurry. It has a clear focal point with the image positioned
appropriately, so that it fits comfortably into the frame. There
wouldn't be anything in the foreground or in the background that
would create a distraction. If you've taken very many candid photos,
you know that this is easier said than done. We often take photos
that are slightly out of focus or where the lighting is off, so there
isn't a good view of a person's face. Fortunately, there are photo
editing tools that can help with some of these issues, but it's better
to start with a high-quality image. The main point is to only include
the best photos on your website or digital design.

            The same thing can be said for videos, which are an
increasingly common way to engage visitors either on a website or
through social media. Videos can be an excellent tool because they
provide clear visuals that can help viewers see a particular process,
event, or product. They can also create emotional connections as
viewers see people's faces and hear their voices. However, there's
a lot that goes into creating an effective video that reduces
background noise, that creates interesting and dynamic scenes, that
avoids "dead air" or transitions that are too slow as well as camera
movements that are too fast or wobbly, that uses effective voice
overs and sound effects, that has the appropriate lighting, that
effectively integrates text and other visual elements, and so on.
Once again, video editing tools have evolved significantly in the last
few years, which makes it possible for anyone to enhance the quality
of the videos they put online. There are also plenty of YouTube
videos--for video editing as well as photo editing techniques.

     Activity 14.1

438 | Basic Design Principles
        Let's put some of the design principles listed above into
     action. Review the FedEx home page--or any other website
     of your choosing. You should go through the design
     principles listed above and consider how they are applied
     on the page. Which ones strike you as being the most
     effective in both engaging readers (both visually and
     emotionally) and helping them easily navigate the
     information on the page.

        Now reverse engineer the page by creating your own
     wireframe of the page structure. You can do this with a
     pencil and paper and really basic boxes and text blocks to
     represent the various elements.

        Now consider how the page might have been structured
     differently. Create a new wireframe that organizes the
     elements in a different way. Consider how you could utilize
     some of the other design principles listed above to engage
     readers in this new page design.

Other Design Theories

While this chapter isn't intended to be an exhaustive resource on
visual design, it would probably be helpful to at least mention some
of the other design theories that could be useful in your decision-
making process as you put together the visual elements of a web
page, blog post, or digital ad. The principles listed above are the
most basic and also the most foundational design principles that can
be immediately applied to your digital writing and design projects.
This section will mention other prominent design theories that may
provide a deeper understanding of the audience perception and

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 439
some of the nuances in your design choices that can have a
significant impact.

Gestalt Design Principles

Many of the principles identified above draw from Gestalt
psychology, which is the study of how people perceive design
elements on a page to create meaning (Encyclopedia Britannica).
Gestalt theory looks at the entire layout of a design and considers
the way that elements work together to create meaning. Thus,
elements aren't viewed in "isolation" but as contributors toward the
entire message. There are seven classic Gestalt principles, some
of which we've already mentioned (ManyPixels), but they are listed
briefly again here so they can be viewed all together:

   Similarity. As already discussed, the principle of similarity
      helps readers group items together that have similar features.
      However, it can be used to make certain items stand apart
      from the group in some way.

   Good figure of simplicity. Viewers will always reduce a
      complex design to its simplest form because it's easier to
      process. The ManyPixels blog uses the example of the
      Olympics logo, which most people will perceive as five
      overlapping circles as opposed to something more complex.
      This relates directly to the principles discussed above about
      limiting the amount of information and visual elements on the
      page. Simpler designs are much easier for readers to process
      and to remember.

   Proximity. Viewers are more likely to group items together
      when they are near each other. This is a good way to
      demonstrate a relationship between these elements and also
      to make other elements--spaced further away--stand out.

   Continuity. Our minds have the tendency to connect items if

440 | Basic Design Principles
   they follow the same line or curve. According to this principle,
   simply lining information up in a line from left to right or top
   to bottom, sometimes using actual lines or arrows to connect
   them, will help readers group items together and sequence
   how they process information.
 Closure. For shapes and images that are disconnected in some
   way, viewers will automatically fill in the gaps so they can
   perceive the entire image. A classic example is a circle that is
   formed along a dotted line. Despite the fact that it isn't a
   closed circle, a viewer will automatically close the gaps to see
   the circle shape, instead of seeing a smattering of random
   dots.
 Figure/ground. When looking at a picture or other page
   layout, we will immediately try to discern what is in the
   foreground (the figure or focal point of the picture) and what is
   in the background. Obviously, the more important items that
   you want viewers to pay attention to should be in the
   foreground, contrasted in some way from the background.
 Common fate. This principle states that people will tend to
   group items together that seem to be moving in or pointing in
   the same direction. A simple example might be italicized text
   that is all pointing in the same direction. We'd be more likely to
   see that text as connected together because of the common
   angle of the font.

                                                               Basic Design Principles | 441
                                                                                        Gestalt
                                                                                        Design
                                                                                        Principles,
                                                                                        by Cara
                                                                                        Miller (CC
                                                                                        BY)

442 | Basic Design Principles
Color Theory

There are lots of different ways to talk about color and the effect it
can have on the audience. For starters, there is a difference between
hue (what we normally think of as the color of something--e.g.,
green or blue) and other visual qualities, such as shade (light or dark)
and saturation (how pale or bright the color appears). Obviously,
colors that are more vibrant--a brighter, more saturated color--will
have more visual weight and be more likely to draw the viewer's
attention.

            Color theory also relates to the emotions that different
colors evoke in the audience. You probably already know that there
are "warmer" colors like red, orange, and yellow and "cooler" colors
like blue, purple, and green. These colors can be used strategically
to enhance a message or the overall tone of a design. Similarly,
different colors are often associated with different meanings
(Bowman). Red is often associated with love, anger, or warmth.
Yellow is often connected with happiness and excitement. And so
forth. Color choice can have a significant impact on how a message
is interpreted and the feelings that the audience associates with
that message.

            Finally, color theory focuses on the ways that colors work
together to create an overall visual impression or experience
(Interaction Design Foundation). The only way that one element
would be emphasized using color is if other items were de-
emphasized with contrasting colors that were less vibrant. There
are also the dynamics of how different color combinations pair
together to create complementary (opposing) or analogous (similar)
effects. The main goal is to use a consistent color palette that has
a variety of colors that work well together and to use color
strategically throughout the design to create emphasis. As always,
color choice is one key element in a much larger strategy to convey
a particular message, build your brand, engage viewers, and evoke
particular responses.

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 443
Typography

As the name suggests, the study of typography relates to the way
that text is designed so that a message is both readable and
interesting. While the particulars of typography--the different
classifications of fonts and the different parts of a letter--can be
quite detailed and specific (Bowers), here we will focus on the
primary considerations of typography, assuming that you will be
making font selections instead of creating your own.

            The main consideration when it comes to typography is
readability. Obviously, the text comprises an important part of the
overall message, and you want readers to be able to easily read it,
from the largest headings and titles down to the smaller text blocks.
There are a few basic strategies that will make the font easier to
read:

   Size. Obviously, the bigger the font, the easier it is to read. As
      previously mentioned, your titles and headings will be larger
      than some of the other text blocks and will therefore naturally
      pull readers' attention, but they should also be able to read the
      "smaller" print of an article or web page. A good rule of thumb
      for digital writing is to use 11-point font or larger. Of course,
      the size will vary depending on the context. If the text is going
      on a digital screen in an area where readers will be reading it
      from a distance, the font size will be significantly larger.

   Font choice. As we'll discuss below, different fonts have
      different personalities that might enhance the emotional
      quality of your message, so it's probably okay to play around
      with different font styles for titles and ad copy where only a
      few words are selected and the font is relatively large.
      However, for larger blocks of text that require more sustained
      readability, it's much better to stick with a standard sans serif
      font, meaning that it doesn't have additional strokes and
      projections at the ends of a letter. For example, look at the two

444 | Basic Design Principles
      F's below. The one on the left is in a sans serif font, and the one
      on the right is in a serif font.

             As you can see, the serif font on the right has extra marks
          at the base and at the ends. While this might create a more
          formal look, it is harder to read, particularly for large text
          blocks in a smaller font. And obviously, the more pronounced
          and ornate the serfs become, utilizing lots of different swirls
          and other elements, the more difficult it would be to read.

   Contrast. The final consideration with readability is about
      contrast, so that the lettering is set apart from the background
      enough so that it is easy to read. One of the biggest mistakes
      novice designers make is to use a font color that doesn't have
      enough contrast with the background--a light gray font on a
      white background, for instance, or red font on a black
      background. There has to be enough contrast so that the text
      easily stands out. You'd especially want to keep this in mind for
      text that goes over the top of an image. Once again, without
      the right contrast, it can be extremely difficult to read the text
      over an image. That's why many designers use the negative
      space of a picture, create drop shadows around the text, or use
      text boxes--all of which can be used to increase the contrast so
      that the text stands out.

            The other consideration with typography is about the
overall emotional quality personality of various font styles and how

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 445
they might be used to enhance your message. Again, readability is
key, so you wouldn't use different font treatments for larger chunks
of text, but for a title or a short line of ad copy, a unique font
can have a significant effect on the audience's interpretation. It
might help if you first consider the overall purpose and tone of
the message, the impression that you are trying to create in the
mind of the reader, and that will likely guide your font choices.
Is the tone of the message serious? In that case, it might make
sense to go with a more traditional sans serif font. Are you trying
to demonstrate the elegance of a particular product or event? In
that case, a more formal script font like Edwardian would be more
appropriate. On the other hand, if you want to invite a bunch of
children to a kid's birthday party, then you'd want a font that seems
playful and fun--Curlz, for instance. While there are lots of different
fonts to choose from that might create the right impression in
your audience, there are definitely fonts that would be the wrong
choice. Consider, for instance, a wedding invitation that is created
in Curlz font. Instead of sending the message that the event would
be formal and sophisticated, the invitation would probably create
some confusion and maybe even some anxiety about what to expect.

     Activity 14.2

        Consider the list of messages below. What type of font do
     you think would be most appropriate for each one? Give an
     example for each one:

          Job rsum
          Yard sale sign
          Graduation open house
          Funeral bulletin

446 | Basic Design Principles
          Ad for a neighborhood block party
          Public service announcement about suicide

             awareness
          Course syllabus
          Divorce papers
          "Closeout" sale
          Feel free to come up with your own

Special Considerations for Digital Design

As you put together designs that will be viewed on digital devices,
there are a few special considerations that enhance usability:

   File sizes. We've already discussed the fact that you should
      only use quality images and videos to engage viewers, but the
      other side of that is that higher-resolution images and high-
      quality videos are usually really big files that take up precious
      storage space and often result in longer loading times, which
      can quickly frustrate impatient users. Fortunately, web
      graphics don't need to be as high-resolution as print graphics
      (72 dpi compared to 300 dpi), which means the files will be
      significantly smaller. Further, saving the file as a .jpg or .png
      results in a smaller file than a .tif or a .psd file. For videos, there
      are online applications you can use to compress video files into
      something smaller. Alternatively, you might consider uploading
      video files to YouTube and then embedding the video link on
      your website, which means that the video will still play on your
      web page, but the video itself isn't housed there.

   Cascading style sheets. With so many WYSIWYG (What You

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 447
      See Is What You Get) platforms, it's no longer necessary for
      you to know how to code a website in HTML to create one.
      Cascading style sheets describe a way of coding the elements
      on a web page so that they are consistent across different
      pages--so that the title of each page, for instance, has the same
      font style, font size, color choice, and spacing. Most web
      platforms have these types of choices built in so that you can
      make selections that will be consistent across different pages
      of your website without having to know the HTML code.
      Utilizing these options will help you more easily create
      consistency and unity.
   Hyperlinks and buttons. Here's where your design choices can
      leverage concepts that your audience is familiar with, and
      since your hyperlinks and buttons usually accompany your call
      to action--inviting readers to take some sort of step toward
      your desired goal--it's important that they recognize these
      elements. It's pretty simple, really. A hyperlink is usually in blue
      font, underlined. This is the universal signal that the text is a
      hyperlink to a relevant page, and following this convention will
      make it much more likely that readers will recognize the
      hyperlink and click it. Usually, pages are structured so that
      internal links open in the same screen, whereas external links
      will open up a new window, making it possible for readers to
      return to the original page. In that case, it's helpful to set up
      your hyperlinks so that they change colors once they have
      been clicked (maybe from blue to purple) so that readers can
      visually see where they've already been. Similarly, buttons are
      more often used as the overall call to action--to "read more," to
      "apply now," to "subscribe," and so on. While some of the more
      subtle style choices might vary, it would be to your benefit to
      make your buttons look similar--not only from one page to the
      next but also in comparison to other websites.
   Mobile responsiveness. A mobile-responsive website is one
      that reformats for maximum readability and usability
      depending on the user's device (Constant Contact). So instead

448 | Basic Design Principles
      of displaying the same, shrunken-down version of the home
      page on your cell phone, the overall format changes so that key
      items are bigger and formatted vertically, so it's easier to scroll
      through and click on the items that you want. This is helpful
      not only when going from a laptop to a cell phone but also
      when switching from one screen size to the next or one type of
      browser to the next. It ensures that the items are reformatted
      appropriately. Once again, many web platforms are mobile
      responsive and make it possible for you to toggle back and
      forth between multiple views as you put a page together.
   Testing. One great thing about digital design is that it's
      relatively easy to change. Content strategists and web
      developers are constantly "testing" the effectiveness of their
      pages, not just through form feedback but also through various
      metrics that show how long viewers stayed on a specific page,
      how many people clicked on the CTA, and so on. Playing
      around with different versions and monitoring the results lets
      you gauge how your design choices are landing with your
      audience and to make improvements along the way.

            There is a lot to consider when it comes to the design of
your digital projects, and sometimes having so many options can
be overwhelming. The good news is that there are lots of online
resources that you can draw from as well as successful (and
unsuccessful) websites where you can draw inspiration and remind
yourself of various pitfalls.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is the user experience (UX) and how does the

                                                                 Basic Design Principles | 449
             overall "design" of a website influence the user
             experience? Consider the different types of "design"
             discussed in the introduction.
        2. How does the design of a message relate to
             rhetoric? Be specific about how it relates to some of
             the terms we've already discussed: purpose, audience,
             genre, persuasive appeals, and so on.
        3. The design principles identified in this chapter are
             based on research in the area of psychology and
             behavioral sciences that look closely at how people
             process and respond to information. Explain this
             reciprocal relationship between audience perspective
             and design.
        4. The chapter lists six foundational principles of web
             design. Identify each one, and give a brief overview of
             what each one means and how it might be applied.
        5. What is a wireframe and how might it be used to
             help you plan your design?
        6. Many of the foundational web design principles
             identified near the beginning of the chapter overlap
             in some ways. For instance, the principles of page
             structure and visual hierarchy both relate to the
             arrangement of elements on the page and strategies
             to emphasize important ideas. What other ideas
             overlap across some of the design strategies
             discussed in this chapter?
         7. Explain how a digital design can have both variety
             and consistency.
        8. What are the Gestalt design principles? How do
             they relate to some of the principles discussed in the
             first part of the chapter?
        9. In what ways do the sections on color theory and

450 | Basic Design Principles
        typography build on the design principles already
        discussed?
  10. Explain some of the special design considerations
        that are unique to digital writing. Can you think of
        any others that aren't specifically mentioned in the
        chapter?

Sources

             Babich, Nick. "Web Page Design: A Comprehensive
          Guide." Adobe.com, 24 Nov. 2020,
          https://xd.adobe.com/ideas/principles/web-
          design/web-page-design/.

             Boag, Paul. "10 Good Website Layout Ideas (with
          Examples)." WebsiteSetup.org, 11 Dec. 2022,
          https://websitesetup.org/website-layouts/.

             Bowers, Micah. "Dissecting the Intricacies of
          Typography Anatomy (with Infographic)." Toptal.com,
          n.d., https://www.toptal.com/designers/
          typography/typography-anatomy-infographic.

             Bowman, Amanda. "How to Choose Brand Colors
          and What Color Says about Your Business."
          CrowdSpring.com, 4 May 2022,
          https://www.crowdspring.com/blog/small-
          business-branding-color/.

                                                            Basic Design Principles | 451
                  Bradley, Steven. "Design Principles:
               Compositional, Symmetrical, and Asymmetrical
               Balance." SmashingMagazine.com, 10 Mar 2017,
               https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2015/06/
               design-principles-compositional-balance-
               symmetry-asymmetry/.

                  Constant Contact. "Mobile-Friendly vs. Mobile-
               Responsive." ConstantContact.com, 22 Dec. 2022,
               https://www.constantcontact.com/blog/website-
               mobile-friendly-vs-mobile-
               responsive/#:~:text=Mobile%2Dresponsive%20%E2
               %80%93%20Websites%20that%20are,pictures%20a
               re%20resized%20and%20reformatted.

                  Crestodina, Andy. "Web Design Standards vs.
               Website Best Practices: Our Review of 500 Sites
               [New Research]." LinkedIn.com, 27 Apr. 2022,
               https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/web-design-
               standards-vs-website-best-practices-
               our-500-crestodina/.

                  Encyclopedia Britannica. "Gestalt Psychology."
               Britannica.com, 2 Dec. 2022,
               https://www.britannica.com/science/Gestalt-
               psychology.

                  FedEx. Fedex.com, 2023, https://www.fedex.com/
               en-us/open-account/
               ag13398602.html?cmp=KNC-1001816-61-10-950-1110
               000-US-US-EN-
               BRZ0001Z01ZDR40&gclid=Cj0KCQ jwk7ugBhDIARIsA
               GuvgPaYSfRtTCauFjvPynrF5RT140dXxr-
               CesMUVNn3EsvpIzes9-NZEiQaAnI0EALw_wcB&gcls
               rc=aw.ds.

452 | Basic Design Principles
   Interaction Design Foundation. "What Is Color
Theory?" Interaction-design.org, n.d.,
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
topics/color-theory.

   Khazanova, Alina. "20 Principles of Website Design
Every Web Professional Should Know."
Elementor.com, 23 Jan 2022, https://elementor.com/
blog/principles-of-website-design/.

   ManyPixels. "Gestalt Principles in Graphic Design."
ManyPixels.com, 9 June 2022,
https://www.manypixels.co/blog/post/gestalt-
principles-in-graphic-design.

   Norman, Don, and Jakob Nielsen. "The Definition
of User Experience (UX)." Nielsen Norman Group,
2023, https://www.nngroup.com/articles/
definition-user-
experience/#:~:text=Summary%3A%20%22User%2
0experience%22%20encompasses,its%20services%
2C%20and%20its%20products.

   Technology Transformation Services.
"Wireframing." Usability.gov, 14 Mar 2023,
https://www.usability.gov/how-to-and-tools/
methods/
wireframing.html#:~:text=A%20wireframe%20is%20
a%20two,styling%2C%20color%2C%20or%20graphi
cs.

   USA.gov. "Making Government Sources Easier to
Find." USA.gov, n.d., https://www.usa.gov/.

                                                Basic Design Principles | 453
15. Branding, Content

Strategy, and SEO

While many of us might take the Google search bar for granted each
day, search engines are remarkable tools that make the internet
functional. Researchers estimate that there are nearly 2 billion
websites currently online (Djuraskovic), with somewhere between
30 and 50 billion individual web pages indexed through Google
(Georgiev). Perhaps even more mind-blowing is the rate of increase.
Remember that the World Wide Web was launched in 1991, just
over 30 years ago, and as web publishing tools have become more
accessible, an increasing number of websites are created each year.
In the last 8 years (since 2015), the number of websites has doubled.
Siteefy.com estimates that 252,000 new websites are created each
day, which equates to 10,500 new sites each hour (Huss).

            It's amazing that so much information exists on this thing
called the internet and that anyone can access it from almost
anywhere using a device that fits in their pocket. And perhaps even
more amazing than that is the ability to quickly--often with very
little effort--type in a couple of terms into the search bar and be
connected immediately with the information that you are looking
for. Out of the 50 billion web pages that exist in Google's database,
it finds pages that are (usually) relevant to your search and presents
them in a search engine results page (SERP) that is easy to peruse,
increasing your chances of landing on the exact right page that fits
your query. The topics are limitless--daily news stories, historical
documents, product reviews, travel tips, studies in academic
journals, healthcare information, and so on. According to the latest
statistics from Oberlo, Google responds to more than 99,000 search
queries per second, adding up to 8.5 billion searches each day.
That doesn't include queries on other search engines, such as Bing,
Yahoo, and Baidu (Broadband Search).

454 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
            The point is that the content on any given web page is
only valuable if people can access it. In chapter 13, we discussed
the primary importance of an organization's website, which is at the
center of its communication strategy and houses key information
about the mission, products and services, and daily operations of
the company. In many cases, a customer can complete the entire
buyer journey--from start to finish--online without ever setting foot
inside the store. However, the entire process hinges on the
customer's ability to find the company's website, so that when they
identify their need and put in search terms to find a viable solution,
they are connected with relevant resources and can quickly and
easily discern that a particular website will provide the best
solution. This is what it means to be "optimized." In general, this
term means that something is working at top efficiency so that it's
as effective and useful as possible. In the world of website design
and digital writing, it means that the website is developed using
strategies that not only enhance the user experience when they are
on the website but also help them find the website in the first place.
A web page with effective SEO (search engine optimization) makes
it easier for Google (and other search engines) to find, index, and
rank the page. The better the SEO, the easier it is for Google to
distinguish how relevant the page is to a particular search and the
higher that page will rank on the SERP. This is the most effective
way to draw traffic to a website. In fact, compared to pay-per-click
(PPC) advertising, the "organic" search results that emerge through
effective SEO are approximately 20 times more likely to bring traffic
to a website (Moz).

            This chapter focuses on the fundamentals of SEO and how
to effectively integrate it into a website to increase traffic and
audience engagement. First, we'll briefly review larger concepts of
content strategy, branding, and digital orchestration so that you
can see how SEO fits into this bigger picture. We'll then look more
closely at how search engines work, the benefits of SEO, and the
specific strategies for incorporating effective, ethical SEO into a
website.

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 455
     Learning Objectives

          Understand what SEO is and how it relates to the
             success of your digital content.

          Consider how SEO fits into larger branding and
             content strategies.

          Learn how search engines work to provide users
             with relevant results.

          Be able to create a list of relevant and useful
             keywords based on audience needs and search
             patterns.

          Learn how to successfully implement keywords on
             a web page in order to strengthen SEO and improve
             page rankings.

          Learn about other important SEO strategies,
             including featured snippets, internal links, backlinks,
             and SEO analytics.

          Understand the difference between white hat,
             black hat, and gray hat SEO and how they relate to
             the user experience and the overall credibility of your
             website.

The Connection between Content Strategy
and SEO

It's important to contextualize SEO in the context of an
organization's larger brand and content strategy. Otherwise, it's

456 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
easy to focus on keywords and lose sight of your larger goals, which
are largely about building connections with an audience and helping
them solve problems. Yes, a large part of content strategy is about
traffic--bringing people to your page. But remember that you're not
focused on getting just anybody to your content. Effective content
strategy is grounded in market research and careful planning that
targets specific types of people who are most likely to be interested
in the information you are providing. And once these people in your
target audience are on your page, your larger content strategy helps
them quickly and easily find the information they are looking for
while also creating a positive impression of your organization and
your overall mission.

            In other words, SEO is an important tool that can create
awareness, extend the reach of your messaging, and intrigue people
in your target audience to learn more, but it's only successful if
it aligns with a larger content strategy that focuses on the needs
of your audience. Julie McCoy writes that effective SEO drives
"profitable traffic" and "high-quality inbound leads," which
demonstrates that not all leads are equal. A high-quality lead is
someone who wants the product, service, or information that you
are offering because it solves a problem or fulfills some sort of
desire. Yes, content marketing is often about "nudging" people along
to create new needs and desires they didn't know they had, but
ideally, there are already people in the world who have identified
a need, and if they only knew about your product or service or
experience and how it would satisfy that need, they would be eager
to engage with your website. McCoy goes on to say, "To provide
meaningful and useful information, you need to understand who
your prospects are and what they need from you. This insight guides
you in creating content with a purpose."

            It's no wonder, then, that one of the first steps McCoy
recommends for effective SEO is to identify and seek to understand
your target audience. What are their needs? How would they define
the problem they are experiencing? What types of things do they
prioritize as they consider viable solutions to their problem? What

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 457
are some of their other values, experiences, affordances, and
challenges that would drive their decision-making process? You
might recall that many of these questions relate directly to the
section on audience research and personas that we discussed in
chapter 9, and it's a crucial aspect of content strategy because it
guides all of your other decisions about what type of content to
write and which channels to use.

            More specifically, understanding the target audience and
developing a content strategy that prioritizes their needs (as
opposed to your own ranking) provides several important
advantages:

   Useful content. You'll not only get a better understanding of
      the search terms that your target audience might use but also
      the intent behind those terms--the type of information they
      are looking for, which will direct the type of information that
      you put on your website and provide direction for blog
      content.

   Engaging content. Audience research helps you understand
      more nuanced preferences about the best format for your
      content (e.g., a blog article, a video, an infographic, etc.) as well
      as the overall tone and design considerations that are most
      likely to engage their attention.

   Stronger branding. With a better understanding of audience
      expectations and values, you can highlight stories and aspects
      of your mission that build trust and emotional connection.
      What's more, as you develop useful content that audiences
      want to share, more backlinks will naturally direct audiences to
      your content, and your reputation as an authority in a
      particular area will grow (Lyons).

   A higher ranking. Too many people try to "trick" the system to
      receive a higher ranking, but the real secret--the thing that
      Google prioritizes in its algorithms that index and rank web
      pages--is relevance (Sharma). The more useful it is to the
      audience, the higher it will rank on the SERP.

458 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
   Effective digital orchestration. Audience awareness helps
      your digital orchestration because you have a better sense of
      which platforms your target audience uses and the types of
      content that would be most compelling.

   More conversions. In the end, better digital orchestration and
      content strategy means that more people in the target
      audience will visit your website and persist through the buyer
      journey, whether that means buying a product, making a
      donation, volunteering for an event, or simply bookmarking
      your page as an important resource.

How a Search Engine Works

Before we get into the particulars of SEO strategy, it might be
helpful to have a better understanding of how search engines work
to find and sort relevant content. According to Google, this process
happens automatically as web pages are added, but there are
definitely key strategies that make it easier for Googlebot to access
and correctly index content (Google, "Search Engine Optimization";
Google, "Googlebot"). Since Google is by far the most dominant
search engine, capturing 90% of all searches worldwide (Broadband
Search), we'll focus on its process, which involves three basic steps
("In-Depth Guide"):

 1. Crawling. Googlebot is programmed to constantly send out
      "spiders" that locate new and updated web pages so they can
      be added to the list. These spiders "fetch" pages by following
      the links on existing pages and then following the links on
      those new pages and so forth, which adds to billions of web
      pages that have been identified. Most of the time, you want
      Google to crawl your pages so they can be added to the index,
      so you'll want to eliminate any potential obstacles, including
      broken links, multiple URLs that point to the same content,

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 459
      content that requires a password, and network or server issues
      (Google, "Optimize"). You can also block spiders from crawling
      certain pages that you don't want to be indexed--an internal
      human resources page, for instance--which eliminates
      unnecessary crawling and prevents people from accessing
      pages you don't want them to see (Google, "How Google
      Interprets").
2. Indexing. As the name implies, this is the process of discerning
      what a particular page is about so the page can be accessed
      later on in response to a relevant query. This includes the
      content on the page that is visible to users--the titles,
      subheadings, and other written content. It also includes meta
      descriptions, content tags, and alt descriptions that can be
      used to label videos and pictures. Pages are more likely to be
      indexed if the content is easy to discern, if the content is
      meaningful and reliable for potential users, and if the page
      seems to be functional with working links and information that
      loads quickly.
3. Providing search results. This is where ranking comes into
      play. When a person does a Google search, Google tries to
      match the keywords from the search to the pages it has
      indexed in order to find the content that is the most relevant.
      The more relevant and high quality the content, the higher it
      will rank on the search engine results page. Although the
      precise algorithm Google uses to sort and rank pages is a trade
      secret (DeMers), the goal is to provide a positive user
      experience by providing meaningful content, which is why
      pages that don't seem relevant or that are clearly trying to
      work the system with unintelligible keyword stuffing won't
      show up in the ranking. Google says, "Relevancy is determined
      by hundreds of factors, which could include information such
      as the user's location, language, and device (desktop or phone).
      For example, searching for `bicycle repair shops' would show
      different results to a user in Paris than it would to a user in
      Hong Kong" ("In-Depth Guide").

460 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
            The goal of SEO is to improve a page's ranking so that it
appears higher up on the list of relevant pages and has a better
chance of being seen by interested users. In fact, the number one
organic result on a SERP (organic meaning it's not one of the
"sponsored" sites at the very top) has a much higher click-through
rate (up to 10 times higher) than pages on down the list, and very
few users (.67%) visit the second page of the results list (Dea). Think
of the thousands of potential web pages that are probably relevant
to a given query. Though a lot of quality pages exist with the types
of content people are looking for, they have relatively low traffic to
their site (and probably lower sales and weaker brand recognition)
because their website isn't optimized.

            Here it's probably helpful to remind you that Google's
algorithms aren't neutral, and many people argue that they aren't
really about providing users with the most useful or quality
information. "The internet has a reputation as a democratic space,
yet the commercial interests that influence what we can find online
are largely invisible," said Dr. Helen Kara in a review of Safiya Umoja
Noble's book Algorithms of Oppression. In other words, Google is not
as much of an information company as it is an advertising company,
and even beyond the sponsored sites, Google privileges content that
serves its own financial interests. That's not to say that there isn't
value in optimizing your website so that your messaging is clear and
easy for users to find. It's simply a reminder that even in the most
basic digital writing tasks--utilizing keywords, for instance--take on
new meaning when you apply a critical perspective, which can help
guide your writing strategies and expectations. The remainder of
this chapter will focus on how to incorporate SEO into a web page
to improve its ranking and overall visibility.

Creating Keywords

At its core, SEO is about identifying the keywords that the target

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 461
audience will use when they search for information and then using
those keywords throughout your web content so that the page is
properly indexed and ranks high on the SERP for queries that use
those keywords. As we've already mentioned, this is largely about
understanding your audience--their needs, values, priorities, and
potential obstacles--so that you can provide meaningful content
that will engage their interest. But it's also about understanding
people's search habits, which can be difficult to figure out. Most
people type in a couple of words or a short phrase into the search
bar, and Google tries to figure out their search intent--the type
of content they are looking for (Backlinko, "Search Intent"). For
instance, if a person types "ice cream" in the search bar, it might
be hard to decipher what type of information they are looking for.
Local ice cream shops? Recipes? Brands? Ingredients? Does the
intent also include yogurt? What about soft serve ice cream? And
what if the person spells the word wrong--"ice creem"? Google
tries to resolve some of these issues using language models that
fix spelling errors and include a variety of synonyms (Google, "How
Results"). It also analyzes the search terms that are given and
suggests ways that users might narrow their search. If a person
types in "ice cream recipes," for instance, they'd get a different list
of results than if they had typed "ice cream stores." You might also
notice that as you begin to type in search terms, Google provides
suggestions for popular queries. If you begin a search with "ice
cream" for instance, Google offers suggestions to help narrow the
search: "near me," "cake," "maker," "flavors." And then once you
complete your query and review the results page, Google will often
offer a list of alternative phrases that "people also search for" to help
guide your search (Dakner).

            As you can see, identifying a user's intent is crucial.
"Satisfying search intent is a primary goal for Google, which in
turn makes it a primary goal for SEO's," says Dawn Macri, who
goes on to explain that search intent should be the foundation
that guides content that is specific and responds to the needs of
different people at different stages of the marketing funnel: "From

462 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
those who are still to discover your brand to those looking to
convert, you can increase your chances of reaching them all by
focusing your efforts to match search intent" (Macri). There are four
broad categories of search intent:

   Informational: Searchers are looking for basic information
      about a term, a process, an event, and so on. They might
      include the terms "how to" or "what is" in addition to the
      general topic. For instance: "What is SEO" or "How to build a
      website." Other searches may be about "the history of" a
      particular topic or "the main ingredients in" a specific food or
      "the effects of" a particular phenomenon. Thinking clearly
      about how people might qualify their search can help content
      writers implement a variety of keywords that match.

   Commercial: Searchers are looking for a particular product or
      service, and they're beginning the search to weigh their
      purchase options. In that case, they might search for specific
      brand names, but they might also search more broadly for the
      "top rated" or the "best" or the "most popular" or the "most
      affordable" options. They might also provide geographical
      qualifications to specify a particular city or that they are
      looking for stores "near me."

   Transactional: Users have done the research and are ready to
      make a purchase, usually from a particular company or brand.
      An example might be "Air Jordan basketball shoes" or "Scott's
      lawn service." Search terms might also include specific types of
      information the user wants to find related to a "subscription,"
      "pricing," "package options," or "making an appointment." You
      can probably see how specific pages on a website, clearly
      identified in the navigation menu and as part of the URL, can
      utilize these keywords.

   Navigational: Searchers are looking for a specific website, but
      because they don't have the URL, they type the name of the
      website into the search bar to help them navigate to the right
      page. Perhaps they are looking for the "login" page or the

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 463
      "home page," or they might remember the title of the page.

Understanding these different types of search intents and the
specific words users might use to qualify their search can be
incredibly helpful in identifying relevant keywords. These are called
"long-tail keywords," which are more specific to the user's intent
and are less competitive than "short-tail keywords," which are very
broad (Yadegar). While short-tail keywords are usually just one or
two broad terms that are very popular and relate to a much higher
search volume ("ice cream," for instance), they are also more generic
and are therefore much less likely to match the user's intent. Long-
tail keywords are longer, including more specific qualifiers that are
more likely to match intent. Though they have a lower search
volume, meaning they aren't as popular, they have a higher click-
through rate.

                                                                                        Long Tail
                                                                                        Keywords, by
                                                                                        Seobility (CC
                                                                                        BY-SA 4.0)

            In addition to understanding user intent and how that
might help you develop keywords, there are several other important
strategies:

   Create content categories relevant to your site. Here you'd

464 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
      identify the different types of information that your website
      offers and then come up with a list of keywords for each one. A
      local sporting goods store, for instance, might offer several
      different content categories on its website: clothing, shoes,
      equipment, equipment repair services. For each category, then,
      they would come up with a list of relevant keywords. The shoes
      category might include keywords such as "women's running
      shoes," "women's athletic shoes," "arch support," "durable
      athletic shoes," and so on.
   Research related keywords. When you put some of your
      keywords into the Google search bar, what other keywords
      does it suggest to qualify your search? What types of keywords
      and phrases are used at the very bottom of the search engine
      results page? These keywords can also be added to your list
      and help you think creatively about other possibilities.
   Use a keyword research tool. Some popular tools include Moz
      Keyword Explorer, Google Keyword Planner, Google Trends,
      AnswerThePublic, and SpyFu Keyword Research Tool. These
      allow you type in a keyword, and they will provide a list of
      popular related keywords.

            Of course, not all keywords are equal. Once you've
generated your list of keywords, you might want to go through and
prioritize strong keywords that have the most relevance to your
content, that relate directly to your authority in a given field, and
that are popular enough to improve your rankings. Matt Secrist
suggests having three to eight keywords for a web page. The above
tools can be very helpful in identifying the search volume of a
particular keyword. If the volume is too high (indicating that it's
too competitive) or too low (indicating that people aren't using that
specific keyword), then you might want to eliminate it from your list.
Google Trends can also be helpful to show the history of specific
search terms and to provide future projections so your keywords
align with search trends.

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 465
     Activity 15.1

        Use the strategies listed above to create your own list of
     keywords, including both short- and long-tail keywords.
     You might start by identifying an existing blog post or
     imagining (or even writing) your own. See if you can come
     up with a list of five to eight keywords that you could use to
     optimize your page.

Implementing Keywords to Improve SEO

When you have your list of keywords, the obvious next step is to
implement them in the content, which should be fairly easy, since
the keywords were created to reflect the main ideas of the content.
There are several ways to implement keywords effectively into your
content to improve SEO:

   The body of the article. The article itself should include your
      primary keywords, but keep in mind that the text should still
      be reader-focused (not search-engine focused), which means
      that it should be meaningful content that flows logically and
      naturally. Some experts believe that Google and other search
      engines prioritize the first 200 words in an article or web page,
      since the introduction typically sets up what the page will be
      about (Clay). In that case, it's important to use your primary
      keywords right away--within the first couple of sentences.
      From there, keywords should be sprinkled throughout the rest

466 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
   of the article. Secrist suggests using your primary keywords
   (the ones that are most relevant to your content) "once every
   100 or 150 words" so that they are distributed fairly equally
   throughout and keep the focus on those main words.
   Secondary keywords should be included throughout also, but
   not more frequently than the primary keywords. Finally, the
   closing 200 words should also include the keywords to create a
   final impression and set up the call to action.
 The article title. Using the primary keywords or a close
   variation of them will also help improve SEO. It's also helpful
   for readers to have a title that clearly identifies what the article
   or web page is about. Titles that are too obscure or vague are
   less likely to attract readers.
 Article headings and subheadings. Since longer articles
   (around 1,000-2,000 words) tend to rank higher in the SERP
   (Secrist), you'll likely have some pages with multiple "chunks"
   that help break up the content and guide readers. Using
   keywords in the headings and subheadings is helpful for
   readers as well as rankings.
 Image alt text. Remember that images--photos, charts, tables,
   and other graphics--make your page more visually appealing
   and can help reinforce and clarify some of the main ideas in
   the text. So your page should have images, and you should take
   the time to label each picture using relevant keywords. This
   label is known as alt text. HubSpot explains that alt tags
   "appear in place of an image on a webpage if the image fails to
   load on a user's screen. This text helps screen-reading tools
   describe images to visually impaired readers and allows search
   engines to better crawl and rank your website" (Becker). Most
   content management systems give you the option to create alt
   tags for your images.
 SEO title tag. Also known as the meta title tag, this is the title
   that appears on the SERP. It is a clickable link that takes users
   right to the page, so it should be clear and utilize your primary
   keyword.

                                            Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 467
   Meta description. This is a description of what the page is
      about that is displayed directly under the meta title on the
      SERP. It should provide meaningful information and also utilize
      your primary keywords at least once but not more than twice
      so that it doesn't seem like you are keyword stuffing.

   The URL. Create meaningful URLs that utilize the keywords to
      identify what the page is about. This is also much easier for
      people to remember later, as opposed to a long nonsensical
      string of characters.
                                                                                        Image SEO,
                                                                                        by Seobility
                                                                                        (CC BY-SA
                                                                                        4.0)

     Activity 15.2

        Find an example of a web page that uses keywords
     effectively in all of the places identified above. Start by
     identifying a question or keyword phrase and doing a

468 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
     Google search. Select one of the top organic search results
     and review the web page to see how and where the
     keywords you used in your search are used throughout the
     page. Now compare this web page with another one further
     down on the list, perhaps on the second or third results
     page. Is there a difference between the way the two pages
     use keywords? Why do you think the second page is ranked
     so much lower than the first?

Other Considerations

In addition to utilizing keywords effectively throughout your
content, there are a few other important strategies that will improve
your page ranking and its visual appeal on the SERP.

   Creating content for a featured snippet. A featured snippet
      shows up on the SERP, just below the featured ads at the very
      top, and it captures text from a particular web page that
      Google believes will immediately answer the search query
      (Smarty). This is obviously a very prominent position on the
      page, which makes it likely to catch the user's attention and
      increases the click-through rate for that page (Gorham). These
      snippets can appear in different formats: as a short paragraph,
      as an itemized list, or as a table. Featured snippets can also
      include photos as well as videos. To get an idea of the type of
      content that would be most helpful, consider what types of
      questions (relevant to your content) users are likely to ask and
      then provide the answer in a direct, clear way, using long-tail
      keywords and short sentences (no more than 50 words). Using

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 469
      headings, sectioning off the content with bullet or spacing, and
      providing quality photos and videos can also increase your
      chances of being featured. Backlinko also suggests doing a
      Google search for your primary keywords and then reviewing
      the type of information that is currently provided as a featured
      snippet, so you can get an idea of the type of information and
      the format that Google is looking for ("Featured Snippets").
   Building internal links. Internal links direct readers to
      different pages on the same website, which can help them
      navigate your site and find the information they are looking for
      and keep them engaged on your site for longer periods of time.
      Internal links are also helpful for SEO because they help
      Google crawl and index all of the pages on your site. Google
      emphasizes the importance of writing clear "anchor text,"
      which includes the words and phrases that are visible in a
      hyperlink ("Search Engine Optimization"). Anchor text should
      provide a clear idea of what the linked content is about,
      perhaps using your primary keyword for that page. While an
      internal link isn't nearly as effective as a backlink (discussed
      below) in elevating your page ranking, it does help to enhance
      the credibility of your content, especially if a page that already
      has credibility links to the new content. However, you'd
      probably want to avoid adding too many internal links because
      it might come across as self-serving and it "dilutes their value"
      (Southern).
   Building backlinks. The more quality, credible pages that link
      to your content, the higher it will rank. As opposed to internal
      links that point to pages on the same website, a backlink
      comes from another website, often directing readers to a
      helpful resource. According to Backlinko, "Backlinks are still
      the best way to determine the quality of a web page," which is
      why it's such an important metric in Google's ranking system.
      The more authority that a page has (indicated by its own
      Google ranking), the more that it helps establish the credibility
      of the linked content. It also helps if your content is linked

470 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
      from a site that is authoritative in a content area that is
      relevant to your own and if it references your site in a positive
      way. Obviously, the best way to develop backlinks is by
      providing quality content that people want to link to. Backlinko
      also notes that certain types of content are especially enticing:
      graphics, lists, primary research and data, and "in-depth" how-
      to guides ("Link Building"). The Backlinko guide provides
      several other helpful strategies for building backlinks,
      including email marketing, writing guest posts on other sites,
      providing interviews and original research to the press, and
      targeting specific types of pages that would be more likely to
      link to your content.
   Using SEO Analytics. SEO analytics uses a number of metrics
      about how people are interacting with your site in order to
      help you identify weaknesses and make improvements to your
      SEO. The most common analytics tool is Google Analytics,
      which provides data about the number of visitors on a page,
      visitor demographics, average time on a page, conversion
      rates, bounce rates, loading speeds, and so on. This type of
      data allows you to identify patterns of user engagement so you
      can more clearly see what's working and where your SEO
      strategy and overall content needs to be improved.

            When it comes to SEO, there are some fundamental basics
that must be addressed first--Googlebot accessibility and
meaningful content--before some of the other strategies like
backlinks and snippets can be used to improve a website's ranking.
Moz created this "Mozlow's Hierarchy of SEO Needs" to
demonstrate this relationship as one SEO strategy builds on the
next.

                                               Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 471
SEO Guidelines: White Hat, Black Hat, and
Gray Hat SEO

The main guideline for effective, ethical SEO is to write content
with the user in mind, providing meaningful content that helps
them solve problems. You'd focus on the aspects of your site that
are unique, valuable, and engaging, and you'd put your energy into
creating fresh, original content. That is what "white hat" SEO is all
about--following the rules and best practices outlined by the search
engine for the sake of enhancing the user experience. For instance,
Google's SEO guidelines provide best practices for SEO, mirroring
many of the things we've already discussed in this chapter about
providing clear tags and making sure Googlebot can crawl through
your site ("Google Search Essentials").

            On the other hand, black hat SEO uses deception and
trickery to rank higher on the SERP. It's less about providing
meaningful content for users and more about being noticed by
search engines. In fact, black hat SEO utilizes strategies that often
lead to vague, confusing, and disingenuous content that will repel
users and weaken a site's credibility. "These unethical tactics don't
solve for the searcher and often end in a penalty from search
engines," says Padraig O'Connor with HubSpot. For instance, Google
states that websites that are caught using black hat SEO tactics
"may rank lower in results or not appear in results at all" ("Spam
Policies"). The document on spam policies goes on to list several
examples of black hat tactics that may result in penalties:

   Cloaking--providing different content to search engines than
      what is provided for users. The real content is "hidden" to
      search engines to make it seem more relevant or useful than it
      is.

   Doorways--"website pages created specifically to gain high
      ranking in a search engine index and to manipulate users.
      These pages are generally stuffed with some keywords and

472 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
   phrases and lead to multiple similar pages in search results
   where each result takes you to the same destination" (Gordon).
   Users are often redirected to a different page without their
   knowledge, or they are tricked into clicking to the next page.
   For instance, if a company selling birdseed wants to get more
   traffic to its main page, "The Best Natural Birdseed," then it
   might create several other "doorway" pages with slightly
   different words and phrases (such as "Best Birdseed in Indiana,"
   "Best Birdseed in Ohio," and "Best Birdseed for Cardinals") in
   hopes of drawing different types of people to these separate
   pages and then redirecting them to the main page.
 Hidden texts and links--putting "hidden" content on a page as
   a way of tricking search engines. Once again, the content
   might have keywords and other content that seems relevant to
   a search engine, but the text isn't visible to users, maybe
   because the text is the same color as the background or the
   text is positioned off screen. For instance, having a white link
   on a white background means that it won't show up for
   readers, but the search engine will see it and rank the page
   higher because of it. Google gives other examples, such as
   setting the font size or opacity of the link to 0 or hiding the
   link behind an image ("Spam Policies").
 Keyword stuffing--overusing keywords for the sake of ranking
   higher on the SERP. "Often these keywords appear in a list or
   group, unnaturally or out of context" (Google, "Spam Policies").
   Once again, Google offers an example, which overuses the
   keywords "app store credit":

      "Unlimited app store credit. There are so many sites that
         claim to offer app store credit for $0 but they're all fake
         and always mess up with users looking for unlimited app
         store credits. You can get limitless credits for app store
         right here on this website. Visit our unlimited app store
         credit page and get it today!"

 Link spam--link-building schemes where backlinks aren't
   earned but they are manipulated in some way, often paid for or

                                            Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 473
      in exchange for a reciprocal backlink. If, for instance, a realtor
      wants other businesses, like home inspection or remodeling
      companies, to link to their realtor website, then they might pay
      these companies to do so or offer to post reciprocal links to
      these companies' websites.
   Misleading functionality--making users believe that they will
      be able to access certain content or features though it isn't
      really available. For instance, a website would have more
      visitors if it claimed to provide a particular free service (a PDF
      merge, countdown clock, online dictionary, etc.). It's
      misleading if visitors follow the link to obtain the service and
      are instead given more ads.
   Scraped content--stealing content from another, more
      reputable website and using it exactly as is or making only
      slight modifications. Like it sounds, this is a form of plagiarism
      as a company literally copies and pastes content from another
      website, perhaps even a competitor, onto their own page. Even
      if they change around a few words here and there, it's still
      plagiarism, and Google notes that this practice often leads to
      copyright infringement claims ("Spam Policies").
   Sneaky redirects--sending users to a different page than the
      one they wanted. In many cases, a sneaky redirect will make
      Google think that users are being sent to a page with quality
      content and useful information while in reality, they are being
      redirected to a page with ads and spam content. In some cases,
      users are sent to affiliate websites that provide some sort of
      commission to the original company for helping them increase
      their own web traffic.

            While these black hat strategies might temporarily make
a page rank higher on the SERP, most experts agree that they are
harmful in the long run, especially if Google demotes your page or
removes it from the results list altogether. This article by Chuck
Price in the Search Engine Journal provides a few more black hat

474 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
strategies as well as information about how to fix them to avoid
penalties.

            Finally, as the name suggests, gray hat SEO is something in
between white hat and black hat SEO. An example might be creating
quality content that is meaningful for users but also hiding texts
on the same page in order to increase the number of keywords.
It's a combination of black and white strategies in hopes of doing
both--providing useful content for visitors and manipulating the
system to achieve a higher ranking. Gray hat tactics are still risky
and can come with the same penalties as black hat tactics. The term
"gray hat" also implies that there's a bit of a "gray" area between
good and bad SEO. What's considered an acceptable SEO strategy
one year might be considered unacceptable the next year, so it's
important to stay current on the latest guidelines.

            As the internet continues to expand and become even more
competitive, understanding how to use SEO to reach your target
audience and build your brand is crucial to the success of your
digital writing content. In fact, the number of SEO jobs has grown
significantly over the past few years, and it can be quite lucrative as
a profession (Montti), which demonstrates its growing importance.
The most important aspect continues to be the ability to leverage
rhetorical skills in order to understand the needs and expectations
of an audience and to communicate effectively using a variety of
tools. Similarly, critical literacy continues to be a key component
of understanding the inherent flaws, limitations, and widespread
effects in the algorithms of Google and other search engines and
social media platforms. There are ethical consequences to the
digital writing choices you make. The goal should always be to
provide the best possible content to inform your audience's
perspectives, promote social justice, and connect users with the
resources they need.

     Discussion Questions

                                              Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 475
         1. What does SEO stand for, and why is it such an
             important consideration for content writers and web
             developers?

        2. How do people's concerns over biased algorithms
             relate to SEO?

        3. How does SEO relate to content strategy? What are
             some of the key advantages of understanding your
             target audience and developing content that strives
             to meet their needs?

        4. Why is search intent such an important aspect of
             identifying effective keywords? What are some
             aspects of user intent that you'd need to consider?
             What are the different types of user intent?

        5. What is the difference between long-tail and short-
             tail keywords? Why are long-tail keywords often
             better? Can you provide some examples?

        6. Name some important strategies that will help you
             create relevant keywords for a web page. How can
             you prioritize keywords so that you don't have too
             many?

         7. How can SEO analytics help you monitor the
             performance of your web content and make
             improvements to your SEO?

        8. What is the difference between white hat and black
             hat SEO? What are some examples of black hat SEO?
             Why are they considered unethical? Can you name
             other unethical practices that digital writers often
             use to manipulate or trick users?

        9. What is your opinion of gray hat SEO? Is it
             unethical? Why or why not? Feel free to explore the
             "gray" area surrounding this practice and the times
             when it is ethical versus the times when it's not.

476 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
Sources

             Backlinko. "Featured Snippets" Backlinko, 2023,
          https://backlinko.com/hub/seo/featured-snippets.

             ------. "Link Building for SEO: The Definitive Guide
          (2022)." Backlinko, 2023, https://backlinko.com/
          link-building.

             ------. "Search Intent." Backlinko, 2023,
          https://backlinko.com/hub/seo/search-intent.

             Becker, Braden. "Image Alt Text: What It Is, How
          To Write It, And Why It Matters to SEO." Hubspot, 22
          Sept. 2022, https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/
          image-alt-text.

             Broadband Search. "27 Mind-Blowing Statistics
          about Google." Broadbandsearch.net, 2023,
          https://www.broadbandsearch.net/blog/google-
          statistics-facts.

             Clay, Bruce. "How to Use Keywords."
          BruceClay.com, n.d., https://www.bruceclay.com/
          seo/
          usekeywords/?_ga=2.76112853.194509982.167915824
          0-583417569.1679158240.

             Dakner, Nadav. "How to Use Google's `People Also
          Search For' to Improve Your SEO."
          InboundJunction.com, 5 Oct. 2022,
          https://inboundjunction.com/google-people-also-
          search-for-
          seo#:~:text=For%E2%80%9D%20In%20SEO%3F-

                                         Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 477
               ,What%20Is%20%E2%80%9CPeople%20Also%20Se
               arch%20For%20(PASF)%E2%80%9D%20In,web%20
               pages%20on%20that%20topic.

                  Dean, Brian. "We Analyzed 4 Million Google
               Search Results. Here's What We Learned about
               Organic Click through Rate." Backlinko, 14 Oct. 2022,
               https://backlinko.com/google-ctr-stats.

                  DeMers, Jayson. "How Much Do We Really Know
               about Google's Ranking Algorithm." Medium, 28 May
               2020, https://medium.com/swlh/how-much-do-
               we-really-know-about-googles-ranking-algorithm-
               ef031586681b.

                  Djuraskovic, Ogi. "How Many Websites Are There?
               The Growth of Websites (1990-2022)."
               FirstSiteGuide.com, 28 Sept. 2022,
               https://firstsiteguide.com/how-many-websites/.

                  Fishkin, Rand. "The State of Searcher Behavior
               Revealed through 23 Remarkable Statistics." Moz, 14
               Mar. 2017, https://moz.com/blog/state-of-
               searcher-behavior-revealed.

                  Georgiev, Deyan. "How Many Websites Are There
               in 2023? [Updated Guide]." Techjury.net, 2 Feb. 2023,
               https://techjury.net/blog/how-many-websites-
               are-there/#gref.

                  Google. "How Google Interprets the Robots.txt
               Specification." Google Search Central, 20 Feb. 2023,
               https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
               crawling-indexing/robots/robots_txt#disallow.

                  ------. "How Results are Automatically Generated."
               Google Search. N.d., https://www.google.com/

478 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
search/howsearchworks/how-search-works/
ranking-results/.

   ------. "Google Analytics." Google, 2023,
https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/
provision/#/provision.

   ------. "Googlebot." Google Search Central, 17 Mar.
2023, https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
crawling-indexing/googlebot.

   ------. "Google Search Essentials." Google, 17 Feb.
2023, https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
essentials?hl=en&visit_id=638147724562699095-268
2311254&rd=1.

   ------. "Google Trends." Google, n.d.,
https://trends.google.com/home.

   ------. "In-Depth Guide to How Google Search
Works." Google Search Central, 17 Feb. 2023,
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
fundamentals/how-search-works.

   ------. "Keyword Planner." Google Ads, n.d.,
https://ads.google.com/home/tools/keyword-
planner/.

   ------. "Optimize Your Crawling and Indexing."
Google Search Central, 10 Aug. 2009,
https://developers.google.com/search/blog/2009/
08/optimize-your-crawling-indexing.

   ------. "Search Engine Optimization (SEO) Starter
Guide." Google Search Central, 23 Feb. 2023,
https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
fundamentals/seo-starter-
guide#:~:text=SEO%20%2D%20Search%20engine%

                             Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 479
               20optimization%3A%20the,our%20presence%20on
               %20the%20web.

                  ------. "Spam Policies for Google Web Search."
               Google, 23 Feb. 2023,
               https://developers.google.com/search/docs/
               essentials/spam-policies?hl=en.

                  Gordon, Jason. "Doorway Pages--Explained." The
               Business Professor, 15 Dec. 2021,
               https://thebusinessprofessor.com/en_US/seo-
               social-media-direct-marketing/doorway-page-
               explained.

                  Gorham, Jonathan. "Research Insights: Role of
               Featured Snippets in Website Traffic Boost." Search
               Engine Watch, 3 Dec. 2020,
               https://www.searchenginewatch.com/2020/12/
               03/research-insights-role-of-featured-snippets-in-
               website-traffic-boost/.

                  Huss, Nick. "How Many Websites Are There in the
               World?" Siteefy.com, 16 Feb. 2023,
               https://siteefy.com/how-many-websites-are-
               there/.

                  Kara, Helen. "Book Review: Algorithms of
               Oppression: How Search Engines Reinforce Racism by
               Safiya Umoja Noble." The London School of Economics
               and Political Science, 7 June 2019,
               https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/lsereviewof books/2019/06/
               07/book-review-algorithms-of-oppression-how-
               search-engines-reinforce-racism-by-safiya-umoja-
               noble/.

                  Lyons, Kelly. "What Are Backlinks & Why They

480 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
Matter for SEO." Semrush, 6 Dec. 2022,
https://www.semrush.com/blog/what-are-
backlinks/.

   Macri, Dawn. "Search Intent and SEO: A Quick
Guide." Moz.com, 21 Sept. 2020, https://moz.com/
blog/search-intent-and-seo-a-quick-guide.

   McCoy, Julia. "7 Ways to Easily Set up a Content
Strategy." SearchEngineJournal, 24 Apr. 2021,
https://www.searchenginejournal.com/seo-
content-marketing-strategy/258253/#close.

   Mohsin, Maryam. "10 Google Search Statistics you
Need to Know in 2023 [Infographic]." Oberlo, 13 Jan.
2023, https://www.oberlo.com/blog/google-
search-
statistics#:~:text=But%20how%20many%20is%20th
at,Internet%20Live%20Stats%2C%202022.

   Montti, Roger. "SEO Salaries 2022: Industry
Growth & Many New SEO Professionals." Search
Engine Journal, 28 Nov. 2022,
https://www.searchenginejournal.com/seo-
salaries-2022-industry-growth/469996/.

   Moz. "The Beginner's Guide to SEO: Rankings and
Traffic through Search Engine Optimization." Moz,
2023, https://moz.com/beginners-guide-to-seo.

   Moz. "Keyword Explorer." Moz, n.d.,
https://moz.com/explorer#index2.

   NP Digital. "Answer the Public." AnswerthePublic,
n.d., https://answerthepublic.com/.

   O'Connor, Padraig. "An Introduction to Black Hat
SEO." Hubspot, 23 Mar. 2022,

                             Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 481
               https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/black-hat-
               seo.

                  Price, Chuck. "The Complete List of Google
               Penalties and How to Recover." Search Engine
               Journal, 29 Mar. 2021,
               https://www.searchenginejournal.com/the-
               complete-list-of-google-penalties-and-how-to-
               recover/201510/#close.

                  Secrist, Greg. "How Long Should a Blog Post Be? A
               Thorough Analysis." BKAContent, 10 Nov. 2022,
               https://www.bkacontent.com/how-long-should-a-
               blog-post-be-a-thorough-analysis/.

                  Secrist, Matt. "How to Use Keywords in Your
               Content for SEO." BKAContent, 15 Feb. 2023,
               https://www.bkacontent.com/how-to-use-
               keywords-in-your-content/.

                  Sharma, Karan. "How SEO and Content Marketing
               Work Together to Fuel Your Online Success." Forbes,
               3 July 2018, https://www.forbes.com/sites/
               forbesagencycouncil/2018/07/03/how-seo-and-
               content-marketing-work-together-to-fuel-your-
               online-success/?sh=32ee76de16bf.

                  Smarty, Ann. "How to Optimize for Google's
               Featured Snippets [Updated for 2022]." Moz, 14 Nov.
               2022, https://moz.com/blog/optimize-featured-
               snippets.

                  Southern, Matt G. "Google Cautions against Using
               Too Many Internal Links." Search Engine Journal, 6
               July 2021, https://www.searchenginejournal.com/
               google-cautions-against-using-too-many-internal-
               links/412553/#close.

482 | Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO
   SpyFu. "Our Marketing Revenue Engine Boosts
SEO & PPC Profits." SpyFu, 1 Mar. 2023,
https://www.spyfu.com/.

   Yadegar, Sam. "Short-Tail vs. Long-Tail Keywords
101." Hawksem, 13 Apr. 2021, https://hawksem.com/
blog/short-tail-keywords-vs-long-tail-keywords/.

                            Branding, Content Strategy, and SEO | 483
16. Accessibility and

Inclusion

Chances are that you've noticed a common thread throughout most
of this textbook: the importance of audience. It's common sense
that you'd create content with your audience in mind to capture
their attention, guide their understanding, and compel deeper levels
of thought and action. However, it's often easier said than done,
especially when the audience is unknown. You're not writing a text
message to one of your friends, for instance, but you're posting a
blog article on your website, and you're not really sure who exactly
might read the article. It's also difficult to predict the needs,
expectations, and perceptions of people in an audience who are
unlike you in some way. You might easily reread and revise content
for people whose background, experiences, and identities are
similar to your own because you probably have a very similar way of
engaging with and interpreting information. But what about people
who are a different age, gender, race, nationality, religion, or sexual
orientation than you? What about people with disabilities who can't
engage with some forms of digital communication the way that
other people do? These people are also part of your audience, and
it's crucial that you create content with them in mind, prioritizing
their needs and experiences so that your content is both accessible
and inclusive.

            The goal in this chapter is to focus on marginalized
identities: minority groups who are often overlooked or devalued
in digital content, which not only creates a more negative user
experience but limits their ability to have meaningful interactions
online or even to complete basic tasks. It also reinforces their
marginalized positions. To improve the quality of your digital
content for these groups (and for everyone else, too), we'll be
focusing on accessibility and inclusion.

484 | Accessibility and Inclusion
            The accessibility of your content refers to users' ability to
understand and interact with the material provided. The Bureau
of Internet Accessibility defines accessibility as "a set of practices
intended to remove barriers for people with disabilities." These
disabilities might include physical impairments, such as limited
vision or hearing, as well as cognitive limitations. Though more
than a billion people worldwide suffer from some sort of disability
(World Health Organization), often affecting their ability to interact
meaningfully online, WebAIM reports that 96.8% of home pages
aren't compliant with accessibility standards. This includes things
like poor color contrast, color usage as the only method of
conveying information (on a pie chart for instance), lack of alt text
information, lack of captions for videos and audio files--all things
that could limit a disabled person from understanding or navigating
through digital content.

            Similarly, inclusive web content is welcoming to all
potential audiences. It's an umbrella term that includes the
accessibility of a web page but also takes into account other factors
that might cause someone to feel excluded in some way. Bianca
Belman-Adams from Elementor explains, "It is important to keep in
mind when designing a website that not every user interacts with it
the same way....Inclusive web design removes bias and assumptions
from a website so that users won't feel excluded due to an
impairment, demographics, or other temporary or permanent
circumstances." Assumptions or biases about language,
socioeconomic status, race, gender, ethnicity, and sexuality can all
create feelings of exclusion.

            This chapter focuses on how to create web content that is
accessible and inclusive so that users can engage meaningfully with
your content. In both instances, we will consider the experiences
of users who are often marginalized from web content, and we'll
identify best practices in the design and implementation of your
content that will remove these barriers. In the end, developing
inclusive content isn't just beneficial to those specific users. It's

                                                            Accessibility and Inclusion | 485
good for your brand, and it sends a positive message to all audiences
about the importance of equality and social justice.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand what it means to make web content
             accessible to people with disabilities and why this
             type of accessibility is important.

          Consider the legal, financial, social, and ethical
             consequences of content that isn't accessible.

          Be able to identify the four principles of
             accessibility outlined by the Web Content
             Accessibility Guidelines.

          Understand basic strategies and some specific
             techniques to make web content accessible for
             people with different types of disabilities.

          Understand the broad definition "inclusion" and
             how it applies to web content.

          Review the elements of DEI as a framework for
             creating working environments and digital content
             that is inclusive.

          Understand the difference between marketing to
             various demographics in a target audience and
             unintentionally excluding marginalized identities.

          Identify best practices for developing digital
             content that is inclusive of a variety of identities.

486 | Accessibility and Inclusion
Accessibility

This section of the chapter focuses on accessibility of web content
for people with disabilities, who are limited in their ability to
understand or use various aspects of a web page. Yes, this includes
people with visual or auditory impairments who will struggle to
read the text, see the pictures, or hear sounds in a video or audio
file, but it also includes people with neurological, cognitive, speech,
and physical limitations. The W3C Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI)
explains that true accessibility allows people with permanent or
temporary disabilities to "perceive, understand, navigate, and
interact with the web" as well as "contribute to the web" with their
own content. Providing tools and accommodations for various
situations not only helps people with permanent disabilities but
also people with temporary limitations--maybe because they have a
broken arm, they are in an environment with a bright glare on the
screen, or they don't have their glasses (W3C). Explained that way,
it's easy to see how most people would benefit at some point from
improved accessibility.

            Before we dive into accessibility standards and best
practices, let's pause for a moment to consider why this is such an
important concept. As stated above, the vast majority of websites
don't meet accessibility standards, but there are several
fundamental reasons why accessible web content should be a
priority:

   Legal. Most websites are bound by either the Americans with
      Disabilities Act (ADA.gov) or Section 508 of the Rehabilitation
      Act (Department of Justice, "Section 508"). While the ADA is
      very broad, encompassing a wide variety of public spaces that
      should be accessible, the law was created to be flexible and to
      adapt to changing circumstances. Therefore, the internet is
      considered as a public space that must accommodate the
      needs of people with disabilities. Violators are subject to

                                                             Accessibility and Inclusion | 487
      lawsuits and hefty fines (Userway).
   Financial. Obviously, paying a fine or a lawsuit settlement

      would be expensive, but that doesn't include the loss of
      revenue from people who aren't able to interact with your
      content and therefore don't continue through the buyer
      journey. According to a 2018 report from American Institutes
      for Research, people with disabilities have a significant amount
      of purchasing power and are much more likely to make a
      purchase when they are provided with a positive user
      experience.
   Social. Being sensitive to the needs of different people can go a
      long way to strengthen your brand. A website that is
      accessible, that has taken every measure to ensure a positive
      experience for people with disabilities, not only makes it
      possible for those people to engage with the content but also
      cultivates a sense of trust and goodwill so that people want to
      engage. This includes not only people with disabilities but
      everyone who considers accessibility to be an important issue
      and appreciates your effort.
   Ethical. All of the other reasons aside, providing accessible
      content is simply the right thing to do. This is especially true
      following the COVID-19 pandemic, where so many of our basic
      activities and daily interactions shifted to the digital realm.
      Recently the U.S. Department of Justice noted that "people rely
      on websites like never before for all aspects of daily living,"
      citing examples like voting information, bus schedules, health
      care information and resources, and so on ("Guidance").
      Everyone should have the ability to access the information
      they need and to contribute in various ways to share their
      ideas and perspectives.

488 | Accessibility and Inclusion
WCAG Standards

The Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) are the most
comprehensive and widely accepted standards of accessibility. It's
currently on its third revision with version 2.2 scheduled for
completion in May 2023, which builds on existing versions but will
enhance "accessibility guidance for three major groups: users with
cognitive or learning disabilities, users with low vision, and users
with disabilities on mobile devices" (Web Accessibility Initiative,
"WCAG 2 Overview"). In essence, as new technologies, trends, and
problems emerge, the guidelines are updated so they remain as
relevant as possible. Because they are developed collaboratively
with constituents in the "global accessibility community" and
because they offer broad principles in conjunction with specific
techniques and technical applications, the WCAG guidelines are
widely used by web designers, content writers, software developers,
and marketing professionals. According to Mark Shapiro, president
of the Bureau of Internet Accessibility, "Rarely does a single
document have such a direct impact on people's lives, but the
guidance that WCAG provides allows developers and content
creators to include people who have historically been excluded from
digital experiences" (qtd. in Bureau of Internet Accessibility).

            The WCAG has four fundamental principles of accessibility,
and each one is further developed with guidelines and success
criteria, which provides more specific strategies for how each
principle can be applied. Each of those principles as well as the
guidelines and some of the success criteria are identified below:

   Perceivable--content must be provided in such a way that
      users can perceive what it is. The W3C Web Accessibility
      Initiative explains, "This means that users must be able to
      perceive the information being presented. (It can't be invisible
      to all of their senses)" ("WCAG 2.1"). Guidelines and specific
      strategies for these principles are listed below, taken from the

                                                            Accessibility and Inclusion | 489
      Web Accessibility Initiative ("How to Meet"):

        Provide text alternatives for nontext content. This includes
            labels and short descriptions for objects, photos, and
            buttons. It also includes descriptive information for things
            like diagrams and charts, which wouldn't provide the same
            information but would give users an idea of what the
            information is about.

        Provide captions and other alternatives for multimedia.
            Captions are especially important for prerecorded videos
            and audio content as well as live content. This category
            also includes sign language alternatives.

        Create content that can be presented in different ways,
            including by assistive technologies, without losing meaning.
            This relates specifically to the way information is
            sequenced and the relationships between elements on a
            page, which can often be done with labels and headings
            tags, grouping related content, and using standard text
            formatting conventions.

        Make it easier for users to see and hear content. This
            includes separating the foreground and the background
            with color and contrast, providing options to pause audio
            and control the volume, making the font large enough, and
            providing enough spacing for the text.

   Operable--elements on the page must be functional. "This
      means that users must be able to operate the interface. (The
      interface cannot require interaction that a user cannot
      perform)" (Web Accessibility Initiative, "Introduction").

        Make all functionality available from a keyboard. In other
            words, users should be able to perform the same tasks
            using keyboard commands as they would with a mouse.
            This includes providing keyboard shortcuts, providing
            keyboard-triggered handlers, avoiding keyboard traps (in
            which a user can't move away from an element on the
            screen), and so on.

490 | Accessibility and Inclusion
      Give users enough time to read and use content. This
         includes letting users know if there is a time limit, allowing
         users to adjust or turn off time limits, allowing content to
         be paused, getting rid of time limits when it's not an
         essential part of the content, preventing interruptions, and
         preventing users from losing data if they do hit the time
         limit.

      Do not use content that causes seizures or physical
         reactions. More specifically, "web pages do not contain
         anything that flashes more than three times in any one
         second period, or the flash is below the general flash and
         red flash thresholds" (W3C). It also includes allowing users
         to disable animations.

      Help users navigate and find content. This can be
         accomplished through page titles and headings, consistent
         navigation links on each page, labels that identify a logical
         reading order or tab order, information about the purpose
         of each link, and providing multiple ways for users to
         access a web page.

      Make it easier to use inputs other than the keyboard. W3C
         explains, "The intent ... is to ensure that content can be
         controlled with a range of pointing devices, abilities, and
         assistive technologies. Some people cannot perform
         gestures in a precise manner, or they may use a
         specialized or adapted input device such as a head pointer,
         eye-gaze system, or speech-controlled mouse emulator."
         The specific strategies here allow for different pointing
         methods, as opposed to only allowing users to drag and
         drop content, for instance, or to swipe right.

 Understandable--"Users must be able to understand the
   information as well as the operation of the user interface. (The
   content or operation cannot be beyond their understanding)"
   (Web Accessibility Initiative, "Introduction").

      Make text readable and understandable. This includes
         applying page attributes that identify the default language

                                                          Accessibility and Inclusion | 491
            used, providing a mechanism for defining unusual idioms
            and jargon, providing the expanded form of abbreviations,
            and writing content that isn't more advanced than the
            lower secondary education level.
        Make content appear and operate in predictable ways. For
            example, new windows and tabs would only open when
            necessary, users should be able to update settings without
            changing the context of a page, navigation should be
            consistent from one page to the next, and similar elements
            should be identified in similar ways.
        Help users avoid and correct mistakes. This includes
            providing text that helps identify errors on forms,
            indicating items on a form that are required, identifying
            the rules for how data must be submitted, providing other
            clear instructions, and providing suggestions for how to
            correct input errors.
   Robust--Content should be developed so it can be interpreted
      accurately by a wide variety of users and assistive devices.
      "This means that users must be able to access the content as
      technologies advance. (As technologies and user agents evolve,
      the content should remain accessible)" (Web Accessibility
      Initiative, "Introduction").

        Maximize compatibility with current and future user tools.
            This includes using markup languages that conform with
            specified instructions, validating the type of web page it is,
            using labels appropriately, and using HTML according to
            relevant specifications.

            Obviously, the specific guidelines and strategies can get
very technical, often requiring a deeper knowledge of HTML and
other principles of web design. The W3C Web Accessibility Initiative
provides much more detailed information about practices that they
consider "sufficient" (necessary) for accessibility as well as
"advisory" (recommended but not required) ("How to Meet"). While
you may or may not become familiar with the more technical

492 | Accessibility and Inclusion
aspects of accessibility standards, it's important that digital writers,
content strategists, and marketing professionals have a working
understanding of the principles as well as the basic guidelines that
can easily be incorporated into the design of a web page. Another
helpful resource is provided by the U.S. Access Board, which
provides guidelines based on Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.

     Activity 16.1

        Select a website for a local business, maybe even an
     academic institution or a business organization that you are
     a part of. Use the checklist below provided by the Bureau of
     Internet Accessibility to determine which aspects of the
     website are compliant and which ones are not ("5 Quick
     Ways"). The article gives more information about how to
     check for each item. Write up your own audit report of the
     site.

         1. Check alt text for images and nontext content. You
             can use a screen reader or other assistive technology
             on desktop and mobile (Bureau of Internet
             Accessibility, "Free Accessibility"). You can also right
             click on an image and select "inspect" to see the
             HTML code, where you can check for "alt" tags.

        2. Check for closed captions and video transcripts. Go
             to a video and within the player, see if there is a
             button or option to turn on closed captions (if the
             captions are open, they'll appear automatically and
             can't be turned off). Make sure the button works with
             a mouse and keyboard. Then, identify if there is a text
             transcript that accompanies the video.

                                                            Accessibility and Inclusion | 493
        3. Check color contrast. When we talk about contrast
             ratios, we're talking about an actual numerical value
             that identifies the level of contrast. Web Content
             Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) success criterion
             1.4.3 states that normal text must meet a minimum
             contrast ratio of at least 4.5:1 and large text (18 point
             or larger, or 14 point or larger and bold) must meet a
             minimum contrast ratio of at least 3:1 (Bureau of
             Internet Accessibility, "WCAG 2.1-SC 1.4.3"). The a11y
             Color Contrast Accessibility Validator is a free instant
             color contrast analysis provided by the Bureau of
             Internet Accessibility ("A11y").

        4. Make sure the site is keyboard friendly. Keyboard
             testing is something you can try yourself right now.
             Using common key commands, like the Tab and Shift-
             Tab keys, you can begin to get a sense of the
             accessibility condition of your website. If you notice
             that there are certain elements you can't reach or it's
             easy to get lost on the page, there might be
             keyboard-accessibility issues.

        5. Make sure the site can be zoomed without loss of
             content or functionality. It's a WCAG requirement
             that content can be zoomed to 200% and still work
             without assistive technology. Additionally, screen
             magnification should not interfere with other
             accessibility requirements. Fortunately, testing for
             this to some extent can be pretty easy. Zoom your
             web browser to 200% and see what happens to the
             content and layout of the web page. Do you notice
             that content elements overlap or disappear, or do
             they stack and adjust nicely? Can all the tasks still be
             performed with both a mouse and keyboard? Do

494 | Accessibility and Inclusion
             navigation elements and menus still work well?
             Performing this preliminary testing isn't exhaustive or
             comprehensive, but it can help you identify some
             obvious accessibility issues with the display.

        (Text for this activity taken directly from the Bureau of
     Internet Accessibility, "5 Quick Ways to Self-check the
     Accessibility of a Website")

Inclusion

In addition to being accessible to people with disabilities, web
content should also be inclusive, providing a space where people
of all different backgrounds and demographics feel welcome.
Obviously, making the website accessible is one very important
step toward that larger goal because it provides very tangible and
specific strategies--color contrast, alt text, closed captioning--that
influence whether or not a person can engage with your content.
Other aspects of inclusion are a little more subtle, pertaining to the
assumptions that are made about the audience, about the kinds of
identities that are "normal" or acceptable. It has to do with the way
that groups of people are portrayed in language and in photos. For
a person to feel welcome on a website, they would see themselves
reflected positively in the content, or they would at least get the
sense that the text was written with a wide range of identities in
mind. This type of content creation can be tricky because it requires
you to identify your own assumptions and biases and to consider
your text from the perspectives of people who are different from
you. It's also just as much about what you don't say or the types
of identities that you don't feature in the imagery as what you do.

                                                            Accessibility and Inclusion | 495
In other words, the inclusivity of a website exists on a spectrum,
and the more positive steps you can take in the right direction, in a
spirit of openness and humility, the better your content will be for
all audiences.

            Hopefully it's obvious why inclusion is important. In fact,
we can point to many of the same reasons that explain why
accessibility is important. Similarly, inclusive content has financial,
social, and ethical implications, many of them directly benefiting
the individual or the organization sponsoring the content as well as
the larger community. For the individual organization, the benefits
are largely financial. A 2019 article by Adobe reports that 61% of
Americans said they find diversity important when it comes to
marketing content, and "38% of consumers are more inclined to
trust brands that effectively embrace diversity in advertising"
(CMO.com Team). On the flip side, the article reports that LGBTQ+,
Black, and Gen Z audiences were apt to boycott brands that they
felt did not adequately represent their identities. This can have
significant financial and social consequences. Just as importantly,
efforts toward diversity and inclusion reinforce larger movements
focused on equality and social justice. According to Crownpeak,
"Diversity, equity, and inclusion matter because they help build a
fairer society, strengthening the bonds between people and within
organizations. Companies have a responsibility to act against the
barriers and historical factors that have caused unfair conditions for
underrepresented groups."

            As a brief reminder from chapter 5, inclusion is part of
a larger framework called DEI, which should guide many of the
decisions within an organization, going far beyond the written
digital content on a web page to also include things like employment
practices, audience research, product development, and so on. It's
an entire culture that seeks to include and understand a variety of
identities. Let's take a brief look at the elements of DEI:

   Diversity is about representing a wide range of identities
      based on age, race, gender, ability, sexuality, and so on. An

496 | Accessibility and Inclusion
      organization that values diversity and a range of different
      perspectives engages a diverse group of people--as employees,
      managers, consumer research participants, product testers,
      and so on. They also strive to include those perspectives as
      they communicate externally about their brand. Influencer
      Marketing Hub says that diversity is the first step because it
      extends the invitation, making people feel that they are
      welcome (Molenaar). They are more likely to feel welcome, for
      instance, if they see positive representations of their identities
      in an organization's digital messaging.
   Equity refers to the actions you take to cultivate an
      environment of diversity and inclusion, reflected in your
      policies and daily practices that ensure different groups of
      people participate and that their perspectives are valued.
      Equitable practices provide resources and opportunities to
      groups that have traditionally been marginalized.
   Inclusion goes beyond inviting diverse groups of people to be
      present. It encourages them to take an active, important role in
      the development of ideas. "Diversity is being invited to the
      party; inclusion is being asked to dance," says Verna Myers, an
      author and influencer (qtd. in Molenaar). Inviting people to
      participate might include the way that you invite feedback
      from various audiences or the way that you use that feedback
      to improve digital marketing strategies or product
      development. It's about inviting participation from diverse
      groups in every aspect of the business process, from product
      development to customer service and everything in between.

            Before we look at specific best practices for inclusive digital
content, it might be helpful to distinguish between being exclusive
and crafting content for a target audience. As we've discussed all
along, identifying your target audience and the characteristics that
define that audience is an important aspect of effective
communication. For instance, a company that caters specifically
to women's athletic gear--shoes, sports bras, running shorts, and

                                                             Accessibility and Inclusion | 497
so on would obviously feature women more prominently in their
advertising and create content that addresses the concerns and
experiences of women. They'd also probably target women in a
certain age group, perhaps in a particular income bracket if the
clothing is expensive. That company would rely heavily on market
research to discover who is in its target market and to create
content that those people would find compelling. However, using
our same example of a company that sells women's athletic gear, it
would be a mistake to exclude (either implicitly or explicitly) certain
types of women who do fit in the target audience--women of color,
women with disabilities, and women with all different body types.
These are segments of the target audience that may very well be
interested in purchasing workout gear, but because they don't feel
fully welcomed on the site perhaps because of language that is used
or a lack of diversity in the photos, they aren't likely to engage.
Not only that, but their marginalized status is reinforced by their
experience on the website.

DEI Best Practices for Digital Writing

Hopefully it's clear that DEI is more than checking off a box on
a to-do list or "tacking on" language or pictures that will appease
certain groups. It's an entire culture in which inclusivity is fostered
at every level of decision-making and management. Crownpeak also
reminds us that DEI should go beyond tokenized representations
of minorities during certain times of the year--featuring a Black
person on the front page of the website exclusively during Black
History Month, for instance: "It's essential to lay the groundwork
for year-round DEI with fair and thoughtful representation of
underrepresented groups throughout your content--both internally
and externally." Many organizations struggle with creating inclusive
web content because it requires that, at their core, they establish
practices and policies that actually are inclusive. What's more,

498 | Accessibility and Inclusion
people with identities that are more mainstream often feel
intimidated by the process of talking through inclusivity issues with
other people or by writing text that is sensitive to the many
different types of experiences and identities that exist. Fortunately,
as discussed by Ann Gynn, the key to writing inclusive content is
to have an open mind and to be intentional at every step of the
production process to include other voices. She identifies several
strategies for making content more inclusive:

   Be intentional about market research that helps you identify
      different segments of your target population. As noted above,
      this doesn't mean trying to cater to people who are clearly
      outside of your target population. It does mean that you'd
      conduct thorough research to get a better sense of who they
      are: "Look at the available data to understand representations
      that can be documented such as gender, income level,
      geography, race, etc. Then go deeper. Ask front-line team
      members, go to industry events, conduct focus groups in part
      to better understand those characteristics that are not easily
      tracked, such as physical ability or point of view" (Gynn). Gynn
      goes on to suggest that this type of research can be used to
      create personas of people with different characteristics that
      can be used to humanize those members of your target
      audience and help you better understand their needs.

   Include diverse voices in the content. Ideally, an organization
      will prioritize diversity and inclusion at all levels of staffing, so
      that different identities are represented across various
      departments and in all decision-making activities. It would also
      be ideal if content was written by people from a variety of
      backgrounds in order to better understand and engage with
      different parts of the audience: "At a minimum, a team should
      be sensitized and trained to ask tough diversity and inclusion
      questions and encouraged to consult with those communities
      where a possible problem or misunderstanding could arise."

   Use inclusive language. On one level, inclusive language

                                                            Accessibility and Inclusion | 499
      relates to a friendly and professional tone, writing that is clear
      and easy to understand, and a respectful approach to different
      topics that resists making biased assumptions about what is
      "normal" or "right." On another level, it's about being sensitive
      to the way that language is used, demonstrating that you've
      made an effort to research and effectively incorporate
      preferred terminology that people won't find offensive. For
      instance, the 2019 version of the Associated Press Stylebook
      added an entire section on race-related topics, identifying
      language that people of color from various journalism
      organizations said they preferred (Berendzen). Another great
      resource is the Conscious Style Guide, which covers a wide
      variety of sensitive topics and recommends specific
      terminology (Yin, Conscious). The guide's author, Karen Yin,
      says her mission is to "help writers and editors think critically
      about using language--including words, portrayals, framing,
      and representation--to empower instead of limit" ("About").
   Think about representation. While it might not be possible to
      provide representation for every type of identity in your target
      audience, making an effort to be diverse will go a long way to
      build trust with your audience. This means using photos that
      have different types of identities represented in a positive way.
      It might also mean including testimonials from a variety of
      different customers or writing employee profiles in order to
      highlight the diverse voices from your team.
   Don't overdo it or be inauthentic. Gynn ends with a warning
      not to "go overboard" when it comes to being diverse. You
      don't want to come across as inauthentic or like you are using
      people's marginalized identities to make yourself look better.
      You also don't want the content to come across as unnatural,
      as if you are forcing a message of diversity into a context
      where it doesn't fit. "Make sure your content reflects a sincere
      commitment to diversity but in a way that's organic for your
      brand and your audience" (Gynn).

500 | Accessibility and Inclusion
     Activity 16.2

        Have every student in class create a chart with two
     columns. The first column should include external
     identifiers that are visible (approximate age, for instance, or
     height or race). The second column should include internal
     characteristics that people wouldn't know just by
     looking--preferences, experiences, hobbies, skills, everyday
     challenges. Ideally these would be things that might go
     against the stereotypes people might initially have when
     they see this person's appearance. Students should go
     around the room and share their lists.

        Next, write a brief reflection about the types of
     stereotypes you often encounter, particularly in your digital
     experiences. What do people tend to assume about people
     with your identity? How do those assumptions and biases
     affect your personal experiences and decisions online?
     What would an "inclusive" web page look like for you?

            Writing content that is accessible and respectful of all
audiences is crucial to effective communication and the success of
your brand, but as you can see from this chapter, writing content
that is truly inclusive is a complex process and requires a great
deal of intentionality, planning, and critical thinking. It also requires
both courage and humility. Taking steps toward social justice is
always a risk. Not everyone will be on board for different reasons
and may choose to disengage from your brand. It's also possible
that despite your best efforts at being inclusive, you'll say something
wrong or something that is taken the wrong way by someone in
your audience. That's where humility comes in--a genuine apology

                                                             Accessibility and Inclusion | 501
for the misunderstanding and an effort to better understand that
person's perspective so you can address that concern in the future.
There's always room to improve your inclusivity efforts and to
better understand the people in your target audience if you are
willing to listen.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a marginalized identity, and why is it
             important to consider the user experience of
             different people from marginalized groups?

        2. What does it mean to make your digital content
             accessible?

        3. What types of disabilities can create challenges for
             people who want to engage with web content?

        4. The introduction explains that inclusivity is an
             umbrella term that includes accessibility, but it
             includes other considerations as well. What are some
             of those considerations?

        5. In what ways does providing accessible content
             help everyone in the audience?

        6. What are some reasons why creating accessible
             content should be a priority for writers and web
             designers?

         7. What does WCAG stand for, and why has it become
             the standard for accessibility practices?

        8. Identify the four major principles of accessibility as
             outlined by the WCAG. Summarize some of the basic
             strategies that coincide with each principle.

        9. What does DEI stand for? Define each term that is

502 | Accessibility and Inclusion
        in the acronym.
  10. What is the difference between catering your

        content to people within the target audience and
        creating content that is exclusive or offensive?
   11. Identify the best practices of digital writing that
        create truly inclusive content.

Sources

             ADA.gov "The Americans with Disabilities Act
          (ADA) Protects People with Disabilities from
          Discrimination." ADA.gov, n.d.,
          https://www.ada.gov/.

             American Institutes for Research. "A Hidden
          Market: The Purchasing Power of Working-Age
          Adults with Disabilities." AIR.org, Apr. 2018,
          https://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/5057002/
          GettingHired_November2019/Pdfs/Hidden-
          Market-Spending-Power-of-People-with-
          Disabilities-April-2018.pdf.

             Belman-Adams, Bianca. "What Is Inclusive Web
          Design?" Elementor.com, 28 Apr. 2022,
          https://elementor.com/blog/inclusive-web-
          design/#:~:text=Conclusion-,What%20Is%20Inclusi
          ve%20Design%3F,components%20of%20an%20incl
          usive%20website.

                                                       Accessibility and Inclusion | 503
                  Berendzen, Gerri. "AP Stylebook Adds New
               Umbrella Entry for Race-Related Coverage, Issues
               New Hyphen Guidance and Other Changes."
               AcesEditors.org, 29 Mar. 2019,
               https://aceseditors.org/news/2019/ap-stylebook-
               adds-new-umbrella-entry-for-race-related-
               coverage-issues-new-hyphen-guidance-and-other-
               changes.

                  Bureau of Internet Accessibility. "5 Quick Ways to
               Self-Check the Accessibility of a Website." BOIA.org,
               3 Apr. 2019, https://www.boia.org/blog/5-quick-
               ways-to-self-check-the-accessibility-of-a-website.

                  ------. "A11y: Color Contrast Accessibility
               Validator." Color.a11y.com, n.d.
               https://color.a11y.com/?bp09.

                  ------. "Free Accessibility Tools and Assistive
               Technology You Can Use Today." BOIA.org, 26 Oct.
               2018, https://www.boia.org/blog/free-
               accessibility-tools-and-assistive-technology-you-
               can-use-today.

                  ------. "History of the Web Content Accessibility
               Guidelines (WCAG)." BOIA.org, 6 Mar. 2019,
               https://www.boia.org/blog/history-of-the-web-
               content-accessibility-guidelines-wcag.

                  ------. "WCAG 2.1-SC 1.4.3 Contrast (Minimum)."
               BOIA.org, n.d., https://www.boia.org/wcag2/cp/
               1.4.3.

                  ------. "Why Is Digital Accessibility Important?"
               BIOA.org, 21 Feb. 2022, https://www.boia.org/blog/
               why-is-digital-accessibility-important-4-statistics-
               to-consider.

504 | Accessibility and Inclusion
   CMO.com Team. "Despite 25 Years of Ad Growth,
Diversity Remains a Challenge." Business.Adobe.com,
4 June 2019. https://business.adobe.com/blog/the-
latest/despite-25-years-of-advertising-growth-
diversity-remains-a-challenge#gs.17qt9f.

   Crownpeak. "How to Make DEI Actionable across
Your Digital Enterprise." Crownpeak.com, 30 Nov.
2021, https://www.crownpeak.com/resources/
blogs/how-to-action-successful-dei-initiatives-
across-your-digital-enterprise.

   Department of Justice. "Guidance of Web
Accessibility and the ADA." Justice.gov, 18 Mar. 2022,
https://www.ada.gov/resources/web-guidance/.

   ------. "Section 508 Home Page." Justice.gov, 27
Feb. 2023. https://www.justice.gov/crt/
section-508-home-
page-0#:~:text=Section%20508%20of%20the%20Re
habilitation,disabilities%2C%20unless%20certain%2
0exceptions%20apply.

   Gynn, Ann. "Diversity and Content Marketing:
How Brands Can Be More Inclusive." Content
Marketing Institute, 5 June 2020,
https://contentmarketinginstitute.com/articles/
diverse-inclusive-content-marketing/.

   Molenaar, Koba. "Diversity, Equity and Inclusion in
Marketing: Changing the Way You Market."
Influencer Marketing Hub, 25 Oct. 2022,
https://influencermarketinghub.com/diversity-
equity-inclusion/.

   Userway. "ADA Compliant Website: 5 Tips to Help
Mitigate Future Lawsuits." Userway.org, n.d.,

                                           Accessibility and Inclusion | 505
               https://userway.org/blog/ada-compliant-website/.

                  U.S. Access Board. "Information and
               Communication Technology: Revised 508 Standards
               and 255 Guidelines." Access-Board.gov, n.d.,
               https://www.access-board.gov/ict/.

                  Web Accessibility Initiative. "How to Meet WCAG
               (Quick Reference)." W3.org, 4 Oct. 2019,
               https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/
               quickref/?showtechniques=111#text-alternatives.

                  ------. "Introduction to Web Accessibility." W3. org,
               31 Mar. 2022, https://www.w3.org/WAI/
               fundamentals/accessibility-intro/.

                  ------. "WCAG 2 Overview." W3.org, 21 Mar. 2023,
               https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/
               wcag/.

                  ------. "WCAG 2.1 at a Glance." W3.org, 5 June 2018,
               https://www.w3.org/WAI/standards-guidelines/
               wcag/glance/.

                  WebAIM. "The WebAIM Million." WebAim.org,
               2023, https://webaim.org/projects/
               million/#:~:text=Across%20the%20one%20million
               %20home,51.4%20errors%2Fpage)%20analysis.

                  Wieland, Britt, et al. "Electronic Brainstorming
               with a Chatbot Partner: A Good Idea Due to
               Increased Productivity and Idea Diversity." Frontiers
               in Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 5, Sept. 2022, pp. 1-8,
               https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/
               PMC9537607/pdf/frai-05-880673.pdf.

                  World Health Organization. "Disability." World
               Health Organization, 7 Mar. 2023,

506 | Accessibility and Inclusion
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/disability-and-health.

   Yin, Karen. "About Conscious Style Guide."
Conscious Style Guide, n.d.,
https://consciousstyleguide.com/about/.

   ------. Conscious Style Guide. Conscious Style
Guide, n.d., https://consciousstyleguide.com/.

                                           Accessibility and Inclusion | 507
17. Remix Culture and

Copyright

At the time of this writing, ChatGPT is quickly emerging as a
sophisticated AI that can compose complex, seemingly "original"
texts and can craft a text to follow the specifics of many types
of prompts (Open AI). It can write computer code, short stories,
academic essays, songs, cover letters, emails, and much more.
Ironically, not only can this new AI be used by students to write
academic papers, it can also be used by teachers to grade essays
and give detailed feedback, which would lead to a rather sad state
of affairs in which nobody, not even writing teachers, is doing the
intellectual and creative work of composing original texts. It's easy
to see why so many people are concerned about the consequences
of such technologies, which allow "writers" to sidestep the
cognitive, often emotional and intensely personal, process of
putting thoughts and experiences into words--the right words. For
many of us, it's a labor of love, and the satisfaction of producing
a thought-provoking text that can engage the emotions and
imagination of an audience is tied up in the inherent struggle of
the writing process. It's much more than a reflection of ideas that
are already fully formed and simply need to be translated into text.
The writing process is generative, where ideas and connections
take shape that wouldn't have otherwise (Sayre). In other words,
writing facilitates personal growth, critical thinking, and human
connections that AI can't replicate--and even if it could, where
would that leave us? Much of the reason that copyright exists is to
validate human expression and the unique ways that writers and
artists go about putting their ideas into words and images.

            On the other hand, the word "original" when it comes to
creative and academic writing is fairly misleading. Many discussions
of the writing process begin with a stage called "invention," where

508 | Remix Culture and Copyright
writers "discover the ideas upon which their essays will focus"
(Vanderbilt University). However, many people argue that true
invention is a myth, that people don't create new ideas and
connections as much as they discover possibilities that existed all
along but hadn't been recognized in quite that same way. Architect
David Galbraith says, "We can only select things that are possible,
[sic] invention is merely when the possible is new. Real invention,
out of nowhere, not selecting from the possible, is impossible, by
definition." Then there's the reality that in many instances, there
aren't really new ideas as much as there are new ways of applying
old ideas--or different ways of combining seemingly disparate ideas
to create something new. That's what a remix is. It restructures
existing content, making selections and deselections from a variety
of texts, to create something new and interesting. It's a lot like
cooking. Chefs don't create brand new ingredients; they combine
existing ingredients in different ways, sometimes making
adjustments to existing cooking processes, in order to create
something fresh and interesting. The whole idea behind "fusion" is
that classic recipes from different cultures are combined to create
new flavors and culinary experiences. The same is true for writers
who combine and build upon existing words and ideas. If you really
think about it, all of the seemingly "new" ideas that people have
emerge from somewhere--something someone else says, a process
or experience that triggers an "aha" moment, an existing line of
thought that can be retooled, the cultural nuances that influence
your way of seeing and thinking about the world. It's impossible
to trace those disparate strands that come together at the exact
moment a "new" thought enters your mind, but it didn't materialize
from nothing. All writing (and thinking) is a remix. According to
Everything Is a Remix, "When we create, we often seem alone, but
we are in fact together" (Ferguson), referring to the ways that ideas
transcend time and space, always setting the stage for and guiding
the choices of what comes next.

            As you can probably see, there are two opposing ideas at
work in this chapter, complicating the very notion of what is an

                                                        Remix Culture and Copyright | 509
"original" work. Writers don't write in a vacuum. They are influenced
by other artists, historical events, cultural contexts, and existing
texts, and human progress depends on our ability to build on what
came before. What's more, with the digital tools that are now so
widely available, it's easier than ever before to create
remixes--mashups, edits, blends, and megamixes. While many
amateur works of this nature exist that aren't particularly inspiring,
there are also many digital remixes that are engaging, enjoyable, and
thought-provoking, providing an outlet for the author's creativity
and expression and adding to the collective repertoire of ideas from
which we all benefit. However, copyright law is still a fundamental
concept for all published works, serving to protect the artistic
integrity and financial remuneration of the author. The purpose
of copyright was to promote the development of new ideas by
providing a mechanism of control and financial incentive for people
who invest their time and expertise in scientific and creative works.
According to the Copyright Alliance, "The theory is that by granting
certain exclusive rights to creators that allow these creators to
protect their creative works against theft, creators receive the
benefit of economic rewards and the public receives the benefit
of the creative works that might not otherwise be created or
disseminated." In many cases, copyright law creates a barrier for
people to redistribute, remediate, remix, or revise someone else's
work without their express permission, and now that there are so
many digital tools that make those very practices so much easier,
it's more important than ever to understand what the rules are.

            In this chapter, we'll discuss the history of remix culture
and explore arguments made by Lawrence Lessig and others who
see the inherent value in being able to remix. We'll also explore
different examples of remix and the ways these examples have
expanded in recent years with the development of new social media
platforms. The second part of the chapter will look more closely at
copyright law within the context of the digital age, providing key
terms and guidelines about the rules as well as the consequences of
breaking those rules.

510 | Remix Culture and Copyright
     Learning Objectives

          Understand the arguments advanced by remix
             culture about the importance of creative freedom and
             the inherent remix that shapes all thoughts and texts.

          Learn about key terms and the different types of
             remix that are possible in music and how those same
             terms can be applied to other types of texts.

          Consider how remix has shaped the development of
             cultures throughout history and how remix culture
             has emerged in response to stricter copyright laws.

          Connect the shift between "read-only" culture to
             "read-write" culture with the advancements of digital
             technology.

          Understand both sides of the debate regarding the
             benefits and drawbacks of remix culture.

          Learn about copyright law and the types of works
             that do and do not qualify for copyright.

          Learn about the law of fair use and be able to apply
             it to a wide range of works.

          Learn about the different types of copyright
             licenses and the permissions they afford.

Remix Culture

Remix has become an umbrella term to refer to derivative works,
created by combining or editing existing content. As we'll see in

                                                          Remix Culture and Copyright | 511
this chapter, remix culture encourages derivative works, believing
that digital editing tools have provided a valuable way for more
people to take an active role in the production of creative and
scientific works (Murray). Many proponents of remix argue that
the process of remix is an inherent part of the creative process
and that copyright laws have become too strict, thus inhibiting
the creative process and prioritizing corporate greed. Others see
the more blatant forms of remix--beginning with others' music,
videos, images, or texts--as mimicry, which sidesteps the creative
process, unfairly leverages the talents of other artists, and impedes
the unique voices, perspectives, and styles that might have emerged
otherwise.

            However, before we examine the history of remix and the
various perspectives, let's look at a few key terms and the
overwhelming prominence of remix. On a fundamental level, to
"remix" means to mix again--to take existing elements and
rearrange them to create something different. "Remix" is an
umbrella term that captures all kinds of processes (adding,
removing, or adjusting elements in some way) in a variety of media
(text, music, film, and graphic art as well as live plays and spoken
word). According to Remix Theory, it's "the activity of taking
samples from pre-existing materials to combine them into new
forms according to personal taste" (Navas). Under this broad
definition, several different types of remix exist, often related to
audio production since that's one of the most common forms of
remix:

   Production remix--starts with the "stem" of an old song,
      utilizing new instruments and other stylistic choices to create
      something different than the original. In some cases, the music
      may change dramatically to accommodate the original lyrics,
      or the lyrics themselves might change to reflect new
      interpretations of the song. An "official remix" happens with
      the original artist's consent, and a "bootleg" does not.

   Flip or sample flip--uses a small sampling of an original song

512 | Remix Culture and Copyright
      and turns it into a completely new piece of music.
   VIP or variation in production--is a remix done by the original

      artist to put a new spin on an old song.
   Edit--makes minor changes to the song related to tempo or

      elements that might be added, dropped, or changed. These
      types of edits are often done by DJs to make songs flow
      together better or to make a song more entertaining for a live
      audience on a dance floor.
   Mashup--mixes together two or more different songs to create
      a new track. In some cases, the words of one song are
      combined with the instrumentals of another.

            These musical remixes were around long before the rise
of digital media and the technologies that make it so much easier
to sample, remix, and mashup songs. For instance, Madonna was
known for remixing her own songs in the 1980s, which is one of
the ways she gained popularity (O'Brien). Art of Noise (The Art of
Noise Online) and Girl Talk (Booker) created new songs entirely out
of existing works. In fact, some bands such as Nine Inch Nails and
Erasure have encouraged fans to remix their music.

            In addition to the possibilities that exist in the music
industry, the term "remix" has been extended to include many
different types of compositions--literature, paintings, film, and
graphic design. Many types of remix have become much easier and
more commonplace with the rise of technologies like Photoshop
and GarageBand, but many other examples have existed for
centuries. Some common examples of remix include:

   Food recipes, which are modified and combined with other
      recipes to create something new.

   Parodies are works that comment on or make fun of another
      work, often in a humorous or satirical way. While many
      contemporary parodies exist (e.g., Weird Al Yankovic [Sulem]
      or Family Guy [Lagioia]), this genre dates back to ancient
      Greek literature (SuperSummary).

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 513
   Paintings and graphic arts combine new and existing elements.
      Think of how many times the Mona Lisa or American Gothic
      have been remixed. Many examples of remixes exist that have
      taken historical photos and paintings and reimagined them
      with a more contemporary twist (Rogers).

   Fanfiction creates new stories from characters and settings
      that already exist (Collins). While this type of writing has
      existed for a long time, the internet has made it much easier to
      access existing stories and for writers and readers to come
      together to share and discuss their work.

   Wiki platforms like Wikipedia and Wikimedia Commons
      encourage users to access, add to, and remix existing content
      in order to invite collaboration and add to the existing pool of
      knowledge.

   Book mashups combine two or more existing stories into one.
      Some examples include Pride and Prejudice and Zombies, Sense
      and Sensibility and Sea Monsters, and It's a Wonderful Death
      (Goodreads).

   Literary intertextuality is where one text alludes to another
      text, either directly or implicitly. In some instances, this
      includes quoted material from an original text. For instance, in
      Dead Poets Society, Robin Williams quotes from Walt Whitman's
      poem "My Captain." Or it might take the form of an allusion,
      which makes an implicit connection to another text. Ray
      Bradbury's Fahrenheit 451 alludes to the Cheshire Cat from
      Alice in Wonderland, which would have created an instant
      image in readers' minds. Intertextuality can also include the
      retelling of classic stories. For instance, the more
      contemporary film 10 Things I Hate about You is a
      contemporary take on Shakespeare's classic play The Taming of
      the Shrew.

   Memes and GIFs are also forms of intertextuality, relying on
      the audience's familiarity with a particular photo or scene from
      a movie in order to understand the implied meaning.

   Open source software makes it possible for users to access

514 | Remix Culture and Copyright
      code that would otherwise have been proprietary so that they
      can add to, modify, or enhance the code in some way to create
      something new (OpenSource.com).
   Film can be used to blend a variety of content. Many
      contemporary movies are adaptations of classic novels, comic
      book stories, or older films. YouTube videos and TikToks also
      incorporate elements from other videos, movies, photos, and
      songs.
   Academic texts build from other academic texts, often
      implicitly through quoted information and citations but also
      implicitly through various genre conventions, organizational
      strategies, and rhetorical choices. Most scientific studies build
      on studies that have already been conducted.

     Activity 17.1

        The above section provides some basic types of remix
     along with several examples. For this activity you should:

         1. Review the different types of remix listed and see if
             you can come up with more examples that would fit
             under each category.

        2. See if you can identify types of remix that haven't
             been identified above along with an example or two.

History of Remix Culture

The history of remix culture is a long one, and it's incredibly

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 515
complex. Some texts are fairly obvious in the ways that they have
purposely integrated elements from preexisting texts. Other texts
are much more subtle, and it would be impossible to trace all of
the different experiences that came together to influence all of the
artistic (or academic) choices the author(s) made. While this section
endeavors to provide a very brief overview of that history, the main
point is to trace the underlying arguments by many proponents
of remix culture and to demonstrate how prevalent the concept
of remix has been throughout history. As we will see, many high-
profile texts and pivotal inventions are a form of remix, which begs
the question of where our society might be now if it weren't for
remix culture.

            Though many people might equate the digital age with the
rise of remix culture, the reality is that remix has been around
for centuries, often as a comment on the culture of the time and
almost always building from other works that came before. Writing
for the World Intellectual Property Organization, Guilda Rostama
says, "Most cultures around the world have evolved through the
mixing and merging of different cultural expressions." She goes on
to list examples of oral traditions dating back to medieval times,
Renaissance architecture inspired by ancient Rome and Greece, and
folk traditions in the nineteenth century. Some also note that the
Panchatantra, dating back to around 400 BCE is an early form of
remix (Roy). Another example can be found in the early Quaker
movement in the seventeenth century, in which followers told Bible
stories in their own words and reenacted scenes from the Bible
(Daniels).

            However, remix culture truly emerged in the twentieth
century as new technologies made different types of remix possible.
In Everything Is a Remix, Kirby Ferguson traces the remix history
of individual songs and artists and the way genres of music took
shape through remixing techniques. For instance, he notes that
as early as the 1970s, DJs were looping songs together at dance
parties, alternating between two or more songs, and speaking words
to the beat of the music, all of which sparked the beginning of

516 | Remix Culture and Copyright
rap. Sampling became more complex, combining different kinds
of sound effects and mixing techniques and expanding to other
genres like hip-hop and rock. All songs, according to Furguson,
employ remix ideas, starting with existing ideas and transforming
and combining them into something else. Some examples are fairly
subtle, perhaps using chords, stylistic techniques, and turns of
phrase that are fairly common. Others are more obvious and have
sparked a great deal of controversy over the years. For instance,
Greg Gillis's Girl Talk project was a "series of flagrantly illegal
mashup albums that can be downloaded for free. Each song is
composed entirely of dozens of uncleared samples by popular
artists" (Furgeson). Gillis is featured in the 2008 open source
documentary RIP: A Remix Manifesto, which explores the concept
of copyright in the digital age (Gaylor). Led Zeppelin is another
group that has been criticized for copying lyrics from other songs,
even being accused of plagiarizing part of the song "Taurus" in its
1971 release of "Stairway to Heaven." The lawsuit finally came to
court in 2016, with the jury deciding that "the descending musical
pattern shared by both songs had been a common musical device
for centuries. One example cited was Chim Chim Cher-ee, from the
1964 Disney musical Mary Poppins" (BBC).

            As new remix techniques emerged in the 1970s, the
Copyright Act of 1976 was put in place to thwart unrestricted use of
licensed materials, imposing strict financial penalties to anyone who
violated the rules. For instance, if the Led Zeppelin lawsuit cited
above had turned in favor of the plaintiff, Zeppelin would have had
to repay somewhere between $3 million and $4 million. As a result of
these restrictions and penalties that some people felt discouraged
creativity and civic participation, remix culture advanced as a form
of protest. Professor Lawrence Lessig is a Harvard law professor
and a political activist who founded Creative Commons in 2001
to provide a platform where people can access, share, and build
upon other people's work. In his book, Remix, Lessig says copyright
restrictions of the twentieth century discouraged people from
taking an active role in the creative process. "The 20th century was

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 517
the first time in the history of human culture when popular culture
had become professionalized, and when the people were taught to
defer to the professional" (29).

            The advancement of digital media was also an important
shift toward remix culture. While analog media encouraged a "read-
only" culture in which people were passive consumers, digital media
allowed a "read-write" culture that was more reciprocal, allowing
people to not only consume but produce creative works. Videos
and audio files could be reproduced over and over without losing
quality. In the 1980s, home computers became more popular and
the free and open software movement sparked a cultural shift in
favor of resources that allow materials to be freely used and edited
by anyone (Tozzi). Also the rise of Web 2.0, defined by platforms that
allow for more collaboration and user-generated content, provided
even more opportunities for people to remix texts, photos, videos,
songs, and more. Now anyone can create remixes, edits, and
spinoffs, and it is a very common form of expression that provides
entertainment and provokes further conversation.

The Remix Controversy

Despite its prevalence, remix culture is controversial, begging the
question of where the line is between creative inspiration drawing
that builds on previous ideas and outright plagiarism. On the one
hand, people argue that remix is a natural part of the thought
process and that it has immense cultural and social value. Kirby
Ferguson, for instance, argues on his website Everything is a Remix
as well as his TED Talk Embrace the Remix that all ideas are
essentially a remix, incorporating the basic elements of copying,
combining, and transforming previous content. We learn first by
copying what others have created, which becomes a gateway to
transforming and combining elements to create something "new." "I
think these aren't just the components of remixing," Furgeson said

518 | Remix Culture and Copyright
in his TED Talk. "I think these are the basic elements of all creativity.
I think everything is a remix, and I think this is a better way to
conceive of creativity." Similarly, Colin Lankshear and Michele
Knobel point out that remix extends far beyond the act of
combining or revising songs or pictures. It's a broad concept that
defines what a culture is: "We could say that knowledge is a remix,
that politics is a remix, and so on. Always and everywhere, this
is how cultures have been made--by remixing: taking what others
have created, remixing it, and sharing with other people again"
(Lankshear and Knobel).

            As ChatGPT, Bard, and other generative AI platforms have
emerged, educators and digital writers alike have found more
complex and productive uses for these technologies, beyond the
simple (and largely unethical and ineffective) practice of inputting
a prompt and then copying and pasting the resulting text. For
instance, these platforms can be used to help brainstorm topic
ideas, create outlines, provide examples of genre conventions, as
well as expand or revise content that has already been written.
In fact, a recent study by Wieland et al. in Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence found that people are more productive when
brainstorming or developing ideas using artificial intelligence (a
platform that wasn't judging their ideas) than with another person.
In other words, like all other writing where every idea and writing
strategy is a remix, writing produced in collaboration with
generative AI is also a remix, and that isn't always a bad thing.

            Of course, proponents of remix culture are quick to point
out the many examples of remix, many of which are identified
above, that have greatly benefited society as a whole. Ferguson's
TED Talk provides several more examples of remixes by Bob Dylan
and Steve Jobs. He has quotes from Picasso as well as Henry Ford
clarifying that they didn't create anything entirely new; they built on
artwork and discoveries that came before. Many classic examples
of remix can be found in the works of Walt Disney. Not only is
Disney remaking many of the old classics, like Lion King and Dumbo
(Simmonds), but many of the original characters in Disney movies

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 519
originated from other stories in the public domain (Khanna). Even
our contemporary version of Mickey Mouse underwent several
remixes over the years on his journey to being the Disney icon
(Trammell). However, in addition to the prevalence of remix,
advocates also argue for the social value. Ferguson says, "Rixing can
empower you [to] be more creative. Remixing allows us to make
music without playing instruments, to create software without
coding, to create bigger and more complex ideas out of smaller and
simpler ideas" ("Everything"). Not only does remixing add to the
cultural repertoire of artistic works, but it teaches people to actively
engage in political discussions and cultural activities, providing a
means of participation, critique, and even social protest. For
instance, memes (Williams) and hashtags (Vickery) have been used
to advance political movements like the #MeToo and the
#BlackLivesMatter movements. It's obvious, then, why advocates
like Ferguson and Lessig ("Re-examining") argue that copyright law
is too restrictive, stifling creative and political expression, used for
the financial gain of artists and other creators who used remix in
their own creations. Their argument is predicated on the way that
copyright law has changed throughout history. While the original
copyright law in 1790 allowed for 14 years of copyright protection
for a work with the opportunity to renew copyright for another
14 years--28 years total, the current interaction extends copyright
protection for the life of the author plus another 70 years. Their
argument also assumes that "remix" involves some sort of
transformation of the original work. Copying or plagiarizing a text
isn't the type of "remix" that Ferguson and Lessig support.

            On the other side of the debate, people argue that remix
culture encourages plagiarism, that artists should have the rights to
their own creative works and be able to control how they are altered
and disseminated. In some instances, remix takes the original text
out of context and alters it to purposely misrepresent the original
idea. There is also the fact that many people are paid for their
creative works, and they lose money and notoriety when their works
are taken without financial compensation or due credit. An article

520 | Remix Culture and Copyright
in The Atlantic by Adrienne LaFrance underscores this problem by
describing the experience of an artist named Gelila Mesfin, whose
artwork was displayed on Pinterest without proper credit and then
copied by someone else who used it as a mural as part of an urban
planning initiative, calling it his own form of art. LaFrance says, "The
same tools that enable artists to share their work widely makes it
easier for those same artists to get ripped off by outsiders who
sometimes profit from this kind of theft. These incidents are
especially fraught, too, because of how often the person benefiting
is already privileged and powerful." In other words, the professionals
who spent years developing their craft and developing the skills
to create various forms of art lose out because of blatant theft by
people who don't have those same professional talents and skills.
Craig Robinson is another artist who was mentioned in LaFrance's
article because his work was copied by someone else using his ideas
who claimed that "everything is a remix" when he confronted her.
"Which is convenient, isn't it?" Robinson said. "Very convenient that
your school of thinking allows you to piggyback off my idea, my
work, my hours and hours and thousands of hours to get yourself
a sugary write-up in the New York bloody Times and exhibitions in
New York" (qtd. in LaFrance).

            Another argument against remix centers on the fact that
many of the original artists are from marginalized groups whose
cultural expressions are appropriated and twisted to fit someone
else's agenda. April Reign, the managing editor of the website
Broadway Black, told Wired magazine, "I cannot name a person of
color who has created something viral and capitalized off of it" (qtd.
in Ellis). Similarly, Thomas Joo argues that remix isn't really a form of
equal opportunity in which individuals find their voice. More often
than not, he says, the "dominant [cultural] institutions appropriate
from the underdog" and "use their influence to `drown out' those
individual voices" (415), which only reinforces dominant ideologies
and the social injustices that those individual voices are trying to
work against.

            It's a complex issue as both sides advocate for artistic

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 521
freedom and the value that such expression has in society. The
digital age has made things more complicated as olds works are
remediated into new forms and have made it possible to
significantly transform the original work, sometimes beyond
recognition. Judges tend to focus on the degree of transformation
of a remixed work as well as the type of alterations made to the
original (LaFrance). There is also the question of the author's
original intent and whether they are still living, assuming that the
original author can be identified. In fact, as remix culture advances
and digital technologies continue to evolve, the very concept of
authorship has become a complicated one, making it difficult to
identify where even our most "original" ideas came from and what
we can claim as our own.

     Activity 17.2

        Write a reflection based on the controversy surrounding
     remix culture. Which side of the controversy do you agree
     with more and why? What are some of the most compelling
     arguments on the other side of the debate? You should also
     comment on your own opinion regarding the line in which
     "remix" becomes "plagiarism."

        See if you can find other examples, like the ones cited
     above, to support your position.

522 | Remix Culture and Copyright
Copyright Law

The debate about remix culture is directly related to the idea of
intellectual property and the desire to protect authors' rights and
encourage ingenuity. Copyright law is intended to provide that
protection. Grounded in the U.S. Constitution, copyright literally
means "the right to copy," and as stated in the Copyright Act of 1976,
it's automatically given to the author of a work, whether it is written
text, graphic art, or a recording. It provides that individual with
the sole right to publish, print, copy, and distribute their work (U.
S. Copyright Office, "Copyright Law"). While many people register
their work with the U.S. Copyright Office in order to have
documented proof in the event that someone violates their
copyright, an original work is protected automatically "the moment
it is created and fixed in a tangible form that is perceptible either
directly or with the aid of a machine or device" (U.S. Copyright
Office, "Copyright in General"). In other words, a text that exists in
your mind isn't protected, but the minute that you write it down
on paper or type it up on a screen, it has copyright protection.
Similarly, a dance or theater performance isn't protected when it
is performed because it's not yet in a "fixed and tangible" medium.
However, if the play is written down or the dance is recorded on
film, then it has copyright protection.

            You might typically associate copyright with literary
texts--poems, short stories, novels, memoirs, and so on--but it
extends to many different types of authorship, including academic
essays, news stories, songs, computer software, architectural
blueprints, sculptures, movies, and more. To receive copyright,
three elements must be present:

   Originality. It is the work of the author and hasn't been copied
      from someplace else. Based on our discussion in the remix
      section of this chapter, it's clear that the term "original" is hard
      to pin down. According to the University Libraries at the

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 523
      University of North Texas, "This doesn't mean it has to be
      `novel' in the way an invention must be to get a patent." While
      the idea itself might not be new, the expression of that idea
      should be unique to that author.
   Creativity. According to the U.S. Supreme Court, a work must
      have a "modicum" of creativity to have copyright. This is in
      some ways up to the interpretation of individual courts, but
      the main idea is that lists of names and numbers don't require
      any sort of creativity while other forms of expression that are
      less straightforward and obvious do.
   Fixation. As mentioned above, the work must be in a fixed
      medium that is stable and can be perceived by an audience.

Given these criteria, you can probably see that many things aren't
protected by copyright. For one thing, there's a difference between
a copyright, a patent, and a trademark. The U.S. Copyright Office
explains that a copyright applies to "works of authorship," while a
patent is more appropriate for an invention, process, discovery, or
scientific creation. A trademark is more about branding, intended
to protect things like logos, symbols, taglines, and slogans that are
associated with a particular brand. In other words, a tagline
wouldn't be protected by copyright, but it might be eligible for
trademark protection. Other things that aren't eligible for copyright
include the following (U.S. Copyright Office, "Circular 33"):

   Ideas, concepts, or processes. As stated above, these might be
      more appropriate for a patent. While you certainly could write
      down the idea or create a drawing that represents a particular
      system, the word choice or the drawing would be protected by
      copyright, but the underlying idea or process isn't.

   Names, titles, and short phrases. This one might be surprising:
      the title of a work, such as a novel or a movie, isn't protected
      by copyright. Similarly, the name of a business, a slogan or
      catchphrase, the name of a character, or a domain name or
      URL can't be copyrighted.

524 | Remix Culture and Copyright
   Facts and discoveries. These are things that weren't created by
      an individual and therefore aren't eligible for copyright or
      patent protection.

   Straightforward language about a process or function. While
      very creative expressions of an idea or process can be
      copyrighted, some expressions are very common or don't have
      creative elements. For instance, the phrase "Preheat the oven
      to 350 degrees" is a very common phrase that doesn't have any
      creativity. It wouldn't be protected by copyright.

   Typeface and special lettering. In other words, a specific font
      can't be copyrighted.

   The layout or format of a document or design. The actual
      design would be protected by copyright, but a template of a
      web page or a magazine layout wouldn't.

   Blank forms, such as order forms, scorecards, address books,
      timecards, and calendars. "Blank forms that are designed for
      recording information and do not themselves convey
      information are not copyrightable" (U.S. Copyright Office,
      "Circular 33").

                                                                                        Copyright
                                                                                        Chart by
                                                                                        Duke
                                                                                        University's
                                                                                        Center, on
                                                                                        Wikimedia
                                                                                        Commons
                                                                                        (CC BY-SA
                                                                                        3.0)

Fair Use

The main exception to copyright law is called fair use, which allows

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 525
individuals to copy portions of a copyrighted work for certain
purposes without explicit permission to do so. In many instances,
fair use is about copying only a small part of a protected work
in order to fulfill a noncommercial purpose, such as archiving,
teaching, critiquing, news reporting, or researching. A teacher in
a classroom, for instance, can photocopy a page out of a textbook
and hand out multiple copies to students for the sake of teaching a
specific concept or idea.

            According to Copyright Law Section 107, several elements
should be considered when deciding whether a protected work can
be copied under fair use (U.S. Copyright Office, "Chapter 1"):

   "The purpose and character of the use, including whether such
      use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational
      purposes." If something is copied for commercial reasons in
      order to make money or promote a product or service, then it
      wouldn't be protected under fair use. If something is
      reproduced for educational purposes or noncommercial
      purposes, it is more likely to be considered fair use, though
      there are other factors to consider.

   "The nature of the copyrighted work." Copyright is intended to
      protect creative expression, and therefore more creative works
      like novels, poems, or songs are less likely to be considered fair
      use than if it were a more technical or factual work like a
      textbook or a news article.

   "The amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation
      to the copyrighted work as a whole." In this case, courts will
      consider the amount of the original work that is copied as well
      as the quality of the work. Smaller portions of the work are
      more likely to be considered fair use than larger portions.
      However, if the selected portion is a really significant section
      of the piece, containing the main idea or underlying
      personality of the whole thing, it might not be protected by
      fair use, even if it is a small portion.

   "The effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of

526 | Remix Culture and Copyright
      the copyrighted work." If the use of the copyrighted work
      creates financial harm to the creator, then it's less likely to be
      considered fair use. This is especially true if the use of the
      material is preventing people from buying their own copy of
      the original.

Harvard University notes that recently, courts have paid more
attention to the degree to which the original work is
"transformative," meaning that it has been added to or built upon in
a way that changes the nature of the original work and provides new
meaning (a.k.a. remix). While works copies of a work don't have to
be transformative to be fair use (e.g., copies of a textbook excerpt
in a classroom), "a use that supplants or substitutes for the original
work is less likely to be deemed fair use than one that makes a new
contribution and thus furthers the goal of copyright to promote
science and the arts" (Harvard University). The Harvard University
article goes on to mention other factors like common practice and
the motives of the person copying the material to help determine
whether it is fair use.

     Activity 17.3

        Review this worksheet that was created by the Copyright
     Advisory Office at Columbia University Libraries. It has a
     checklist that goes through each element of fair use. Use it
     to consider the various examples of copying listed below
     and whether each one is fair use and why or why not. Keep
     in mind that some of the examples are fairly complex and
     are open to interpretation by a jury.

          You repost or share a link to someone else's social

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 527
             media post on your own account.
          A teacher copies a photo from Google Images and

             pastes it into their slideshow for class.
          A teacher photocopies an entire chapter of a

             textbook and distributes it to students so they don't
             have to purchase the book.
          A friend sends you a picture they took with their
             digital camera, and you use it to create a meme that
             you post on your social media page.
          Part of a popular song is used in a commercial.
          You edit part of a published film by inserting
             yourself into the scene and then posting it on
             YouTube.
          You and your friends perform a famous part of a
             song in your garage.
          You take the color scheme and overall layout of
             another website and apply it to your own.

Understanding Copyright Licenses

Because texts are so readily available in online spaces, it's important
to be familiar with the different types of copyright licenses and what
they mean. In all instances, the creator holds the copyright and
gets to decide which type of license they want to use. A standard
copyright, as noted above, prohibits other people from copying,
adapting, or redistributing their work. However, there are other
types of licenses (known as copyleft) that provide more flexibility
in how they can be used. The most common copyleft license that
allows the author to retain basic rights over their work while still
allowing others to reuse it in different ways is a Creative Commons

528 | Remix Culture and Copyright
license. Founded in 2001 by Lawrence Lessig (an advocate for remix
culture and more lenient copyright laws), Creative Commons "is a
nonprofit organization that helps overcome legal obstacles to the
sharing of knowledge and creativity to address the world's most
pressing challenges." As they explain on their website, the Creative
Commons licenses are composed of four different elements or
rules:

   BY: attribution is required (the author must be given credit)
   NC: No commercial use (can't be used to make money)
   ND: No derivative works (can't be changed)
   SA: Share alike, which applies only to derivative works and

      requires that they have the same license as the original.

Obviously, an ND and SA can't be combined to form a CC license,
but the other elements can be combined in various ways to form six
different licenses:

   CC BY (least restrictive)
   CC BY-SA
   CC BY-ND
   CC BY-NC
   CC BY-NC-SA
   CC BY-NC-ND (most restrictive)

Each Creative Commons license gives permission for people to
share, but they include different rules that must be followed.
Another type of license not listed above is the CC 0, which is the
designation used for a work that is in the public domain. It is the
same thing as "no rights reserved," meaning that the author has
relinquished any claim on the work and it can be used, adapted, and
copied without limit.

            Understanding how copyright works and the types of
licenses that are available is important so that you can ensure you
are using material legally. All work should have some sort of

                                                         Remix Culture and Copyright | 529
copyright designation, but when in doubt, you should always
contact the original author and get written permission to use their
work in whatever way you intend.

            Remix culture and copyright law have evolved in tandem
over the last few decades as digital technologies have enhanced our
ability to access, modify, and redistribute information. Interestingly,
they are both focused on protecting the artistic and scientific
progress of our society, but they envision the creative process in
different ways. Whatever school of thought you espouse, it's
important to understand the ways that digital media encourages
a more participatory culture where new ideas and different forms
of expression emerge, but it's equally important to understand the
legal restrictions that are in place and the consequences of misuse.

     Discussion Questions

         1. What is a remix? Give a definition of the different
             types of remix along with some examples.

        2. How can the concept of remix be applied to other
             forms of knowledge and expression beyond music?

        3. What is the purpose of copyright law? How does
             the concept of remix contradict the underlying
             principles of copyright?

        4. In what ways has remix shaped human history?
             Why did remix culture emerge so strongly in the
             twentieth century? What were some of the factors
             that facilitated its advancement?

        5. Explain the remix controversy. What are some of
             the important arguments for and against remix?

        6. Why is the concept of "ownership" and "originality"

530 | Remix Culture and Copyright
        so complex? How does digital media further
        complicate these ideas?
    7. Explain what copyright is and how a work gains
        copyright protection. What are the three elements
        that must be in place for a work to be copyrighted?
   8. What are some examples of works that can be
        copyrighted? What works can't?
   9. Explain what fair use means and what the
        standards are for deciding whether copying a work is
        considered fair use.
  10. How does a Creative Commons license extend
        permission to users beyond a traditional copyright?

Sources

             The Art of Noise. "History." TheArtOfNoiseOnline,
          2017, https://theartofnoiseonline.com/The-Art-of-
          Noise.php.

             BBC. "Led Zeppelin's Stairway to Heaven
          Copyright Battle Is Finally Over." BBC.com, 5 Oct.
          2020, https://www.bbc.com/news/entertainment-
          arts-54423922.

             Booker, Christopher. "How One Artist Put a New
          Spin on Mashing Up New and Old Music Tracks."
          PBS.org, 23 Apr., 2022, https://www.pbs.org/
          newshour/show/how-one-artist-put-a-new-spin-

                                                    Remix Culture and Copyright | 531
               on-mashing-up-new-and-old-music-
               tracks#:~:text=For%20the%20last%2020%20some,a
               lbum%20with%20fully%20licensed%20samples.

                  Collins, Bryan. "What is Fanfiction? 5 Types of
               Fanfiction." BecomeAWriterToday, 26 Sept. 2022,
               https://becomeawritertoday.com/what-is-
               fanfiction/.

                  Copyright Advisory Office. "Fair Use Checklist."
               Columbia University Libraries, 14 May 2008,
               https://copyright.columbia.edu/content/dam/
               copyright/Precedent%20Docs/fairusechecklist.pdf.

                  Copyright Alliance. "What Is the Purpose of
               Copyright Law." CopyrightAlliance.org, 2023,
               https://copyrightalliance.org/education/
               copyright-law-explained/copyright-basics/
               purpose-of-copyright/.

                  Creative Commons. "What We Do."
               CreativeCommons.org, n.d.,
               https://creativecommons.org/about/.

                  Daniels, C. Wess. "Remix Culture and the Church."
               GatherlingLight.com, n.d.,
               https://www.gatheringinlight.com/2011/03/04/
               remix-culture-and-the-church/.

                  Ellis, Emma Grey, "Want to Profit Off Your Meme?
               Good Luck If You're Not White." Wired, 1 Mar. 2017,
               https://www.wired.com/2017/03/on-fleek-meme-
               monetization-gap/.

                  Ferguson, Kirby. "Embrace the Remix." TED, 2012,
               https://www.ted.com/talks/
               kirby_ferguson_embrace_the_remix/transcript.

532 | Remix Culture and Copyright
   ------. "Everything Is a Remix."
EverythingIsARemix, 24 Mar. 2023,
https://www.everythingisaremix.info/.

   Galbraith, David. "There Is No Such Thing as
Invention." Medium.com, 7 June 2013,
https://medium.com/i-m-h-o/there-is-no-such-
thing-as-invention-30f0adc336ee.

   Gaylor, Brett. RIP! A Remix Manifesto. National
Film Board of Canada, 2008, https://www.nf b.ca/
film/rip_a_remix_manifesto/.

   Goodreads. "Mashup Books." Goodreads.com, n.d.,
https://www.goodreads.com/shelf/show/mashup.

   Harvard University. "Copyright and Fair Use."
Harvard University, 16 Feb. 2023,
https://ogc.harvard.edu/pages/copyright-and-fair-
use#:~:text=Fair%20use%20is%20the%20right,law
%20is%20designed%20to%20foster.

   Joo, Thomas W. "Remix without Romance."
Connecticut Law Review, 138. Retrieved from
https://opencommons.uconn.edu/law_review/
138/.

   Khanna, Derek. "50 Disney Movies Based on the
Public Domain." Forbes, 3 Feb. 2014,
https://www.forbes.com/sites/derekkhanna/2014/
02/03/50-disney-movies-based-on-the-public-
domain/?sh=1995b56f329c.

   LaFrance, Adrienne. "When a `Remix' Is Plain Ole
Plagiarism." The Atlantic, 3 May 2017,
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/
2017/05/the-indignities-of-remix-culture/525129/.

                                       Remix Culture and Copyright | 533
                  Lagioia, Stephen. "The 10 Funniest Family Guy
               Spoof Episodes (According to IMDB)." ScreenRant, 3
               Dec. 2019, https://screenrant.com/family-guy-
               funniest-spoof-episodes-imdb/.

                  Lankshear, Colin, and Michele Knobel. "Lankshear
               and Knobel Remix Lessig." NewLearningOnline.com,
               2008, https://newlearningonline.com/literacies/
               chapter-1/lankshear-and-knobel-remix-lessig.

                  Lessig, Lawrence. "Re-examining the Remix." TED,
               n.d., https://www.ted.com/talks/
               lawrence_lessig_re_examining_the_remix#t-5733
               98.

                  ------. Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in
               the Hybrid Economy. Penguin Press, 2008.

                  Murray, Ben. "Remixing Culture and Why the Art
               of the Mash-Up Matters." TechCrunch, 22 Mar. 2015,
               https://techcrunch.com/2015/03/22/from-
               artistic-to-technological-mash-up/.

                  Navas, Eduardo. "Remix Defined." RemixTheory,
               n.d, https://remixtheory.net/?page_id=3.

                  O'Brien, Jon. "Madonna's 20 Top Remixes of All
               Time." Billboard.com, 22 June 2022,
               https://www.billboard.com/lists/madonna-
               remixes-best-all-time-songs/.

                  Open AI. "Introducing ChatGPT." OpenAI, 30 Nov.
               2022, https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt.

                  OpenSource.com. "What is Open Source?" RedHat
               Inc, 2023, https://opensource.com/resources/
               what-open-source.

                  Rogers, S. A., "Art Remix: 26 Modern Takes on

534 | Remix Culture and Copyright
Famous Historical Paintings." WebUrbanist, n.d.,
https://weburbanist.com/2011/11/07/art-
remix-26-modern-takes-on-famous-paintings/.

   Rostama, Guilda. "Remix Culture and Amateur
Creativity: A Copyright Dilemma." WIPO Magazine,
June 2015, https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/
en/2015/03/article_0006.html.

   Roy, Nilanjana S. "The Panchatantra: The Ancient
`Viral Memes' Still with Us." BBC.com, 17 May 2018,
https://www.bbc.com/culture/article/
20180517-the-panchatantra-the-ancient-viral-
memes-still-with-us.

   Sayre, Eleanor C. "Generative Writing: How to
Make the First Draft of Your Research Paper."
Zaposa.com, 18 Aug. 2023,
https://handbook.zaposa.com/articles/generative-
writing/index.html.

   Simmonds, Ross. "The Disney Strategy: Why You
Should Take Old Ideas and Remix Them."
Medium.com, 11 Dec. 2019,
https://medium.com/@thecoolestcool/the-disney-
strategy-why-you-should-take-old-ideas-remix-
them-970102dee970.

   Sulem, Matt. "The 25 Best `Weird Al' Yankovic
Parody Songs." YardBarker, 19 Jan. 2022,
https://www.yardbarker.com/entertainment/
articles/
the_25_best_weird_al_yankovic_parody_songs/
s1__30317705.

   SuperSummary. "Parody." SuperSummary, n.d.,

                                       Remix Culture and Copyright | 535
               https://www.supersummary.com/parody-in-
               literature-definition-examples/.

                  Tozzi, Christopher. "For Fun and Profit: A History
               of the Free and Open Source Software Revolution."
               MIT.edu, 2017, https://direct.mit.edu/books/book/
               3528/For-Fun-and-ProfitA-History-of-the-Free-
               and-Open.

                  Trammell, Kendall. "6 Mickey Mouse Facts You
               Probably Didn't Know." CNN.com, 18 Nov. 2017,
               https://www.cnn.com/2017/11/18/entertainment/
               mickey-mouse-fun-facts-trivia-trnd/index.html.

                  University Libraries, University of North Texas.
               "Copyright Quick Reference Guide." University of
               North Texas, 28 Oct. 2022,
               https://guides.library.unt.edu/SCCopyright/
               basics#:~:text=The%20three%20basic%20elements
               %20of%20copyright%3A%20originality%2C%20crea
               tivity%2C%20and%20fixation,-
               There%20are%20three.

                  U.S. Copyright Office. "Chapter 1: Subject Matter
               and Scope of Copyright." Copyright.gov, n.d.,
               https://www.copyright.gov/title17/
               92chap1.html#107.

                  ------. "Circular 33: Works Not Protected by
               Copyright." Copyright.gov, Mar. 2021,
               https://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ33.pdf.

                  ------. "Copyright in General (FAQ)." Copyright.gov,
               n.d., https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-
               general.html#:~:text=Copyright%20is%20a%20form
               %20of,both%20published%20and%20unpublished%
               20works.

536 | Remix Culture and Copyright
   ------. "Copyright Law of the United States (Title
17)" Copyright.gov. N.d., https://www.copyright.gov/
title17/.

   U.S. Supreme Court. "Feist Publications Inc., v.
Rural Tel. Ser. Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991)." Justia, n.d.,
https://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/499/
340/.

   Vanderbilt University Writing Studio. "Invention
(aka Brainstorming)." Vanderbilt.edu, 17 July 2023,
https://www.vanderbilt.edu/writing/resources/
handouts/invention/ .

   Vickery, Jacqueline Ryan. "Mapping the
Affordances and Dynamics of Activist Hashtags."
Paper presented at AoIR 2017: The 18th Annual
Conference of the Association of Internet
Researchers. Tartu, Estonia: AoIR.
https://spir.aoir.org/ojs/index.php/spir/article/
view/10205.

   Williams, Apryl. "Black Memes Matter:
#LivingWhileBlack with Becky and Karen." Social
Media + Society, vol. 6, no. 4, https://doi.org/10.1177/
2056305120981047.

                                       Remix Culture and Copyright | 537
18. Editing Your Work

A lot of people bemoan what they perceive to be a disregard for
basic grammar and punctuation rules as different forms of digital
writing have emerged. For instance, research by the Pew Research
Center found that the majority of AP (Advanced Placement) and
NWP (National Writing Project) teachers have mixed feelings about
digital media, feeling that on one hand, it promotes more
opportunities for different types of writing and collaboration and a
deeper awareness of audience and other rhetorical considerations
(Purcell et al.). However, they also feel that the shift to reading and
writing informal texts have "diminished" students' ability to attend
to the more precise aspects of their writing--word choice, grammar,
punctuation. In a survey of AP and NWP teachers, 68% expressed
concern that digital tools make it more likely that students will "take
shortcuts and not put effort into their writing." Respondents also
noted concerns about "spelling and grammar" and writing that is
"too fast" and "careless" (Purcell et al.).

            Perhaps text messaging is one of the best examples. With
the affordances of text messages, we can easily stay in touch with
people all day long, quickly reading short messages and responding
in kind as time allows. This is an incredibly informal form of writing.
It's not unusual to see a text message with no punctuation or
capitalization at all. Instead it's filled with SMS language
(abbreviations), slang, emojis, and GIFs--all of which convey
meaning and can go a long way to advance conversations, provide
entertainment, and forge social connections. Text messaging and
social media posts have significantly expanded the types of and the
amount of writing that people do each day, which is a major benefit.
However, the concern is that when tasked with a more formal type
of writing--an academic essay, an email to a colleague or supervisor,
or even a blog post or white paper--people will approach them in

538 | Editing Your Work
the same way, with little attention to prewriting, organization, or
proofreading for accuracy and clarity.

            The reality is that concerns about students' ability to write
"correctly" (i.e., according to grammar and punctuation rules for
Standard American English) and the debate about which writing
skills merit the most attention go back a long way. As early as 1874,
Harvard added a writing component to its already rigorous entrance
exam for potential applicants, and more than half of students taking
the exam that year failed and were therefore required to take
remedial writing courses before they were considered ready for
college-level writing (Haswell). Grammar and punctuation drills
were normal in English classes throughout the beginning of the
twentieth century, and even still, in 1974, a Newsweek article titled
"Why Johnny Can't Write" decried the "appalling" literacy statistics
and the growing number of surface-level errors that undermined
basic writing proficiency. The article begins like this: "If your
children are attending college, chances are that when they
graduate, they will be unable to write ordinary, expository English
with any real degree of structure and lucidity" (Sheils). It goes on to
discuss the connection between low reading levels (as predicted by
Marshall McLuhan with the growth of television culture) and poor
writing skills and the deficit of professionals and "civil servants"
who can write effectively (Sheils). Since then, more writing teachers
have focused on other aspects of writing--depth of content and the
underlying ideas and insights, rhetorical considerations, and writing
processes that help students think about their writing in stages.

            Certainly, there is much more to effective writing than
correct grammar and punctuation. It has to catch readers' attention,
offer insights that help readers think about a topic in new ways,
demonstrate logical thinking, and in some cases, spark an emotional
response that prompts readers to take action. However, as this
chapter will discuss, correctness matters too, adding clarity and
credibility to your writing. While there are far too many grammar
and punctuation rules to cover in one chapter, we'll cover some
of the most fundamental, paying particular attention to common

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 539
mistakes. We'll also discuss strategies for concise writing, which is
especially important in digital writing.

     Learning Objectives

          Understand the difference between revising and
             editing.

          Consider the recursive nature of the writing
             process.

          Identify the rhetorical importance of proofreading
             for clarity and correctness.

          Understand the differences between different
             English dialects that have different vocabularies and
             grammar rules.

          Be able to identify the different parts of speech and
             what they do.

          Be able to identify the different parts of a sentence
             and how they function to create meaning.

          Understand and be able to apply common grammar
             rules.

          Understand and be able to apply common
             punctuation rules.

          Be able to revise your writing to make it concise
             and easy to read.

Revising vs. Editing

Sometimes you might hear the words "revising" and "editing" used

540 | Editing Your Work
interchangeably, as if they are the same thing, but there are
significant differences. Revision relates to "big picture" or "global"
changes that you make to a draft to improve the content and
organization. It might be that the process of writing the draft helped
you think through your ideas more clearly, and you've changed your
mind about the direction of your text. Maybe you've changed your
mind about your argument or the way that you want to approach
your argument. Revision might also relate to the way that you
develop your content, providing more examples or reasoning or
explanation in the text. In contrast, it might be that you got derailed
from your original topic in some places, and you need to condense
or eliminate sections that aren't central to the point you want to
make. Finally, revision could entail reorganization--moving around
sentences or entire paragraphs so the flow of your text is more
logical and easy to follow.

            In contrast, the editing process takes a closer look at
individual sentences, making more "local" changes that don't relate
as much to the content and organization. It's more about making
sure that sentences have correct grammar and punctuation,
consistent usage, precise word choice, and a structure that is
concise and enhances the flow. Once the overall structure of a text
is set, the editing process is a way of polishing a text to make sure it
is clear, easy to understand, and makes the right impression on the
intended audience.

            In terms of the writing process, the final editing typically
comes last, but it's a bit of a misnomer to think that the writing
process is linear. You've probably seen diagrams of the writing
process that seem to move sequentially from brainstorming to
prewriting to drafting to revising and, finally, to editing. The reality,
though, is that the writing process is messy, resisting predictable
steps and a clear order. In fact, it's often more recursive than linear,
and you might find yourself doing more brainstorming while you
are drafting, for instance, or rethinking some of your original ideas
even as you are proofreading for errors. Also, many people have a
pretty natural understanding of grammar and punctuation rules and

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 541
tend to polish their sentences for accuracy and word choice in their
initial draft. However, the final edit should always come last and,
ideally, include a couple of different people focusing on the smaller
details of a draft. While you might not feel that any text is ever really
"perfect," it's amazing the errors you will catch and the tangible
improvements you can make with just one more read through.

            The bottom line is that proofreading, along with having
a solid understanding of at least the most common grammar and
punctuation rules, has significant rhetorical value. Remember
rhetoric? It's the purpose of your text. It's the main idea that you
are trying to convey in order to invoke some sort of change in
your reader--to deepen their understanding of an issue, to make a
personal connection, to challenge their thinking on a controversial
issue, to provoke some sort of action. You might think that the
final edit is more like the frosting on the cake than anything of real
substance or consequence, but some proofreading errors create
confusion for readers, making it more difficult for them to read
and understand your work, which is a significant barrier to the
success of your text. Also, proofreading errors can diminish your
ethos--your credibility or authority in the minds of readers. A text
with punctuation, spelling, or grammar errors creates the
impression that the writer was either too lazy or careless to
proofread or that they don't understand what the rules are. Either
way, these errors can have a profound impact on readers'
impression of a text and how they respond.

     Activity 18.1

        Go back to the last thing that you wrote, preferably not a

542 | Editing Your Work
     text message. An email or even a class assignment could
     work for this activity.

        First you should briefly consider your own process and
     how carefully you believe you proofread this text before
     you submitted it.

        Now go through and proofread the document thoroughly.
     See how many grammar, punctuation, or spelling errors you
     can find. Also circle or underline words or phrases that you
     think could be more precise.

        Now switch with someone else. How many more errors
     or editing suggestions can you find on this person's paper
     that they missed?

        Trade papers and then discuss. Which errors surprised
     you? Which errors are you unsure about? Where did you
     and your partner differ when it came to proofreading
     suggestions?

A Note about Dialect

The remainder of this chapter focuses on common rules related
to grammar, punctuation, and conciseness, all stemming from the
Standard American English dialect that is most often taught in
English courses and advanced as "correct" in professional and
technical writing. However, there are many legitimate English
dialects, each one with its own pronunciation of words as well
as unique vocabularies and grammar rules (Laperre). As we've
discussed throughout this textbook, rhetoric is extremely
contextual, so what is "correct" can vary significantly from one

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 543
situation to the next. Like language itself, grammar and punctuation
rules are socially constructed, created for the primary purpose of
enhancing communication, and those rules evolve over time. The
point of this chapter is not to promote Standard American English
as more correct or legitimate than any other dialect. Rather, it is a
starting point to cultivate greater awareness of how grammar and
punctuation rules function so that you can apply them effectively
to your own writing. It's important to remember, too, that grammar
and punctuation rules have historically been used as a means of
exclusion, to separate those who are "educated" from those who are
not and to create further barriers to socioeconomic advancement
for minority groups (Wetherbee). At its best, however, attention
to grammar and punctuation is a means of inclusion, making your
text more accessible to readers who desire to be part of the
conversation.

Basic Grammar Rules

This section will review a few grammar concepts, many of which
are probably familiar and some that might be new or forgotten. Of
course, you can always look up information about more complicated
or nuanced grammar rules. Here we focus on common mistakes
that can make it difficult for readers to understand the meaning of
your writing and create a more negative impression of you and your
message. Being able to consistently follow these rules will go a long
way toward writing that is easy to read and more fluid.

Subject-Verb Agreement

This rule focuses on the subject of a sentence and whether it is in
singular or plural form. A singular subject requires a singular verb

544 | Editing Your Work
just as a plural subject requires the plural form of the verb. Some
examples:

            The squirrel climbs the tree.
            Those boys are on the same basketball team.
   Sometimes, it's a little more difficult to find the actual subject of
the sentence. For instance:
            A flock of geese is flying overhead.
   In this example, "flock" is the actual subject, which is singular,
while "geese" is the object of the preposition. Here's another
example:
            Feeding the animals at the zoo is prohibited.
   Here, the subject of the sentence is a gerund phrase. "Feeding
the animals" works together to form the subject of the sentence,
and even though "animals" is plural, the action that is implied in the
gerund "feeding" is singular.
            Some other things to consider when it comes to subject-
verb agreement are the following:

   Two singular nouns linked with "and" are considered a plural
      subject.

        Sarah and Maggie are on their way.
   Two singular nouns linked with "or" are considered a singular

      subject.

        Either Mom or Dad is coming to my game this afternoon.
   Indefinite pronouns are typically considered singular (anybody,

      one, everyone, nobody, etc.).

        Nobody likes getting a speeding ticket.
        Everyone is getting ready for the final exam.
   Sentences that begin with "there is" and "there are" agree with
      the noun that follows, which is the true subject of the
      sentence.

        There are only four cookies left in the box.
        There is rain moving into the area.
        One common rule of thumb is to try to avoid sentence

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 545
            constructions that begin with "there is" or "there are" to
            be more concise and put emphasis on the true subject. For
            instance: Rain is moving into the area. Only four cookies are
            left in the box.
   A subject that is joined by the correlative conjunctions "not
      only...but also," "neither...nor," "either...or" will have a verb that
      agrees with the subject closest to it.
        Not only the students but also the teacher is looking forward
            to summer break.
        Either my dog or the squirrels in the backyard are
            responsible for this mess.

Subject-Pronoun Agreement

Similar to subject-verb agreement, subject-pronoun agreement
focuses on whether the subject of the sentence is singular or plural.
In order to avoid the redundancy of naming the subject over and
over, writers will use pronouns to refer back to the subject. Once
again, a plural subject requires a plural pronoun and a singular
subject requires a singular pronoun.

            The doctor was running late and asked the nurse
      practitioner to fill in for her.

            Motorcyclists have a special connection. They always wave
      when they pass each other.
   Of course, pronouns can sometimes be tricky in a sentence with
more than one subject. Consider the following example:

            My mom and sister were in an accident. She got a minor
      concussion.
   Here the pronoun "she" is confusing. It's unclear which
antecedent (the noun that the pronoun refers to) "she" corresponds
to, the mother or the sister. Consider another example:

            I accidentally drove your car into the garage door and badly
      damaged it.

546 | Editing Your Work
   Again, it's unclear whether "it" refers to the car or the garage
door. Another similar problem with pronouns is if they occur in
a sentence that is separated from the antecedent by several
sentences, which might make it difficult for readers to remember
who or what the pronoun refers to. In that case, you'd want to
be sure to explicitly name the noun to aid readers' understanding.
Similarly, if the ideas presented in the text are somewhat complex,
instead of saying "this idea," it would probably be more helpful for
readers if you rearticulated the idea for them.

            Some other important subject-pronoun guidelines to keep
in mind include the following:

   Recently, "they" has become increasingly accepted as a
      singular pronoun for a singular subject, which helps eliminate
      gendered pronouns as well as the clunky "he or she" or "his or
      her" construction for an indefinite subject. For instance,
      instead of saying
        One must pay close attention to his or her surroundings.

                    It has become acceptable to say

        One must pay close attention to their surroundings.

                    Here's another example:

        An anonymous donor funded our entire trip. They are so
            generous!

   If possible, it's sometimes easier to simply make the subject
      plural to avoid disagreement. Instead of saying, A teacher
      should work hard to engage their students, it would be simpler
      to make the subject and pronoun plural: Teachers should work
      hard to engage their students.

   Two singular nouns connected with "and" become a plural
      antecedent and require a plural pronoun. Mary and Gregg
      walked to their car.

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 547
   Two singular nouns connected with "or" are a singular
      antecedent and require a singular pronoun. Either Sarah or
      Esther left her book on the table.

   A subject that is joined by the correlative conjunctions "not
      only...but also," "neither...nor," "either...or" will have a pronoun
      that agrees with the subject closest to it.
        Either my aunt or my sisters will let me share their hotel
            room.

Sentence Boundaries

One of the most common writing mistakes involves a
misunderstanding of sentence boundaries--where one sentence
should end and another one should begin. Here is where an
understanding of an "independent clause" as discussed above will
be helpful. As a reminder, an independent clause can stand alone as
a sentence because it has a subject and a verb, and it doesn't begin
with a subordinating conjunction.

            There are two common mistakes associated with sentence
boundaries:

 1. A fragment sentence can't stand alone as a sentence because
      it is missing a complete subject or predicate.

        For instance "going to the store to get lemons" is a fragment
            sentence because it's missing the subject. Who is going to
            the store to get lemons?

        Similarly, "the vendor at the kiosk who took my credit card"
            is also a fragment sentence because it doesn't have a
            predicate that indicates what this person did. The relative
            clause "who took my credit card" provides more
            information about which vendor is being discussed, but it's
            part of the subject. It needs a predicate to be complete:

548 | Editing Your Work
           The vendor at the kiosk who took my credit card is gone.
       The most common fragment sentence is one that begins

           with a subordinating conjunction, which makes the
           sentence a dependent clause. For instance, "I love ice
           cream" is an independent clause with a subject and a verb
           that can stand alone as a sentence. However, if you put a
           subordinating conjunction in the beginning, it becomes a
           dependent clause: "Because I love ice cream." Now it's no
           longer a complete thought; it's a fragment sentence. It
           needs an independent clause to be complete: "Because I
           love ice cream, I always have a carton in the freezer."

2. Run-on sentences put more than one independent clause
     together in the same sentence without using a conjunction to
     connect them. Instead of not having enough information to be
     a complete thought, a run-on sentence has two complete
     thoughts that should either be two separate sentences or be
     connected with a coordinating conjunction. Here are some
     examples:

         "I paid for my ticket to the movie I didn't have enough money
         for popcorn." This is an example of a run-on sentence
         because there are really two independent clauses here that
         could stand alone as a sentence: "I paid for my ticket to the
         movie" and "I didn't have enough money for popcorn."

            There are three ways to fix the above run-on sentence:

       First, it could simply be broken into two separate
           sentences: "I paid for my ticket to the movie. I didn't have
           enough money for popcorn."

       Second, and probably most common, it could be combined
           into a single sentence with a coordinating conjunction (i.e.,
           for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so). A coordinating conjunction
           can be used to connect two independent clauses into a
           single sentence: "I paid for my ticket to the movie, but I

                                                                       Editing Your Work | 549
            didn't have enough money for popcorn."
        Third, two independent clauses can be combined with a

            semicolon. We'll discuss punctuation rules in more detail
            below. For now, it's helpful to point out that a semicolon
            can combine two independent clauses, but there wouldn't
            be a coordinating conjunction. "I paid for my ticket to the
            movie; I didn't have enough money for popcorn."
        Here are a few more examples of sentences with two
            independent clauses that use a coordinating conjunction
            to combine them into one sentence:
              My daughter cleaned the house today, and she managed

                  to mow the lawn, too.
              You can go to the restaurant with us, or you're welcome

                  to drive yourself.
              I don't like exercising, nor do I watch what I eat.
              Tyler studies very hard, for he's trying to get into med

                  school.
              They worked together to rake theleaves, so they finished

                  theirchores more quickly.
              I've been getting up early for the past month, yet it's still

                  difficult to get out of bed.

Parallel Structure

Sentences with two or more ideas with equal weight should be
parallel, meaning that they have the same grammatical pattern of
words, usually beginning with the same part of speech. Verbs match
up with verbs, nouns match up with nouns, and so on. Not only
does this show that the ideas are equal, but it helps with clarity and
readability. Let's look at a few examples:

   On any given weekend, you'll find her reading, napping, and
      trying to catch up on laundry. This is an example of parallel

550 | Editing Your Work
   structure. All of the items in the list are gerunds.
 The men's room is down that walkway and to your left. Here the

   two items connected by the coordinating conjunction begin
   with prepositions.
 Most people would describe that class as challenging but also
   interesting and fun. Here all of the elements, combined with
   the use of two coordinating conjunctions, are adjectives.
 To lose weight, one should exercise regularly, eat reasonable
   portions, and drink plenty of water. All of the elements in this
   list begin with a verb.

            A sentence that isn't parallel fails to follow the same pattern
for similar items, which could create confusion, but more often than
not, it just sounds strange. For instance:

 I like baking, jogging, and to relax on the couch. Do you see the
   problem? "To relax" isn't a gerund like the other elements in
   the list. It should say, "relaxing on the couch."

 The financial advisor emphasized the importance of open
   communication, intentionality, and to think critically about how
   to reduce spending. In this example, "communication" and
   "intentionality" are both nouns, but "to think" is an infinitive.
   To be parallel, that last item needs to become a noun.
   "Resourcefulness" could work.

            There are several key instances when parallel structure is
necessary:

    When similar items are joined by a coordinating

   conjunction.

     She takes her coffee with cream and sugar.

     I don't want to go to the movies or get ice cream.

    With elements in a list.

     The goalkeeper was attentive, aggressive, and quick.

    With items that are being compared.

                                          Editing Your Work | 551
         I like eating sushi more than I like making it.

        With items joined by a correlative conjunction (both/and,

   either/or, neither/nor, not only / but also, whether/or, as/

   so).

         At the restaurant, we not only got appetizers, but we

         also ordered dessert.

         Just as the body needs exercise, so too does it need rest.

         More tests are needed to diagnose your illness and treat

         it effectively.

Active Voice

Active voice simply means that the subject of the sentence is doing
the action of the sentence and not being acted upon. This makes
sentences more interesting and usually more concise. In contrast,
a sentence in passive voice has a subject that is acted upon. Some
examples:

   Passive voice: The exam was failed by more than half the
      students in class.

   Active voice: More than half the students in the class failed the
      exam.

   Passive voice: The window was broken by the kids playing
      baseball across the street.

   Active voice: The kids playing baseball across the street broke
      the window.

   Passive voice: The new puppy was given a bath by our
      neighbors.

   Active voice: Our neighbors gave the new puppy a bath.

            An exception to the rule is when the agent doing the action
is unknown or unimportant. In that case, putting the person or thing

552 | Editing Your Work
being acted upon at the beginning of the sentence is useful for
emphasis. For example:

   I was notified today that I got the scholarship.
   The car was stolen yesterday.

Other Common Mistakes

   Dangling modifiers: A word or phrase that is being modified
      isn't clearly stated in the sentence. Here's an example:
        Having finished the assignment, the television was turned
            on. In this sentence, the phrase "having finished the
            assignment" is a modifying phrase, and as such, it should
            be followed up by the noun that is being modified. In other
            words, who or what finished the assignment? That person
            is missing from the sentence. A corrected version would
            look like this:
        Having finished the assignment, Sarah turned on the
            television.

   Misplaced modifiers: A modifying word or phrase seems to be
      modifying the wrong word. Modifiers should always go close to
      the work they are describing, and when that doesn't happen it
      can create problems. For instance:
        I turned a gold man's watch in to the lost and found. Here
            the word "gold" is misplaced. It should be next to the word
            "watch" to indicate that the watch was gold, but since it's
            next to man, it makes it seem like there is a gold man. A
            fixed version would put the modifier right next to the
            word being described:
        I turned a man's gold watch in to the lost and found.

          Here are some other examples:

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 553
        I put my dirty clothes in the hamper that I had worn. (The
            modifying phrase "that I had worn" should go next to
            "clothes" instead of "hamper." It should read, "I put my
            dirty clothes that I had worn in the hamper.")

        She arrived at the office out of breath. ("Out of breath"
            should go near "she" instead of "the office." It should read,
            "She arrived out of breath at the office.")

   Who vs. whom: Use the word "who" when it is the subject of
      the sentence and "whom" when it is the object (receiving the
      action of the verb). For instance:
        Who knows the answer to this question? (Here "who" is the
            subject completing the action of the verb.)
        To whom should I address the envelope? ("Whom" is
            receiving the addressed envelope while "I" is doing the
            action.)
        When in doubt, see if you can replace he or she with the
            word who or whom. If you can, then it should be
            "who"--the subject. If him or her makes more sense, then
            the word should be "whom"--the object. For instance: He
            knows the answer to the question. Also: I will address the
            envelope to her.

     Activity 18.2

        Fix the grammar errors in the following sentences
     (several have more than one error):

         1. Alex like to get to the theater early so it can get a
             seat in the front row.

        2. The team of football players were standing on the

554 | Editing Your Work
             sidelines with their arms crossed and frowning.
        3. Although the sun is shining today and the air is

             warm.
        4. When my parents got home, they were upset that I

             had all of the lights on they is making me pay the light
             bill this month.
        5. In his haste, Greg stubbed his toe on the chair,
             spilled his coffee, and he was forgetting to close the
             garage door.
        6. Whom will pick you up after the dance?

        Edit the following sentences so they are in active voice:

         1. The taco dip was brought to the party by Mary.
        2. Our most recent family vacation will always be

             fondly remembered by us.
        3. The church was hurried to by Sarah, so she

             wouldn't be late for the wedding.

        Try writing your own sentences with grammar errors or
     in active voice and switch with someone else to make
     corrections.

Punctuation

This section reviews punctuation rules. Again, we'll focus on some
of the more common mistakes and the rules that will help you avoid
those mistakes. While we won't discuss the most basic punctuation
marks--periods, question marks, and exclamation marks, we will
discuss the importance of several other punctuation marks and how
they should be used to add clarity to a sentence.

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 555
Commas

Commas separate elements in a sentence to provide clarity. There
are several instances when a comma is necessary:

   Transition words, such as however, thus, therefore,
      nevertheless, and so on.
        I don't, however, have the right tools to fix the washing
            machine myself.
        Therefore, we need to call the repair specialist.

   Descriptive phrases (sometimes called appositives) that help
      describe another element in the sentence. If the descriptive
      phrase provides additional information but isn't necessary to
      understand the meaning of the sentence or the referent, then
      commas are necessary to surround the information.
        Professor Snow, a longtime psychology professor on campus,
            will receive the award.
        We're going to the sand dunes in August, the hottest month
            of the year.
        Toni Morrison's book Beloved is my favorite. (There
            wouldn't be commas in this sentence because the title of
            the book, Beloved, is essential to understanding which
            book is being discussed, since she has published more
            than one.)

   Descriptive clauses (i.e., relative clauses) that describe a noun
      in the independent clause. These require commas if they aren't
      necessary to understanding the meaning of the sentence or
      the identity of the referent. (This is also called a nonrestrictive
      relative clause.)
        The news report was published in Science, which is a
            leading academic journal. (The relative clause at the end
            isn't necessary to understand which journal is being
            discussed. It simply provides additional information.)

556 | Editing Your Work
      Our mail person, who has been on our route for the last 25
         years, is retiring this spring. (The relative clause gives
         additional information about the mail person, but it isn't
         necessary for understanding who the sentence is about.)

      College students who suffer from dyslexia should register
         with a counselor to get the help they need. (In this example,
         the relative clause "who suffer from dyslexia" is restrictive.
         It's necessary to help readers understand which college
         students the sentence is about.)

 Adjacent items like dates and locations. Many people don't
   know that when you give a city and a state in a sentence, the
   state should be surrounded by commas. The same is true for a
   full date with the month, day, and year; the year should be
   surrounded by commas.

      The championship will take place in Madison, Wisconsin,
         this year.

      He was born on July 2, 1902, at the local hospital.
 Coordinating conjunctions that connect two independent

   clauses.

      I want to take that new history class, but it doesn't fit into
         my schedule.

      I went to the theme park in the afternoon, and I couldn't
         believe how long the lines were.

      Note: There shouldn't be a comma if the conjunction
         doesn't separate two independent clauses. For instance: I
         went to the theme park this afternoon and couldn't believe
         how long the lines were. Since "couldn't believe how long
         the lines were" is a dependent clause, a comma isn't
         correct.

 Lists of similar items. Rules vary, but typically you'd want to
   include the Oxford (or serial) comma, which is the last comma
   in the series, right before the word "and" or "or."

      I will buy cereal, milk, and coffee at the store.
 Separated quotes that are complete sentences. A comma

                                                                      Editing Your Work | 557
      provides separation from the dialogue tag.
        According to the American Cancer Society, "1 in 2 men and 1
            in 3 women will be diagnosed with cancer in their lifetime."
        "I don't know what you're talking about," he said.

   Subordinate clauses at the beginning of sentences.
      Remember that a subordinate or dependent clause begins with
      a subordinating conjunction and can't stand alone as a
      sentence. It needs an independent clause. If the dependent
      clause comes at the beginning of the sentence, then a comma
      should come afterward. However, if it is attached to the end of
      the sentence, a comma isn't needed.
        When we get home, you need to get right to bed. (Dependent
            clause in the beginning.)
        You need to get right to bed when we get home. (Dependent
            clause at the end.)
        Because of the snow, school has been delayed.
        School has been delayed because of the snow.

          The two exceptions to this rule are the subordinating
          conjunctions "whereas" and "although," which still require a
          comma if they come in the middle of a sentence:

        The doctor's appointment went well, although her blood
            pressure seemed a little high.

Semicolons

Semicolons also separate items in a sentence, but there are far
fewer instances in which a semicolon is necessary:

   To separate two independent clauses in the same sentence.
      Remember that you can use a comma and a coordinating
      conjunction to link two or more independent clauses in a

558 | Editing Your Work
      sentence. Another option is to link them together with a
      semicolon, which is a cue to readers that the two clauses are
      connected. When you use a semicolon, avoid using a
      coordinating conjunction.

        I didn't sleep very well last night; going to work today will be
            difficult.

        I don't eat strawberries because I'm allergic; they always
            give me a rash.

   To separate items in a list that have internal commas. Lists
      are typically separated with commas, but if one or more items
      in that list has an appositive phrase or relative clause that
      requires a comma, then semicolons are used to distinguish
      between the modifying information and the larger items in the
      list.
        In attendance at the meeting were Mr. Morrison, the
            university president; Ms. Smith, the CEO; and Mr. Collins,
            our financial advisor. Here, the semicolons show
            separation between the three main items in the list. If only
            commas were used, it would look like there were six
            people at this meeting instead of only three.
        On my schedule for next semester, I'm taking history, which
            I love; math, which I can tolerate; and archery, which I hope
            will be fun.

Colons

A colon signals that something important is about to follow. It's used
in the following instances:

   To introduce a list. When used this way, the information
      leading up to the colon should be an independent clause. A
      colon shouldn't be used in between a verb and its object.

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 559
        Correct: At the market today, we bought the following items:
            bread, jam, pie, and homemade soap.

        Incorrect: At the market today, we bought: bread, jam, pie,
            and homemade soap. (The colon isn't needed here.)

   To further define or explain a word or phrase that came
      before it.
        The intended readers are managers: people who are
            concerned with planning, budgeting, and allocation of
            resources and personnel.

   To introduce a quote with an independent clause.
        In his debate speech, Mr. Reidy was clearly against tax
            increases: "I will do whatever is necessary to reduce
            spending."

   To show typographical distinctions or divisions.
        Dear Ms. Wong:
        7:30 a.m.
        "Ethics Case Study: The Boundaries of Marketing Integrity"

Hyphens

Hyphens are used to join two or more words to make compound
words and adjectives.

   In some instances, hyphens are used to connect compound
      words that are nouns--for instance, decision-maker, twenty-
      four, mother-in-law, self-care. Usually, you can look up these
      types of words to see if they should be hyphenated or not.

   Hyphens also connect words (often nouns) that act as
      adjectives in a sentence.
        Martha is a twenty-one-year-old girl. ("Twenty-one-year-
            old" works together to modify "girl.")
        We went to an all-you-can-eat buffet.

560 | Editing Your Work
        My doctor wants me to switch to low-impact exercises.
   Note: Hyphens aren't needed for many compound words (e.g.,

      playground), common prefixes and suffixes (e.g., prelaw, joyful),
      or -ly adverbs that are used with adjectives (e.g., a highly
      esteemed position, a barely worn sweater).

Dashes

There are two different kinds of dashes:

 1. An em dash (--) is used to separate additional information,
      similar to the way that commas are used for this purpose,
      except that em dashes are used to emphasize the additional
      information.

        The meeting took two hours--much longer than
            anticipated--but we got a lot done.

2. An en dash (-) is shorter than an em dash but longer than a
      hyphen. It's used to mark a range of dates, times, page
      numbers, or other measurements. It can also be used with
      compound adjectives.

        The Christmas party is scheduled for Friday evening, 6-8
            p.m.

        For tomorrow's assignment, please read chapter 5, pages
            140-168.

        I still have my grandmother's World War I-era dress.

          Note: There aren't any spaces before and after em or en
          dashes.

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 561
Apostrophes

Apostrophes are used in two instances:

1.      To show possession. For instance:

    1.      Single possessive: Kelly's book or My neighbor's new car

    2.      Plural possessive: Students' grades are higher this

        semester. The studies' results show a correlation between

        sleep and cognitive performance. Note that for plural

        possessive, the apostrophe goes after the "s."

    3.      Note: To make a word that already ends in "s"

        possessive, add an apostrophe and s.

        1.  The Prius's tire is flat.

        2.  Chris's wallet is still in the car.

    4.      Another note: There is a difference between joint

        possession, where more than one noun has ownership of

        the same item, and separate possession, where each noun

        has ownership of its own item.

        1.  Joint ownership: We're having dinner at mom and

            dad's house. To show joint ownership, the apostrophe

            and s go after the last person or thing. Here, the home

            belongs to both mom and dad.

        2.  Separate ownership: Income is split evenly into

            mom's and dad's bank accounts. To show separate

            ownership, the apostrophe and s go after each person

            or thing that has ownership. In this instance, mom and

            dad each have their own, separate bank accounts.

2.      For contractions. Can't, won't, shouldn't, don't, and so on.

Ellipses

The main use of ellipses is to show that information has been
562 | Editing Your Work
extracted from a quote. Perhaps it's a long quote, and there is
more information or detail given in certain parts than necessary
for your own purposes. An ellipse can be used in place of that
information, indicating to readers that words were removed from
the original quote. Importantly, the quoted information must still be
grammatically correct. It's also important not to remove words that
are important to the original meaning of the quote. You don't want
to distort the original meaning or take words out of context.

   According to the National Institute on Deafness and Other
      Communication Disorders, "Just as with other languages,
      specific ways of expressing ideas in ASL vary as much as ASL
      users themselves. In addition to individual differences in
      expression...ASL has regional variations in the rhythm of
      signing, pronunciation, slang, and signs used."

   Note: Use a fourth period if it's at the end of a sentence to
      mark the period.

Brackets

Similar to ellipses, brackets are used primarily with quoted
information, but instead of being used to remove information,
brackets are used to add information that would help readers
understand the quote. Bracketed information often clarifies a word
or phrase.

   Sometimes the bracketed information is in addition to the
      word or phrase it clarifies: He [Trent] was a lot taller than
      expected. In this example, "Trent" clarifies the pronoun "he," in
      case readers don't know who the referent is.

   The bracketed information can also replace the unclear word
      or phrase: [Trent] was a lot taller than expected.

   The word "sic" is sometimes put in brackets in the middle of a

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 563
      quote to show there is an error in the original quote. Their [sic]
      are instructions inside the box.
   Additionally, ellipses are often put in brackets to indicate that
      the author inserted them when a quote also includes ellipses
      as part of the original text.

Quotation Marks

Quotation marks have three primary uses:

 1. To emphasize particular words: To be marked "present" in
      class, you must not only be physically present but also pay
      attention and participate.

2. To indicate that information is being quoted verbatim from
      another source. If you paraphrase information, putting the key
      ideas into your own words, then quotation marks aren't
      necessary.

        According to the Mayo Clinic, "In heart valve disease, one or
            more of the valves in your heart doesn't work properly."

        Note: If there is a quote within a quote, that internal quote
            should be set off by single quote marks: Gary said, "I don't
            understand what the professor meant when she said, `The
            essay must be at least five pages of content.'" In this
            example, Gary is being quoted, but he quotes the
            professor.

        Another note: In American English, the endmark will
            usually go inside the quotation marks, especially periods
            and commas. For questions, it depends on whether the
            original quote was a question. If so, the question mark
            should go inside the quotation marks. If not, it should go
            outside. A colon, semicolon, or em dash should also go
            outside.

564 | Editing Your Work
3. To mark the title of a short work. Short stories, poems,
      newspaper articles, chapter titles, and web page titles are put
      in quotation marks. For instance, "The Yellow Wallpaper" or
      "The Road Not Taken" are titles of short works that require
      quotation marks. Longer works, such as books, journals,
      newspapers, movies, television shows, and so on are italicized.

Parentheses

Parentheses are typically used to identify information that is an
aside to the information in the original sentence. As opposed to
information enclosed in em dashes (for emphasis) or commas (of
equal importance), parentheses show information that is of lesser
importance in the sentence.

   Example: We always have Easter with my grandma (my dad's
      mom).
        Note: If the parenthetical is only part of a full sentence, the
            period should go on the outside. If the parenthetical is a
            full sentence by itself, then the period goes inside. For
            example: Conferences will be held in the biology lab. (The lab
            is located on the third floor of Blaine Hall.)
        Another note: Parentheses are also used in academic
            writing to indicate source information. Different citation
            styles have different formats, but the period always goes
            after the parentheses.

     Activity 18.3

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 565
        Fix the punctuation errors in the following sentences.
     (Some sentences have more than one error.)

         1. While you are at the store could you pick me up
             shampoo; deodorant; and toothpaste?

        2. I don't think I'll be able to make it to class today my
             roommates' alarm didn't go off and I'm running late.

        3. The main characters in the play were the mother,
             Amanda, the son, Tom, and the sister, Laura.

        4. The problem with having back to back classes is
             that I don't have time for lunch.

        5. The professors' syllabus clearly states, "No food or
             drinks are allowed in the classroom".

        Try writing your own sentences with punctuation errors,
     and switch with someone else to make corrections.

Conciseness

Digital writing is known for being concise. While academic writing
is often a little more developed, social media posts, blog articles, and
emails should be more to the point to engage readers and enhance
readability. This is different from the grammar and punctuation
rules that we noted above because being wordy isn't exactly an
"error." What's more, there are some instances in which a few extra
words will enhance the meaning or develop the tone of a piece in a
positive way. Being as concise as possible isn't a rule, but it will often
make your writing clearer and more effective. Below are some basic
guidelines for concise writing.

566 | Editing Your Work
 Avoid redundancies and unnecessary information.

      Instead of: I will be out on vacation beginning on April 7,
         which is the day I leave. I'll be returning back to the office on
         April 15.

      Revised: I will be out on vacation from April 7-April 14.
 Use language that is straightforward and to the point,

   eliminating language that is flowery or pretentious.

      Instead of: It has been made known to me by my students
         that they will be away from campus for a period of several
         days due to a planned excursion with the business school.

      Revised: My students told me they will be on a field trip with
         the business school for several days.

 Write in an active instead of passive voice. As demonstrated
   in the grammar section above, active voice is not only more
   straightforward, but it's also more concise.

      Instead of: The entire plate of spaghetti was eaten by me.
      Revised: I ate the entire plate of spaghetti.
 Eliminate wordy phrases and unnecessary prepositional
   phrases.

      Instead of: We are taking the dog for a walk in the park near
         the center of town later this afternoon, around 4 p.m.

      Revised: We will take the dog for a walk in the park this
         afternoon.

 Avoid sentences that begin with "there is," "there are," or "it
   is."

      Instead of: There are many different species of birds in
         Indiana.

      Revised: Many different species of birds dwell in Indiana.
 Replace phrases with more precise words.

      Instead of: When he walked, he scuffed his heels along the
         surface of the ground.

      Revised: He shuffled his feet as he walked.
 Turn double negatives into positive phrases.

                                                                      Editing Your Work | 567
        Instead of: Our office won't see patients who don't have an
            appointment.

        Revised: Our office only sees patients with an appointment.
   Replace "to be" verbs + a gerund with a simple verb.

        Instead of: I am looking for a car with low mileage.
        Revised: I want a car with low mileage.
        Instead of: Residents shouldn't be parking their cars in the

            street.
        Revised: Residents shouldn't park in the street.

     Activity 18.4

        Rewrite the following sentences to make them more
     concise.

         1. Another irritating thing that upsets me deeply is
             the fact that so many people were laid off right before
             the Christmas holiday.

        2. Hopefully, in the future, with these improvements,
             workflows will be completed more efficiently by the
             employees who work here.

        3. There are many different ways to evaluate the
             quality of a written literary analysis essay and
             whether it effectively does all of the things it's
             supposed to do.

        4. In our study group, we will be watching different
             tutorials and seeing how we can apply what we learn
             to our own assignments.

        5. It is imperative and absolutely necessary at this
             stage of the onboarding process that our newly hired

568 | Editing Your Work
             employees begin familiarizing themselves with the
             employee handbook and all of the guidelines therein.

        Try writing your own wordy sentences, and switch with
     someone else to make their sentences more concise.

A Helpful Use of Generative AI

You're probably familiar with the limitations of generative AI. It's
often inaccurate, providing hallucinated content that is false or
misleading (Nah et al.), and there are concerns that because the data
sets that are used to train AI machines are biased, the generated
content will be biased as well, perpetuating stereotypes related to
race, gender, class, sexuality, and so on (Knapton). What's more, AI-
generated text doesn't always flow very naturally, nor does it always
attend to the rhetorical situation and the more "human" aspects
of dialogue. All of that is to say that you probably shouldn't use
generative AI to complete writing tasks for you, especially if it's a
writing project that you've been assigned by a boss or a client. The
expectation is that you will be the one creating the content, and it
would make you and potentially your company look bad if there are
problems with the content.

            However, there are other ways that you can use generative
AI in ethical and helpful ways. For instance, it can help with topic
brainstorming. If you're given a topic or an assignment, but you're
not sure how to focus that topic, putting a prompt into a program
like ChatGPT can be useful in coming up with ideas that you could
pursue. It can also be used to help you organize your ideas into
an outline or provide example templates of a particular genre that

                                                                        Editing Your Work | 569
you're not familiar with so you can get a sense of how you might
format your own text.

            It can also be used for revising and editing your work. For
instance, you can input a sentence or a paragraph that you have
created, and ask ChatGPT how you can make it better. It might give
you suggestions regarding organization or clarifying vague words.
Or it might help you identify grammar, punctuation, and spelling
mistakes that you missed. This article gives more suggestions for
ways that generative AI can be used to improve your writing by
attending to things like tone, sentence structure, organization,
creativity, and more (DeAlmeida).

     Sources

                  DeAlmeida, Dan. "Unleashing the Power of
               Generative AI: The Art of Prompt Engineering."
               LinkedIn, 19 July 2023, https://www.linkedin.com/
               pulse/unleashing-power-generative-ai-art-
               prompt-engineering-dan-dealmeida/.

                  Haswell, Richard H. "Post-Secondary Entry
               Writing Placement: A Brief Synopsis of Research."
               Comppile.org, Nov. 2004, http://www.comppile.org/
               profresources/writingplacementresearch.htm.

                  Knapton, Ken. "Navigating the Biases in LLM
               Generative AI: A Guide to Responsible
               Implementation." Forbes, 6 Sept. 2023,
               https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestechcouncil/
               2023/09/06/navigating-the-biases-in-llm-
               generative-ai-a-guide-to-responsible-
               implementation/?sh=798cf4465cd2.

570 | Editing Your Work
   Laperre, Eline. "There's No Such Thing as
Standard English." Cambridge.org, 24 Feb. 2020,
https://www.cambridge.org/elt/blog/2020/02/
24/no-such-thing-as-standard-english/.

   Nah, Fiona Fui-Hoon, et al. "Generative AI and
ChatGPT: Applications, Challenges, and AI-Human
Collaboration." Journal of Information Technology
Case and Application Research, vol. 25, no. 3, July
2023, pp. 277-304, https://doi.org/10.1080/
15228053.2023.2233814.

   Purcell, Kristen, et al. "Part III: Teachers See
Digital Tools Affecting Student Writing in Myriad
Ways." Pew Research.org, 16 July 2013,
https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2013/07/
16/part-iii-teachers-see-digital-tools-affecting-
student-writing-in-myriad-ways/.

   Sheils, Merrill. "Why Johnny Can't Write."
Newsweek, 8 Dec. 1975, p. 58,
https://www.leetorda.com/uploads/2/3/2/5/
23256940/
why_johnny_cant_write__newsweek_1975___1_.
pdf.

   Wetherbee, Kelsey. "Black English Isn't Bad
English: Overcoming the Prejudice Against African
American English." Langoly.com, 13 Feb. 2023,
https://www.langoly.com/african-american-
english/.

                                                       Editing Your Work | 571
19. Final Thoughts

We live in a digital world. Many of us wake up in the morning to
an alarm we set on our smartphone, and from that moment on, so
many of our daily activities revolve around technology: the weather
and news updates that we get from Alexa, the podcast or Pandora
station we listen to on our way to work, the text messages and
emails that we respond to throughout the day, the social media
posts that we read on our breaks, the projects we complete on
our computers, the meetings we have on Zoom, the Netflix shows
we watch as we unwind before bed. It would be an interesting, if
not slightly disturbing, experiment to document how much digital
media you consume each day--how much time you spend, which
platforms you use, and what types of activities you do. More
disturbing yet, consider how difficult it would be to navigate your
daily life without digital media. What would your day look like if
you didn't have a smartphone or a laptop or continual access to the
internet?

            While this textbook has demonstrated the ubiquitous
nature of digital technology in various ways and the significant
opportunities that come with the ability to easily access and share
information, there are significant and complex skills that come with
effective digital writing, and unfortunately, the important nuances
are often overlooked. In fact, for many of us, composing text
messages, emails, social media posts, and even blog articles has
become such a common practice in our everyday lives that we
often fail to recognize the larger rhetorical, social, and cultural
implications of our writing. That's not to say that every text message
you write has profound consequences. However, more often than
not, the deeper purpose goes beyond sharing a funny GIF or letting
a friend know you're running late. When you think about the
underlying goals of each message (whether composed using digital
media or not), some of your writing strategies and anticipated

572 | Final Thoughts
audience reactions come into focus, helping you make effective
choices. What's unique about digital media is its immediacy, its
constant presence in our lives, and the range of communication
strategies that are at our disposal. It's also much harder to control
the spread of digital information once it's been published. All of
these aspects of digital writing demand a higher level of
intentionality, critical thinking, and social awareness, which is why
so much of this textbook focuses on the critical and rhetorical
perspective of digital writing (the "why" and "to what effect") in
addition to the functional perspective (the "how to").

            As digital technologies continue to evolve, the "how to"
will probably change. New features and entirely new platforms will
inevitably take the place of older versions, and there will be a
learning curve with each one. Chances are that you'll also encounter
new, specialized technologies as you advance in a particular field,
and it may take time for you to learn how to navigate each one
with confidence. What won't change are the underlying principles
of critical and rhetorical literacy that can be applied in each new
circumstance and help guide the choices you make. The hope is
that the tools you learned in this textbook will be relevant again
and again as you participate in digital spaces, both now and in the
future.

            In this final chapter of the book, we'll briefly explore the
significant benefits that coincide with digital literacy. You might
recall that in the first chapter of the book, we debunked the idea
of the digital panacea, opting instead to understand both the
affordances and constraints of various tools as well as the negative
social, emotional, and cognitive effects that are often overlooked or
dismissed. While those negative effects are legitimate and should be
an important consideration as you think critically about the digital
technologies you use and set appropriate boundaries, being
intentional to monitor and evaluate your practices will not only
enhance your writing but have significant personal benefits that
extend far beyond a single text or digital platform:

                                                                             Final Thoughts | 573
   Enhanced communication. Of course, nothing can replace in-
      person conversation, where you can attend more fully to
      things like inflection, tone, and body language. However, digital
      technology has vastly expanded how and with whom you can
      communicate. Email, text messaging, social media, and web
      platforms make it possible for you to quickly and easily
      communicate information with a large number of people and
      to communicate at your convenience throughout your day.
      Also, while in-person communication might be more personal
      and flow more naturally, there are some important advantages
      of digital communication. For instance, messages that are
      more informational or detail-oriented can be organized around
      bullet points or numbered lists so readers can easily follow
      along and refer back to the message as needed. It's easier to
      incorporate pictures, tables, and charts that enhance the
      message. There's also more time to process the information
      you receive and formulate an appropriate response.

   Forged connections. Think of all the relationships that
      wouldn't exist or that would be much more difficult to
      maintain without digital media. Some relationships function
      exclusively online. Facebook groups, online support groups,
      and video game clans are just a few examples of online
      communities that can provide meaningful interactions among
      group members, perhaps from different states or even
      continents, allowing them to develop relationships and nurture
      certain aspects of their identity. Other groups might
      communicate online as a supplement to in-person activities,
      providing a consistent and convenient way to connect in
      between meetings. Even one-on-one relationships between
      spouses, parents and children, friends, coworkers, and so on
      can easily connect through digital media when an in-person
      conversation or even a phone call isn't feasible.

   Personal growth. If nurtured in the right way, your online
      engagement with diverse groups of people, with an endless
      body of information, with various perspectives and forms of

574 | Final Thoughts
      expression can go a long way to develop your own worldview,
      expanding not only your basic knowledge of concepts and
      events but of other people and experiences far different from
      your own. To thoughtfully engage with these ideas cultivates
      more self-awareness and more understanding and empathy for
      others.
   Professional advancement. The last unit of this textbook
      focused on the professional opportunities that exist within
      digital media--as analysts, SEO experts, content strategists,
      web designers, social media coordinators, and more.
      Employers consistently advocate for workers who can
      communicate effectively on a number of platforms, and
      chances are that whatever professional field you enter, it will
      require at least some form of digital writing. However, as more
      organizations seek to have an omnichannel presence and to
      make genuine connections with their target market, the ability
      to craft effective messaging across a variety of platforms will
      significantly increase your value at work and create more
      advancement opportunities.
   Civic engagement. Last but not least, digital technology can
      have a positive impact on your civic engagement, not only
      because it's easier and quicker to stay apprised of the latest
      national and local news, but also because digital platforms
      provide the opportunity to spark (hopefully) constructive
      dialogue, rally support around key issues, organize events, and
      prompt action. As discussed earlier in the text, it's not
      uncommon for digital spaces to become "toxic" with personal
      agendas and rhetoric of divisiveness, but opportunities can and
      do exist to identify tangible needs and to use digital tools to
      inform, to unite, and to affect positive change.

            The common thread among the benefits listed above is
intentionality--being intentional to engage in meaningful, fulfilling,
and positive digital writing activities, setting healthy boundaries,
and being able to identify and avoid digital spaces and activities that

                                                                             Final Thoughts | 575
are harmful or destructive. True digital literacy means being able
to self-monitor and self-regulate. It's a habit of mind that promotes
curiosity, critical thinking, and continual reflection, all of which
create a feedback loop to inform your decisions about which
technologies to engage with and how you will engage with the
people you encounter. As the digital realm continues to expand, we
are in desperate need of writers who are intentional and thoughtful
about the messages they share and the way their words will affect
different audiences on the other side of the screen.

576 | Final Thoughts
Contributors

Author

                       Dr. Cara Miller

                                     ANDERSON UNIVERSITY

Dr. Cara Miller is an English professor at Anderson University,
where she teaches a variety of writing classes,
including professional writing, digital writing, and creative writing.
She is the director of the English Program at AU and editor of the AU
Press. Her research interests include student engagement, rhetoric,
content strategy, digital marketing, and the intersection of writing
and AI.

   https://orcid.org/0009-0001-4421-7063

Reviewers

Dr. Elizabeth Imafuji

IVY TECH COMMUNITY COLLEGE COLUMBUS

Dr. Rory Lee

BALL STATE UNIVERSITY

                                                                                Contributors | 577
