Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Writing for Strategic Communication
                Industries

                       JASMINE ROBERTS

                                         THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY
                                                   COLUMBUS, OHIO
Writing for Strategic Communication Industries Copyright © 2016 by Jasmine Roberts-Crews is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
Contents

About the Author                                                    ix

CC BY (Attribution)

Acknowledgments                                                     xi

Part I. Chapter 1: Defining Strategic Communication

1. What is strategic communication?                                 2

2. Five tenets of strategic communication                           3

3. Skills needed in the strategic communication profession          7

4. Jobs in strategic communication                                  9

5. References                                                       10

Part II. Chapter 2: Media Writing--Conventions, Culture, and Style

6. The role of media in American society                            12

7. Media culture and work environment                               13

8. The role of writing in strategic communication                   16

9. Media writing skills and characteristics                         17

10. References                                                      19

Part III. Chapter 3: Strategic Communication Ethics

11. Ethics case study                                               21

12. Code of ethics                                                  23

13. Defamation, Slander, and Libel                                  24

14. Conflict of interest                                            26

15. Plagiarism                                                      27

16. Lack of transparency                                            28
17. Misleading advertisements                                29

18. Corporate social responsibility                          30

19. References                                               31

Part IV. Chapter 4: News Value

20. News value and the strategic communication professional  33

21. News value types (Part 1)                                34

22. News value types (Part 2)                                36

23. References                                               37

Part V. Chapter 5: News Writing Basics

24. News story objective                                     39

25. Types of news stories                                    40

26. Summary lead                                             41

27. Headlines                                                43

28. Inverted pyramid style                                   45

29. Attribution                                              46

30. Body of the article                                      48

31. References                                               49

Part VI. Chapter 6: Feature Writing

32. The purpose of feature writing                           51

33. Feature writing versus traditional news writing          52

34. Feature leads                                            53

35. Feature article organization                             54

36. Feature writing devices                                  55

37. References                                               56

Part VII. Chapter 7: Public Relations Industry

38. What is public relations?                                58

39. Four models of public relations                          59
40. Why do companies need public relations?                           61

41. Public relations versus marketing versus advertising              62

42. General roles in public relations                                 64

43. References                                                        65

Part VIII. Chapter 8: Public Relations Writing

44. The role of writing in public relations                           67

45. News writing versus public relations writing                      68

46. The press release                                                 69

47. Writing the press release                                         70

48. Press release structure and format                                71

49. Press kit materials                                               72

50. References                                                        75

Part IX. Chapter 9: Media Relations

51. What are media relations?                                         77

52. Working with journalists                                          78

53. Pitching to the media                                             79

54. References                                                        83

Part X. Chapter 10: Social Media--Uses and Messaging

55. What are social media?                                            85

56. Factors to consider before posting                                86

57. The impact of social media in strategic communication industries  88

58. Social media characteristics                                      89

59. Creating social media messages                                    90

60. References                                                        93

Part XI. Chapter 11: Advertising Industry

61. The role of advertising in society                                95

62. Job responsibilities in advertising                               96
63. Advertising campaign model: Social marketing        97

64. Creative brief                                      99

65. Copywriting                                         102

66. References                                          103

Part XII. Chapter 12: Creating a Writing Portfolio

67. Why create a writing portfolio?                     105

68. Other important points about the writing portfolio  106

69. Online versus hardcopy portfolios                   107

70. Writing portfolio content                           108

71. References                                          109
About the Author

      Jasmine Roberts-Crews ( formerly Jasmine Roberts) is a strategic communication lecturer in the School
of Communication at The Ohio State University, where she teaches public relations writing, digital
activism and campaign strategy. Professor Roberts-Crews earned her bachelor's degree in communication
studies and Spanish at the University of Michigan and her master's degree in communication at the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. She has worked in the marketing and public relations fields
for nonprofit, entertainment, and banking industries in the United States and Spain.

   Along with her communication expertise, Professor Roberts-Crews is also a renowned open

                                                                                                                                                              About the Author | ix
education leader. She has delivered numerous keynote presentations across the country on the topics
of social justice in open education and has a TEDx talk titled "I'm tired of talking about race." She has
provided consulting to several open education organizations on how to dynamically embody social
justice and equity in practice. In her spare time, she loves to connect with her wife, fur babies (2
dogs), and green babies (40 plants total).

x | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Acknowledgments

This project would not be possible without the assistance and support of many people.
   I cannot express enough how grateful I am for The Ohio State University Office of Distance

Education and eLearning. Thank you for offering a grant that enables instructors to create openly
licensed materials. I appreciate the department's commitment to affordable learning and access to
quality higher education.

   To Lynne Bonenberger, my editor: You are very gifted in your craft! Thank you for sharing your
talents with me. Your feedback and revisions were invaluable to the quality of the textbook. You have
made me a better writer in our time working together.

   To Ashley Miller and Michael Shiflet, members of the Affordable Learning Exchange team: Thank
you for being there to help with the creation of the book's materials and answer questions about
digital and open education resources.

   A special thank you to Cheryl Brilmyer, my former project manager. You are amazing! You
demonstrated a genuine desire to help with the project through your organizational skills. You played
a key role in keeping me on track and completing this book. Thank you, thank you, thank you!

   To the faculty reviewers, Dr. Susan Kline, Alyson Moses, Dr. Gerald Kosicki, and Dr. Felicia Ross:
Thank you for the constructive feedback on the book content.

   To Dr. Daniel McDonald, former department head of The Ohio State University School of
Communication: Thank you for supporting my various career endeavors and acknowledging my
contributions to the department. I appreciate your dedication to lecturers and our undergraduate
students.

   Thank you to the industry experts who came to The Ohio State University campus to record the
videos that are presented in conjunction with the textbook. I am confident that those using this
resource will appreciate a real-world perspective on writing.

   Thank you to my family and friends who were willing to listen to me talk about my passion for
creating this textbook (and making sure I didn't work too hard).

   To my students: You are the reason why I love my job. Thank you for challenging me as an educator
and making my job fun. It's an honor and privilege to hold such a great responsibility. You all matter
so much to me. I am so blessed to wake up each morning and have passion for my job. This book is an
extension of my love for education.

                                                                                                                                                            Acknowledgments | xi
PART I

CHAPTER 1: DEFINING STRATEGIC
COMMUNICATION

1 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
1. What is strategic communication?

   Scholars and communication professionals have
adopted strategic communication as an umbrella
term meant to include a variety of communication-
related professions, such as public relations, brand
communication, advertising, and more. Although
the term is not new, scholars have only recently
examined it as a cohesive paradigm. Hallahan et al.
(2007) defines strategic communication as "the
purposeful use of communication by an
organization to fulfill its mission" (p. 3). It is
multidisciplinary in that it draws from a variety of
methods and subject areas.

According to Paul (2011), creating clear goals and
understanding "how a certain set of audience "Strategic Planning" by Stefano Senise from
attitudes, behaviors, or perceptions will support Thinkstock is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
those objectives" is what makes communication
strategic (p. 5). In strategic communication, message development, or the process of creating key
points or ideas, requires high levels of planning and research. These messages are targeted, or
created with a specific audience in mind, and help to position an organization's communication
goals with its structural goals. As the world becomes increasingly interconnected through new
forms of communication, the role of strategic communications is to help organizations
understand how to effectively deliver their message to key audiences.

                                                                                                                                       What is strategic communication? | 2
2. Five tenets of strategic communication

Although the tactics of strategic communication methods may vary, the purpose and the general
characteristics of strategic communication are similar across related industries (Hallahan et al.,
2007). In 2008, the U.S. Department of Defense's Strategic Communication Education Summit
considered these similarities and created a list of principles (Hastings, 2008). The following tenets
of strategic communication are informed by these principles as well as arguments from Paul (2011).

Intentional message design

Strategic communication involves a great deal of thought, planning, and analysis. It does not
mean simply designing a clever advertisement or sending a tweet without thinking about its
implications. To create an intentional message, you must begin with a realistic communication
goal for what you're trying to achieve. This reinforces Paul's (2011) argument about what
constitutes strategic communication. Do you want to cultivate positive associations with the
organization's brand? Raise awareness of a new product? Connect with key stakeholders in a
meaningful manner? Whatever your goal, you must begin with a well-defined purpose and
continue to keep it at the forefront throughout the process of creation and implementation.

   Additionally, you must be sure that the communication goal goes hand-in-hand with the
organization's goal. Let's say that an organization wants to create and maintain a socially
responsible image. You might achieve that by developing a philanthropic communication strategy,
such as teaming up with a local nonprofit organization for a benefit concert or publicizing a
promotion to help a popular charity.

The correct platform(s)

   There's a saying in public relations, marketing, and even journalism: go where your audience
is. A large part of this involves choosing the right platform to communicate to your key publics
or audiences. This can be challenging. Gone are the days when only a few major news stations,
magazines, and radio stations controlled the message content for the masses. Today's audiences
have plenty of choices when it comes to media, making it even more difficult for your message to
be seen or heard.

   If you can determine the audience's general media consumption preferences, you can more
effectively place your message. Let's say you are trying to increase the brand visibility of a new
vegan restaurant among men who strongly support healthy living. In this case, if the targeted
audience frequently reads a local, health-centered magazine, you might place a feature article in
the magazine to raise awareness of the new restaurant.

3 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Calculated timing

All of your planning, analysis, and creative efforts may be wasted if your message is not
communicated at the right moment. In 2014, Malaysia Airlines launched a marketing/public
relations campaign with a variety of prizes, including free airline tickets for potential customers in
Australia and New Zealand. The problem? The campaign, titled "My Ultimate Bucket List," invited
people to talk about places they would like to go and activities they would like to do before dying
(Barber, 2014).

   The timing of the campaign was imprudent. Earlier that year, two Malaysia Airlines flights had
crashed, resulting in more than 500 deaths. Although the goal of the campaign was to recreate
a positive brand image after the tragedies, the use of the term "bucket list," given its association
with death, proved to be inappropriate. Airline executives faced a backlash from audiences, many
of whom claimed that the message was insensitive. The executives admitted their error and soon
ended the campaign.

   As this example shows, the success of any strategic message is highly predicated on when the
audience will be most likely to receive it and when the interference of external factors, such as a
major crisis, is at a minimum.

Audience selection and analysis

Some audiences are more important to a message's goal than others. Audiences for internal
communication messages include employees, investors, and managers. Audiences for external
communication messages include customers, influencers, and the news media.

   It is important to always keep the message goal in mind so that you can choose the correct
audiences that will help you meet the goal. Taking a broad approach and targeting everyone is not
the best way to succeed. Practice audience segmentation, that is, the division of a large group into
subcategories based upon attitudes, demographics, and media use.

                                                                                                                                Five tenets of strategic communication | 4
                                                                                                                              "2014 Social Media
                                                                                                                              Age Demographics
                                                                                                                              Stats" by
                                                                                                                              Automotive Social is
                                                                                                                              licensed under CC
                                                                                                                              By 4.0

Once you've selected your main audience, analyze it. This involves deep examination of attitudes,
values, and beliefs toward the message topic, with the goal of giving the audience what they want
and need. Generally speaking, people are inclined to pay attention to a message that is relevant
to them. It increases their level of involvement and engagement with the message (Wang, 2006;
Cacioppo et al., 1986).

Desired impact

During the planning stage of a message, clearly define what a successful campaign will look like to
the organization. How will the strategic communication team measure success? Are you hoping
to increase sales? Are you aiming to increase attendance at promotional events? Are you trying to
minimize negative media coverage about your client or company?

   In 2015, shortly after a series of racially tense incidents across the country, the coffee chain
Starbucks launched an initiative called "Race Together" that encouraged customers and employees
to have conversations about race relations. The company's CEO, Howard Schultz, told the
Huffington Post: "Our intent is to try to elevate the national conversation" (Baertlein & Rigby, 2015).

   However, the initiative provoked a huge backlash on social media. Many people thought the
campaign's goal was unrealistic--why would Starbucks coffee shops be appropriate venues to
begin healing the country's racial wounds? Others said the campaign was hypocritical, pointing
out that the company's leadership team is predominantly white and/or male. Some baristas
reported feeling uncomfortable with initiating conversations (Sanders, 2015; Baertlein & Rigby,
2015).

5 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
                                                                                                                              Twitter reaction to
                                                                                                                              Starbucks' "Race
                                                                                                                              Together"
                                                                                                                              campaign.

The failure of "Race Together" shows how communication executives neglected to carefully
consider how they planned to define success and how important it is to select the correct platform
and spokespersons in order to achieve the desired effects.

   Together, the five tenets of strategic communication help to create effective messages. Be
mindful of these tenets as you're writing for various audiences.

                                                                                                                                Five tenets of strategic communication | 6
3. Skills needed in the strategic

communication profession

Many students who are interested in pursuing a career in strategic communication ask, "What
can I do in order to be successful in my internship?" or "What skills do I need by the time I
graduate?" The answers often depend on the specific role. However, employers expect job-seekers
to demonstrate several general transferable skills:

  · Writing ability: Writing is at the center of what many strategic communication professionals
      do. They might be required to write a press release, develop marketing copy, create an
      annual report, or manage a Twitter account. Regardless of the specific task, writing clear,
      concise, and relatable messages is a vital skill in any communication-related role. To quote
      from an interview with Carol Merry, senior vice president of corporate communication at
      Fahlgren Mortine, one of the nation's largest independent marketing and communications
      agencies:

       "Writing has defined my career. Being able to write well has led to opportunities
       and provided hard-to-achieve credibility with executive management, clients, legal
       partners, and others. Today's corporate communications practitioners need to be able to
       sift through material to develop clear, crisp communications. The written word has not
       been abandoned in the business world." (C. Merry, personal communication, May 27, 2016).

  · Oral communication/presentation skills: Oral communication or skill in public speaking is
      critical to achieving success in a strategic communication career. You may have to deliver a
      presentation to pitch new business to a potential client or discuss campaign ideas and
      results with a current client. Successful presentations demonstrate a solid understanding of
      how to connect with the audience in a compelling and persuasive manner.

  · Analytic ability: Strategic communicators use analytic skills to examine industry trends,
      audiences, and message design. They also use these skills to manage organizational needs,
      solve complex problems, conduct research, come up with creative ideas and communication
      tactics, and conceptualize realistic and effective messaging goals. They also may use metric-
      driven programs such as Google Analytics or Kissmetrics.

  · Ability to work under pressure: Strategic communication often involves working against tight
      deadlines and being expected to deliver results under pressure. In the event of a crisis or a
      stressful organizational situation, you want to be able to craft an effective response and
      shape the narrative going forward. In a less negative situation, such as promoting the grand
      opening of a store, you will still need to create messages quickly in order to get them out to
      audiences.

7 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
· Proactive mindset: Many people think that strategic communication is reactive because they
   associate it with crisis communication. But many areas of strategic communication are
   proactive; that is, they involve finding unique opportunities to communicate with key
   audiences before competitors do. Having a proactive mindset will help you distinguish your
   messages from the thousands of others that your audiences encounter daily.

· Adaptability: Work schedules sometimes may change abruptly in order to meet the needs of
   an organization. You might be called on to be part of a project at the last minute. Having an
   open mind and being ready to help when needed will set you apart from others who are not
   as flexible.

· Diverse talents: Being able to perform diverse tasks will make you more marketable as a
   communication professional, whether you're asked to develop an infographic for a brochure,
   create a video for a marketing campaign, deliver a presentation to a client, or conduct a
   focus group for market research. Instead of pigeonholing your professional growth, learn as
   much as possible to leverage your personal brand, and then develop a specialty in something
   that interests you.

   Further Reading

      · Advice for the next generation of PR Pros
      · USC "7 Skills Every PR Specialist Needs"
      · Strategic Writing: Multimedia writing for public relations, advertising, and more. Charles Marsh, David

          W. Guth, and Bonnie Poovey Short.
      · Writing that works: How to communicate effectively in business. Kenneth Roman and Joel Raphaelson.

                                                                                                    Skills needed in the strategic communication profession | 8
4. Jobs in strategic communication

A degree in strategic communication or a related subject--such as marketing, communication
studies, and public relations--can equip you to fill a variety of roles.

   Below is a list of jobs in strategic communication as well as links to descriptions of each:
  · Community relations specialist
  · Communication specialist
  · Brand journalist
  · Press secretary
  · Copywriter
  · Public relations specialist
  · Social media manager
  · Event planner
  · Marketing manager
  · Media buyer
  · Speechwriter

9 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
5. References

Baertlein, L. & Rigby, B. (2015). Starbucks `Race Together' campaign brews backlash. Huffington

Post.     Retrieved  from: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/18/starbucks-race-

Backlash_n_6898324.html

Barber, E. (2014). Malaysia Airlines asked for travelers' `bucket lists' in ill-advised contest. TIME.

Retrieved from: http://time.com/3254363/malaysia-airlines-mas-my-ultimate-bucket-list-

branding-marketing-disaster/

Cacioppo, J.T., Petty, R.E., Kao, C.F., Rodriguez, R. (1986). Central and peripheral routes to

persuasion. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 31, 1032-1043.

Hallahan, K., Holtzhausen, D., van Ruler, B., Vercic, D., Sriramesh, K. (2007). Defining strategic

communication. International Journal of Strategic Communication, 1(1), 3-35.

Hastings, R. (2008). Principles of strategic communication. Retrieved from: http://www.au.af.mil/

info-ops/documents/principles_of_sc.pdf

Paul, C. (2011). Strategic communication: Origins, concepts, and current debates. Westport, CT:

Praeger.

Sanders, S. (2015). Starbucks will stop putting the words `Race Together' on cups. NPR. Retrieved

from: http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2015/03/22/394710277/starbucks-will-

stop-writing-race-together-on-coffee-cups

Wang, A. (2006). Advertising engagement: A driver of message involvement on message effects.

Journal of Advertising Research, 46(4), 355-368.

                                                                              References | 10
PART II

CHAPTER 2: MEDIA
WRITING--CONVENTIONS, CULTURE,
AND STYLE

11 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
6. The role of media in American society

The function of media in society has evolved in recent years, especially due to the digitization of

messages. Audiences in the past had to rely heavily on mainstream messages that were generated,

sent, and controlled by institutions such as corporations and large media outlets. These

institutions determined which issues and stories were newsworthy, thus influencing the public's

perception of what was important.

The emergence of social media has affected

communication patterns in that audiences are now

message creators. They also play a more active role

in determining which issues are important to cover

from a news perspective. However, the basic

function of mass media remains the same: to

provide audiences with information they need and

want to know, for both informative and

entertainment purposes.                              "Camera crews at the joint Press Conference given
   Communication professionals still rely on the     by the Congress and the ODIHR" by Kober (talk) is
                                                     licensed under CC BY 2.0
media to distribute their company's news to large

audiences. Unlike marketing or promotional

messages sent directly from an organization, information from news media can have a "third-party

endorsement" effect, which enhances its perceived credibility. The media also influence our

attitudes, how we think, and even our behaviors.

As a strategic communication professional, be aware that you hold great responsibility when

writing material that will land in the media. More than ever, strategic communicators are

influencing public discourse and shaping conversation. You must seize opportunities to positively

integrate your organization or client into media coverage or risk being excluded from the dialogue.

Watch the video below of Chris Davey, former assistant vice president for media and public

relations for The Ohio State University. He discusses the function of media in society and writing

for the media.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=66#oembed-1

                                                     The role of media in American society | 12
7. Media culture and work environment

It's important to be aware of the culture and work environment of media organizations and
content publishers. Understanding the expectations of those who have a tremendous influence
on the coverage of your organization can better inform your media strategy. The following points
elaborate on the work environment and culture of media outlets.

Fast-paced environment

Corporate media organizations compete with one another to break stories or report on events.
Being the first to deliver a story brings a media outlet prestige and credibility. Furthermore, being
the first to publish often results in a higher search engine ranking, which results in more clicks
and stronger viewership.

   The onset of cable television in the 1980s changed the media landscape. One of the most notable
results is what we refer to as the 24-hour news cycle. Audiences in the past had to wait until
specific broadcast times--usually at noon and in the early and late evening--to hear the latest
about current events.

   Today, many media outlets disseminate news constantly, every hour of the day. This immediacy
of news coverage seeks to meet the audience's demand to have essential information quickly.
Furthermore, media outlets compete not only against each other but against the Internet. In this
fast-paced environment, media professionals are expected to provide quality news stories to the
masses even as they find it more difficult to gather and report facts accurately and responsibly.

Strict deadlines

The 24-hour news cycle places high demands on journalists and news media professionals to work
against tight deadlines while being the first to break news. Strict deadlines are not isolated to
the newsroom; public relations professionals also are expected to produce under pressure. For
example, if your organization has an unanticipated product recall, audiences will expect some
type of official announcement quickly. Furthermore, you often get only one chance to create the
right message, one that has its intended effect. However accuracy (explained below) is still very
important under strict deadlines. It is better to be "second" to put out accurate information than
be the "first" to put out inaccurate information. Effective strategic communication professionals
learn to meet tight deadlines while producing credible content.

13 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Internal competition

The internal culture of the media has become more competitive over the years. Given the pressure
to be the first to break a story, journalists increasingly feel the need to market themselves as
trustworthy news sources. Those who work for the same media outlet may compete with one
another. Journalists are expected to create a likeable personal brand. They are rated not only on
viewership, but on social media likes, shares, personal appearances, and so on.

   Journalists can no longer hide behind their byline; they must put their best face forward and
work to increase followers. It is important for you to realize this when pitching a news story to a
journalist. These topics will be covered in depth later in the book.

Accuracy of information

Fact-checking and pursuing the truth are paramount in the strategic communication industries.
As Pulitzer Prize journalist and MacArthur Fellow, Nikole Hannah Jones explained in a NPR
podcast, "journalism is not stenography. The role of journalism is getting at the truth and providing
context and analysis so that audiences know what the [story] means." In the age of "fake news" and
low media literacy, it is becoming increasingly difficult for consumers to decipher the accuracy
of information. Therefore, the role of strategic communication professionals, journalists, and
publicists, is to ensure the integrity of information they are responsible for disseminating to
the broader public. To verify the accuracy of information, strategic communication professionals
should verify sources and whether there is a conflict of interest (explained later in Chapter 3). Try
to use primary sources and corroborate the information with secondary sources. Additionally, the
Newmark J-School Research Center encourages writers to ask themselves the following questions
when determining the accuracy of information:

  · "Who says?"
  · "How do they know?"
  · "Are they biased?"
  · "What don't I know?"

It is worth taking the additional time to verify the credibility of the information you're using in
your content. This is particularly important as some industries report an increased reliance on AI
tools to create content. While using AI tools can be make the work process more efficient, the
information produced from these tools are not always accurate. A writer runs the risk of damaging
their own reputation or the reputation of their organization if there is over reliance on tools that
may produce inaccurate information.

                                                                                                                                 Media culture and work environment | 14
Efficiency

Effective strategic communication professionals write for simplicity and clarity. Minimize the use
of academic jargon, clichés, or complex sentence structure to avoid confusion. Using active voice
writing rather than passive voice writing helps achieve dynamic and clear writing so that your
consumers understand your content. Have a clear organizational structure and flow.

15 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
8. The role of writing in strategic
communication

Writing is a fundamental business skill that can greatly affect the credibility and success of an
organization. A recent survey conducted by the National Association of Colleges and Employers
(2024) found that 70 percent of employers look for evidence of strong writing skills in recent
college graduates.

   Styles of writing vary with the medium, the type of message being communicated, and the
audience.

   Media writing as discussed here differs from
academic writing, which most higher
education audiences are accustomed to using.
Media writing is clear, straightforward,
accurate, and appealing to the target audience.
It is active and dynamic, and it allows an
organization to engage with its key audiences
and clearly communicate ideas and goals. It
should also influence the target audience's
perceptions and/or behaviors. Word choice,
tone, and message packaging are some of the
techniques you will need to master in order to
be a strong communicator.

   As with any skill, you have to consistently practice writing and be open to suggestions in order to
improve. Because there is a perceived--if sometimes unjustified--association between intelligence
and writing ability, you may misinterpret constructive feedback as criticism. However, one of the
best ways to learn whether you're clearly communicating through your writing is to get a third-
party audience to read and react honestly to it.

   In this video, Carol Merry, former senior vice president with Fahlgren Mortine, discusses the
importance of strong writing skills in the workplace and provides practical tips to improve your
writing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=315#oembed-1

                                                                                                                    The role of writing in strategic communication | 16
9. Media writing skills and characteristics

Writing for the media can be difficult, especially for beginners. Practicing the following skills will
help you improve the quality of your work.

Knowledge of AP Style

Most media outlets use AP style--the style established and constantly updated by the Associated
Press--as the foundation for basic news and media writing. AP style provides consistency in
writing across media outlets and publications. You should purchase the latest edition of the AP
stylebook and familiarize yourself with it because you will be required to write in this manner for
messages intended for media outlets. The stylebook is available both online and in hard copy. In
general, AP style has evolved to ensure that media writing is accurate, impartial, and clear to the
audience.

Knowledge of grammar and punctuation

Audiences hold media and strategic communication professionals to a high standard when it
comes to knowledge of grammar and punctuation. To assist you in learning how to write for the
media, here are a few basic grammar and punctuation rules:

  · Use simple sentences that follow the subject, verb, object order (example: Maria attended the
      press conference).

  · Use active, not passive voice. Active voice helps with clarity and concise writing. (Passive
      voice: The press release was completed by Brian. Active voice: Brian completed the press
      release.)

  · Understand word choice and meaning:
         affect, effect
         its, it's
         they're, their, there
         accept, except

  · Be aware of comma uses:
         Set off modifiers (words or clauses that provide further description)

17 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
            The publicist, who works for Ogilvy, arrived late to the meeting.
         Separate an introductory phrase or word

            While studying, I listened to music.
         Before a conjunction

            I want to go, but I have to study.
         When writing a series of items (three or more)

            She bought shoes, food, and a movie.
Watch the video below of Jenny Patton, senior lecturer in the English department at The Ohio
State University. She discusses common grammatical errors and tips to improve your writing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=75#oembed-1

                                                                                                                               Media writing skills and characteristics | 18
10. References

Hare, K. (2013). Keller, Greenwald debate whether journalists can be impartial. Poynter. Retrieved
   from: http://www.poynter.org/2013/keller-greenwald-debate-whether-journalists-can-be-
   impartial/227386/

National Association of Colleges and Employers. (2024). Job outlook 2025: Attributes employers
   want to see on new college graduates' resumes. Retrieved from: naceweb.org/s11182015/
   employers-look-for-in-new-hires.aspx

Society of Professional Journalists. (2014). SPJ Code of Ethics. Retrieved from: http://www.spj.org/
   ethicscode.asp

Wemple, E. (2014). New York Post settles `bag men' defamation suit. The Washington Post. Retrieved
   from: https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2014/10/02/new-york-
   post-settles-bag-men-defamation-suit/

19 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART III

CHAPTER 3: STRATEGIC
COMMUNICATION ETHICS

                                                                                                                        Chapter 3: Strategic Communication Ethics | 20
11. Ethics case study

The issue of ethics is important in the strategic communication profession. Creators of content
should heavily rely on a code of ethics when carrying out various tasks. Using ethical reasoning,
whether you're designing a campaign or writing a newspaper article, demonstrates basic
understanding of the influence of messages on audiences. Ethical communication also helps an
organization avoid dilemmas and compromising situations.

   Several cases covered in the press highlight the ramifications of failure to use ethical and honest
standards in communication efforts. The case study below demonstrates this.

Case study: Ryan Holiday, media manipulation, and the rise of the Tucker
Max brand

Media strategist Ryan Holiday made a career of controlling the media to achieve public relations
goals. A few years ago, he became a PR specialist for Tucker Max, a controversial blogger and
author who garnered attention for his lewd writing and explicit discussions of his sexual
adventures with countless women. Holiday played an essential role in a campaign for Max's book
I Hope They Serve Beer in Hell. Pretending to be someone who hated Max's writings, Holiday
contacted influencers, bloggers, and television stations about the social controversy caused by the
brand. Soon Max's book received widespread attention from national media outlets and writers all
over the blogosphere (Ariely & Melamede, 2015).

   Filmmakers later created a movie based on the book. Holiday used some of the same tactics
to promote the film. He emailed college organizations across the country, again pretending
to be someone who was disgusted with the Tucker Max brand. He included photos of fake
advertisements that were offensive to women (which Holiday himself had created), and said that
the advertisements were used to promote the film (Ariely & Melamede, 2015). He told campus
leaders, bloggers, and other influencers to urge people not to see the film.

   Holiday was intentionally trying to create protests to generate media coverage and public
awareness about the film and the Tucker Max brand in general (Ariely & Melamede, 2015). He used
deceptive measures and some aspects of controversy--strong opinions on a topic, social backlash,
and a hated public figure--as leverage. And he was very successful: organized groups across the
country held protests against the film, furthering the widespread attention on Tucker Max. In this
situation, the saying "any press is good press" worked to his advantage.

21 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
   Cases such as this raise several concerns related
to the field of strategic communication. Most
important, the Tucker Max situation calls into
question the ethics Holiday used to control the
media. How far should one go to promote an
organization or brand? The perception exists that
strategic communication professionals, specifically
those in public relations, are expert spin doctors
and media manipulators; because of this, the
profession's credibility has been damaged. In order
to reclaim the trustworthiness of the field, strategic "Photo of Author, Ryan Holiday" is licensed under
communication professionals must abide by strong CC BY-SA 2.0
ethics in their decision-making processes.

   The majority of strategic communication professionals promote their client or organization
in an honest and straightforward manner. One case study that demonstrates this comes from
a Columbus-based public relations agency, Geben Communication. In 2014, the agency helped
promote a small catering business, Two Caterers. It used a targeted media relations strategy and
pitched to several local publications and news stations (Geben Communication, 2016) in order to
enhance brand awareness. The pitches contained factual information, and those working on the
account did not use manipulative tactics to achieve their goal.

   Geben Communication's promotional effort had positive results. Local publications wrote
several articles on Two Caterers, and a television station invited the small business to do a
cooking demonstration for a morning segment. Furthermore, Two Caterers received accolades
and recognition from small business associations and magazines.

                                                                                                                                                             Ethics case study | 22
12. Code of ethics

Ethics is a moral code that serves as a compass for individual or societal behavior. Engaging in
unethical behavior or messaging can be particularly damaging for business brands. Countless
businesses have been involved in scandals and crises stemming from unethical behavior and
judgment. Recovering from these instances is difficult, and the effects are sometimes irreversible.

   Most subfields related to the broader strategic industry have what is called a code of ethics or
a collection of rules and values that play a foundational role in conduct and the decision-making
process. The links below explain the code of ethics for marketing, public relations, journalism, and
advertising:

  · Marketing
  · Public relations
  · Journalism
  · Advertising

23 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
13. Defamation, Slander, and Libel

Defamation

Compromising the code of ethics may have legal consequences, depending upon the situation.
One of the most common ethical problems that occur in court cases is defamation. Defamation
is intentional damage done to one party's reputation by another party. Although it is not a crime,
it is considered a civil suit in a court of law. Individuals or organizations with particularly high
stakes attached to their reputation (for example, celebrities, public figures, renowned educators,
or popular businesses) are more inclined to sue for defamation.

   A recent example is the defamation cases filed by comedian Bill Cosby. In 2015, Cosby faced
allegations of sexual assault from more than 50 women, resulting in civil lawsuits and criminal
investigations against him. The tremendously negative effect on his reputation resulted in the
rescinding of several honorary degrees he had received as well as the cancellation of reruns of his
popular TV program from the 1980s and early '90s, The Cosby Show. In response to the damages,
Cosby sued some of the women for defamation, but the cases were later dismissed. The allegations
continue to have an impact on Cosby's image and legacy.

Slander and Libel

There are two categories of defamation: slander and libel. Slander is the spoken version of
defamation, when something is said verbally that harms another party's reputation. Libel is the
written version of defamation, when something is published that damages a party's reputation.
Because this textbook focuses on writing, libel will be discussed in greater detail. Libel includes
both print and online publications; even social media posts and Youtube videos can be grounds for
a libel suit.

   In 2019, rapper Cardi B, whose real name is Belcalis Almánzar filed a defamation case and
lawsuit against Latasha Kebe, a YouTuber who goes by Tasha K. Cardi B not only sued Tasha K for
defamation, but also invasion of privacy, and intentional infliction of emotional distress, alleging
that Tasha K made false and damaging claims about her in multiple YouTube videos. The videos
reached millions of viewers and gained a large amount of attention.

   Those falsehoods claimed that Cardi B was a former prostitute, used illegal drugs, and engaged
in lewd behavior around her child. Cardi B testified in court that these lies had caused her
significant emotional distress, anxiety, and even suicidal thoughts. Later in 2022, Cardi B won the
case and Tasha K was ordered to pay the rapper $4 million, which included costs for general and
punitive damages as well as legal fees.

   This case is important because it set a significant precedent for how public figures can fight

                                                                                                                                          Defamation, Slander, and Libel | 24
online defamation, especially against influencers and content creators who profit from spreading
falsehoods. The case also serves as a cautionary tale and reminder that free speech does not
protect defamatory speech. Finally, it also highlighted the legal risks for online gossip and celebrity
commentary channels.

   Click here for more information on the case and its implication.
   Winning a libel suit is difficult. Five elements have to exist in order to render a statement as
libelous (Harrower, 2012):
  1. The statement was published.
 2. The statement is conveyed as a fact, not an opinion.
 3. The statement is false.
 4. The statement is identifiable with or made about the plaintiff.
 5. The statement was published with intentional negligence or malice.
The last element is particularly challenging to prove. Many libel suits are dismissed because the
plaintiff fails to provide evidence for the existence of each element.
   The possibility of defamation is of great concern to every strategic communication professional.
Careful information gathering and rigorous fact checking are vital in order to avoid defamatory
communication. Double-checking quotes and sources helps minimize the risk of publishing
libelous statements.

25 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
14. Conflict of interest

     Reflection Point

        Before reading the section on conflict of interest, think about the following situation:
        Should a newspaper travel writer accept a free hotel stay, airline ticket, meals, and so on from a resort as an
     enticement to get the writer to do a story? Does this produce real or perceived bias in the resulting reporting? Is
     this arrangement disclosed to readers? What if the only way the newspaper could afford to have a travel writer
     was to accept such free offers? What kinds of conflicts, real or perceived, need to be considered?

Conflict of interest is "a clash between a person's self-interest and professional interest or public
interest" (Business Dictionary, 2016). Communication professionals should try to eliminate any
action that may compromise their impartiality or the interests of their organization. That includes
separating personal interests from the organization's goals.

   The definition seems straightforward, but real-life situations can be murky. As a professional
working at an advertising agency, should you take on two clients who are competitors? Most
within the industry would say that you should inform both parties of the situation and let them
decide if they want to proceed. However, let's say your agency takes on a client who has a history
of using unethical labor practices, something that you staunchly oppose. How do you remain
impartial in this situation? How do you write material that benefits your client when your personal
opinions may affect the content? Or, should you, as a journalist, accept a small gift from a source
(for example, a five-dollar Starbucks gift card) before or after an interview? Most journalists would
say no, because accepting a gift from a source, no matter how small, could affect your feelings
toward the individual, which could be reflected in your writing.

   There are several ways to avoid a conflict of interest. Gather as much information as you can
about the potential conflict in order to make an objective decision (or as objective as possible).
Firms should have formal rules, and conflicts should be disclosed to supervisors. To safeguard your
career and reputation, it's important to always uphold high ethical standards and conduct yourself
in a manner above reproach. You may want to ask colleagues or supervisors for advice. Also, be as
upfront as possible with the parties involved.

                                                                                                                                                          Conflict of interest | 26
15. Plagiarism

Plagiarism is an issue in both academic and professional situations. The term refers to using
another person's work without proper credit or attribution. Plagiarism is a very serious offense
in the strategic communication field, and is particularly egregious in journalism. In 2011, a
Washington Post journalist, Sari Horwitz, was accused of directly copying content from the Arizona
Republic while covering the shooting of congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords. The Post issued an
apology and suspended Horwitz for three months (Memmott, 2011). Horwitz also expressed her
remorse and released a statement as reported by NPR:

       "I am deeply sorry. To our readers, my friends and colleagues, my editors, and to the paper
       I love, I want to apologize. ... Under the pressure of tight deadlines, I did something I have
       never done in my entire career. I used another newspaper's work as if it were my own. It
       was wrong. It was inexcusable. And it is one of the cardinal sins in journalism" (Memmott,
       2011, para. 2).
Plagiarism is not committed primarily by students or those new to the field. Horwitz was an
experienced journalist who had received the Pulitzer Prize three times.
   A highly publicized case of plagiarism involved a speech given at the 2016 Republican National
Convention by Melania Trump, wife of the party's presidential nominee, Donald Trump. Soon after
she delivered the speech, some took to social media to point out similarities to a speech given by
Michelle Obama at the 2008 Democratic National Convention. News media outlets later reported
that parts of the speech were lifted directly from Obama's speech (Horowitz, 2016). Meredith
McIver, Melania's speechwriter and an employee of the Trump organization, took responsibility
for the incident and stated that it was a mistake (Horowitz, 2016). McIver was not fired, and many
outraged observers questioned the integrity of the Trump campaign.

27 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
16. Lack of transparency

Most crisis communication experts agree that transparency is key to maintaining or regaining the
public's trust. Lack of transparency can have devastating effects that sometimes leave a permanent
stain on a company or brand's image. Brands cannot thrive without the public's trust.

   A recent case that demonstrates the negative outcomes of failing to be transparent is the
emissions scandal at Volkswagen. In 2015, news outlets reported that the German car company
used a "defeat device" in many of its cars as far back as 2009 to cheat on several emissions tests
conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency. These devices were able to detect when tests
were being conducted and help reduce toxic emissions during the procedures. In reality, the
vehicle emissions were well above the levels permitted by the EPA.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=85#oembed-1

                                                                                                                                                        Lack of transparency | 28
17. Misleading advertisements

Similar to public relations agencies, advertising firms often have a reputation for using
manipulative tactics at the expense of the consumer. This is largely due to consumers' experiences
with misleading advertisements, or promotions that exaggerate claims or misinform audiences.
The goal of an advertisement is to emphasize the benefits of a product or service over any
drawbacks or shortcomings.

   However, agencies should not create deceptive advertisements at the expense of consumers,
or those that "raise health and safety concerns ... and those that cause economic injury" (Federal
Trade Commission, "Division of Advertising Practices," 2016, para. 1). By law, claims in
advertisements have to be truthful and supported by evidence. Going back to the Volkswagen
emissions scandal, the company also faced legal troubles for falsely advertising that its cars had
low emissions. The Federal Trade Commission filed a complaint against Volkswagen in federal
court, arguing that the company deceived its consumers through unsubstantiated claims and
corrupt evidence.

   Learn more about false advertising scandals.
   FTC consumer protection laws vary from state to state. These laws ensure that consumers are
not misled and that agencies provide fair communication to their target audiences. The FTC can
determine whether an advertisement is deceptive. The criteria for deception are as follows:
  · The advertisement should have a high probability to mislead the average, reasonable

      consumer; and
  · Advertisement claims should cause the consumer to buy the product or service based on

      misinformation.
If consumers report an advertisement to the FTC, the organization then goes through a series of
steps to decide whether the ad is truly deceptive. You can find a list of the steps here.

29 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
18. Corporate social responsibility

                                                      Numerous companies are taking measures

                                                      to create an ethical brand image. One strategy

                                                      is through corporate social responsibility,

                                                      which is a business model or practice that

                                                      seeks to benefit the greater society. More and

                                                      more consumers support businesses that

                                                      create initiatives to help communities.

                                                      Corporate social responsibility can take a

                                                      variety of forms, from making charitable

                                                      donations to local causes to underwriting

                                                      beneficial projects in developing countries. For

"Close up of a keyboard with a Volunteer concept" by  example, firms including Amazon, Whole
Duncan_Andison from Thinkstock is licensed under CC   Foods, Eddie Bauer, and Kroger have high-
BY 2.0.                                               profile programs that allow consumers to

                                                      direct a portion of their money spent to a

charity of their choice (50+ companies that donate, 2016). Apple has been a leader in making

large investments in environmentally friendly practices such as using renewable power and

recycling in its offices.

There are several benefits to demonstrating and promoting corporate social responsibility.

Organizations that do so tend to have a better public image. Furthermore, studies show that

consumers are willing to spend more on a product if they know that their purchase benefits

a charitable cause or addresses a social or environmental need (Matching gift statistics, 2016).

Strategic communication professionals play a key role in branding businesses as socially conscious

through message design and brand management. Their efforts help to spread awareness of these

initiatives and make them a part of the organization's brand identity and core values.

                                                      Corporate social responsibility | 30
19. References

Ariely, D. & Melamede, Y. (2015). (Dis)Honesty [motion picture]. United States: Salty Features.

Business Dictionary. (2016). Definition of conflict of interest. Retrieved from:

http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/conflict-of-interest.html

Double the Donation. (2016). 50+ companies that donate to nonprofits. Retrieved

from: https://doublethedonation.com/companies-that-donate-to-nonprofits/

Double the Donation. (2016). Matching gift and corporate giving statistics. Retrieved

from: https://doublethedonation.com/matching-grant-resources/matching-gift-statistics/

Federal Trade Commission. (2016). Division of Advertising Practices. Retrieved

from: https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau-consumer-protection/our-

divisions/division-advertising-practices

Geben Communication. (2016). Two Caterers: Local PR. Retrieved

from: http://gebencommunication.com/portfolio/two-caterers-local-pr/

Harrower, T. (2012). Inside Reporting. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education.

Horowitz, J. (2016). Behind Melania Trump's cribbed lines, an ex-ballerina who loved writing. The

New York Times. Retrieved from: http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/21/us/politics/melania-

trump-speech-meredith-mciver.html

Memmott, M. (2011). Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter apologizes for plagiarizing. NPR. Retrieved

from:  http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2011/03/17/134620598/pulitzer-prize-

winning-reporter-apologizes-for-plagiarizing

31 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART IV

CHAPTER 4: NEWS VALUE

                                                                                                                                                     Chapter 4: News Value | 32
20. News value and the strategic
communication professional

While watching or listening to a major media network, you may occasionally find yourself thinking,
"Why is this story considered news?" Audiences assume that the role of the media is to provide
them with the most important information about issues and events happening locally, nationally,
and worldwide. Therefore, media outlets send an indirect message to audiences about a story's
perceived importance through selection and how much time and exposure they give the story.

   A story's newsworthiness is largely determined by its news value, a standard that determines
whether an event or situation is worth media attention. News value is referred to as "criteria used
by media outlets to determine whether or not to cover a story and how much resources it should
receive" (Kraft, 2015). Journalists and reporters are likely to spend their limited time and resources
on a story that has many news values.

   Strategic communication professionals who understand what constitutes newsworthy content
will increase their chances of gaining media coverage for their brand or organization. In fact, there
is a saying that "the most successful public relations professionals are those who think and act like
reporters" (Caruso, 2011, para. 1). Because journalists are more interested in stories that will appeal
to their readers or listeners, understanding the news value of your messages will help to enhance
your company's media relations and general coverage.

33 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
21. News value types (Part 1)

In the 1960s, researchers Johan Galtung and Mari Holmboe Ruge examined news stories
worldwide to determine their similarities (Galtung & Ruge, 1965). Their seminal study created the
first news value list, which is still referred to today by journalists and strategic communication
professionals. (See the University of Oxford's paper on Galtung and Ruge's research for more
information.) News values have evolved over time, and there is much debate over whether
journalists should consider other criteria to select newsworthy content. (See Dr. Meredith Clark's
article on considering a new set of news values.) Currently, eight values are used to determine
a story's newsworthiness (Kraft, 2015). Some of the values' names may differ slightly in other
sources, but their meaning is the same.

Immediacy/Timeliness

Events or stories that have recently taken place or will happen in the immediate future have
immediacy or timeliness. Breaking news stories or stories about unexpected events that are
developing are good examples. Media gatekeepers deem these stories so important that they
often interrupt regular television schedules to immediately give audiences the information. Recent
happenings typically carry more news value than less timely events.

   Timeliness also takes into consideration factors such as seasonal events, commemorations, and
holidays. A strategic communication professional may pitch an activity that connects with this
type of timeliness--for example, a fundraiser that distributes toys to low-income children during
the holiday season.

Proximity

Proximity considers the location of the event in relation to the target audience of the media outlet.
Audiences are more likely to pay attention to stories that take place in their local communities.
For example, a news station in Ohio usually wouldn't cover day-to-day events at the Indiana State
Fair. However, happenings at the annual Ohio State Fair always get daily coverage in central Ohio
news outlets.

                                                                                                                                                  News value types (Part 1) | 34
Human interest

Stories that are emotionally compelling capture the audience's attention and appeal to their
attitudes and beliefs. Feature articles often are good examples of human interest stories when
they depict a person, organization, or community in a way that triggers an emotional connection
between the audience and the characters. Other examples are a behind-the-scenes look at the life
of an athlete or the story of a person struggling to overcome an obstacle.

   An example of a human interest story that contains strong emotional elements is that of Leah
Still, daughter of National Football League player Devon Still. Leah captured the hearts of many
when news outlets began to cover her battle with cancer in 2015, when she was four years old.
Many people admired Leah's positive attitude and determination to beat her illness. Now cancer-
free, Leah continues to be an inspiration to thousands of people. For more information about this
story and its human interest elements, take a look at this video:

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=95#oembed-1

35 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
22. News value types (Part 2)

Prominence

Stories that feature well-known individuals or public figures such as politicians and entertainers
carry news value. News outlets covered the story when model Tyra Banks completed a
management program at Harvard's School of Business in 2012. Banks's celebrity profile raised the
news value of a story that would have received little or no attention had it involved just about
anyone else.

Impact

The United Kingdom's vote to exit the European Union in June 2016 had global implications, and
many media outlets in the U.S. and abroad reported the story. However, British news stations
such as BBC News and Sky News covered the event more extensively than American media did
because the decision impacts Britain's economy and citizens much more so than Americans.
Generally, people are more likely to care about stories that directly affect their lives; therefore,
media gatekeepers often devote more time and resources to stories that have implications for
their respective audiences.

Novelty

Stories that are odd, unusual, shocking, or surprising have novelty value. An example would be a
story about an unusual animal friendship, such as that between a dog and a deer. Because such a
friendship is not a normal occurrence, it sparks the curiosity of audiences. In 2015, CNN covered
a story about a weatherman who was able to correctly pronounce the extremely long name of a
Welsh village. Take a look at this clip of the story:

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=452

                                                                                                                                                  News value types (Part 2) | 36
23. References

Caruso, D. (2011). What makes a good PR pro: A degree or a journalism background? Ragan.com.

Retrieved       from:                                http://www.ragan.com/Main/Articles/

What_makes_a_good_PR_pro_A_degree_or_a_journalism_43397.aspx

Galtung, J. & Ruge, M.H. (1965). The structure of foreign news: The presentation of the Congo,

Cuba and Cyprus crises in four Norwegian newspapers. Journal of Peace Research, 2(1), 64-90.

Kraft, N. (2015, August 12). COMM 2221-News Value [YouTube video file]. Retrieved

from: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=akgY46ejiQY

37 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART V

CHAPTER 5: NEWS WRITING BASICS

                                                                                                                                         Chapter 5: News Writing Basics | 38
24. News story objective

While the structure of news stories has changed over time, the overall purpose remains the same.
News writing informs and entertains readers and listeners. News stories give citizens information
about events happening both in their communities and around the world and therefore play an
essential role in shaping their viewpoints and general ideas. We can know what is happening in
a foreign country without traveling there, or develop an opinion about a public figure without
meeting the person.

   Strategic communication writers produce material that they hope will find its way into the news
stream. They provide information that helps explain their clients' facts, framing of a controversy,
or opinions. Producing the material in a format that makes it easier for journalists to adapt to their
own purposes is very important. Alissa Widman Neese, a Columbus Dispatch reporter, discusses
the nature of news writing in the video below.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=97

39 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
25. Types of news stories

Straight news/Hard news

Stories that report only the most essential information in a concise and impartial manner are
referred to as straight or hard news stories. This type of story typically follows the inverted
pyramid style, which organizes information by descending order of importance or places the most
newsworthy information at the beginning of the article. This style will be discussed in more detail
below. Examples of hard news stories include those about political topics and crime.

Features

The primary difference between a feature story and
a straight news story is the style. A feature article is
more in-depth than a traditional hard news article
and uses the types of storytelling devices and
details that you might find in novels. Feature stories "Newspapers B&W" by Jon S is licensed under CC
are considered soft news and do not focus merely BY 2.0
on the basic facts.

   Writers typically have more flexibility to use a wider range of formats, provide rich descriptions,
and include scene-setting anecdotes. Features often are given more space on the page and are
accompanied by pictures, illustrations, graphics, maps, and other visual components. A profile of
an athlete or a political figure is an example of a feature article. The characteristics of feature
writing will be explained further in the next chapter.

Editorial

Although journalistic ethical standards call for general news writing to be objective in content
and tone, newswriters also have the opportunity to communicate personal points of view about
current events and topics. The editorial is a type of news story used to develop an argument about
an issue and even sway readers' opinions. The essay also represents the official view of an editorial
board that determines what views to share after some kind of deliberative process.

   Click here for an example of an editorial.

                                                                                                                                                       Types of news stories | 40
26. Summary lead

A summary lead concisely tells the reader the main idea of the story or conveys its news value.
Most journalists and editors believe that the lead should come in the first sentence or first few
sentences of a hard news article. Reporters use the term "burying the lead" or "delayed lead" to
describe one placed later in an article. A buried lead may give the impression that the writer wasn't
able to determine what the real newsworthy material was, and can therefore reflect poorly on
his or her journalistic judgment. In features or other soft news stories that use more dramatic
storytelling techniques, the lead sometimes is buried in order to increase suspense or add an
element of surprise.

   A summary lead should address the following questions:

  · Who is the story about? orWho is involved?

  · What is the story about? or What happened?

  · When did the event take place?

  · Where did the event take place?

  · Why did the event take place?

  · How did the event happen?

Keeping the 5Ws and H in mind when writing a news story will help you organize the content
and find a focus for the article. News judgment consists of figuring out the organization of these
aspects of the content and prioritizing them in terms of their importance. It's not necessary to
cram the 5Ws and H into one sentence for the lead; however, the lead usually should contain
information about the Who and What.

   Take a look at the lead in this article from WOSU News.
   Now, let's answer the 5Ws and H for the lead:

  · Who? Greater Columbus Arts Council

  · What? $4 million in grants paused

  · When? July 23, 2025

  · Where? Columbus Metro Area

  · Why? Cuts from government funding

41 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
  · How?
In this case, the How of the story is not addressed in the summary lead or nut graph. Still, the
reader can easily understand the main idea of the article. When you're practicing writing summary
leads, remember to keep the sentence(s) relatively concise, with no more than 30 words.

                                                                                                                                                                 Summary lead | 42
27. Headlines

A headline concisely states the main idea of the story and is further elaborated on in the lead.
It should clearly convey a complete thought. Headlines have become increasingly important in
today's society; people tend to look only at headlines rather reading complete stories, especially
online. An effective headline encourages the reader to take the time to read the article.

Print versus web headlines

   Print headlines tend to be concise (using
fewer than six or seven words) and
straightforward. Online headlines tend to be
longer and use catchy language. Images,
captions, and subheadlines are more common
with print headlines than web headlines (Davis
& Davis, 2009).

   Web headlines usually appear as links that
lead the reader to the actual article. Given the
acceleration of media consumption, many
readers simply want to know the basic
information about an event. The headlines
used with web publications give readers
enough information to understand what is
happening without reading the story.

How to create a headline

Writing headlines take practice. You need to

select words carefully and use strong writing

in order to entice the audience to read the

article.

   Create the headline after you finish writing      This print news headline includes a subheadline and an
the article so that you have complete                image that provides context, and uses an
understanding of the story. Focus on how you         attention-grabbing phrase. "The Globe and Mail,
can communicate the main idea in a manner            Toronto, ON Canada" by Cliff is licensed under CC BY
that will capture the reader's attention. Also       2.0

focus on key words and do not include articles such as a, an, and the. Use present-tense verbs for

43 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
headlines about events in the past or present. For events in the future, use the infinitive form of
the verb: for example, "Local store to open new location."

                                                                                                                                                                       Headlines | 44
28. Inverted pyramid style

In general, news stories are organized using the inverted pyramid style, in which information is
presented in descending order of importance. This allows the audience to read the most crucial
details quickly so they can decide whether to continue or stop reading the story. From an editing
perspective, using the inverted pyramid style makes it easier to cut a story from the bottom, if
necessary. Invented more than a century ago, the inverted pyramid style remains the basic formula
for news writing (Scanlan, 2003).

                                    "Inverted pyramid in comprehensive form" by Christopher
                                    Schwartz is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0

It is important to note that some news stories do not strictly follow the inverted pyramid style,
although the lead for a hard news piece always does. Furthermore, not everyone in the journalism
field embraces the style; some detractors believe it is an unnatural way to engage in storytelling
and present news to the public. Yet, proponents believe it is an efficient way to organize and share
information in a fast-paced society (Scanlan, 2003). Therefore, it's important for students to learn
the style; one good way to do so is to regularly read hard news stories and pay attention to how
the leads are structured. The lead (also known as the summary lead) and the body of the inverted
pyramid style are discussed in the next sections.

45 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
29. Attribution

Attribution is the process of indicating the source(s)/origin of the information presented in the
article. It serves a similar purpose as formal citations in an academic paper; however it is not
formatted in the same fashion. A story's major information should be attributed, through phrases
such as "she said" or "according to a recent Pew Research report." Furthermore, attribution for a
news article or press release takes the form of paraphrases as well as direct and indirect quotes.

   Attribution is very important in media writing, as it helps to establish an objective tone and adds
credibility to an article (Harrower, 2012). Attribution also explains how the writer retrieved the
information and why a particular source was quoted.

   Attribution can be placed at the beginning of a sentence to introduce information or added after
a statement. Pay close attention to verb tense and choice when attributing sources. For example,
the most common verbs used for attributing human sources are "said," "stated," and "asked." For
records or documents, use "reported," "claimed," and "stated." Direct quotes should be surrounded
by quotation marks and include the source's exact words. Paraphrased statements and indirect
quotes should not be placed in quotation marks.

   Here are examples of attributed statements:

  · "The libraries are usually crowded and filled with students around this time in the semester,"
      said Laura Sykler, a sophomore at The Ohio State University.

  · National Weather Service officials said a heavy cloud of smog hung over the city
      Wednesday.

  · The president will announce his pick for the vacant Supreme Court seat on Monday,
      according to a statement from the White House.

When initially referencing a human source, include the person's full name. Use only the last name
for subsequent references. Click on this WOSU Article for an example.

   Include important qualifiers with the first reference to demonstrate that the source has
expertise on the topic. For example:

  · "Using Mentimeter in the classroom actually enhances student engagement," Jasmine
      Roberts-Crews, strategic communication lecturer at The Ohio State University, said.

Notice that the direct quote with attribution uses the qualifier "strategic communication lecturer
at The Ohio State University" to indicate the source's credibility.

   Qualifiers are also used to explain a source's relevance to the topic. The following example might
be used in a news article reporting on a crime.

  · "It was just complete chaos in the store. The police were trying very hard to catch the

                                                                                                                                                                     Attribution | 46
      shoplifter," eyewitness Angela Nelson said.
The qualifier "eyewitness" helps to establish Nelson's relevance to the narrative.

   Finally, attribution should flow well within the story. Avoid using long qualifiers or awkward
phrases.

47 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
30. Body of the article

Once you've created the lead, give the reader more information in the body of the article. This
is your opportunity to elaborate on what else you know about the story. In keeping with the
inverted pyramid style, present the information in decreasing order of importance, not necessarily
in chronological order. The least important details should appear at the end of the article, where
they could be omitted by an editor if necessary.

   Use direct and indirect quotes from sources to tell the reader the origin of the information
(there is more about this below), and remember to maintain an objective tone. Use the third
person; avoid pronouns such as I, me, you, or us that are more suited to opinion pieces.
Use short, simple sentences and organize them into paragraphs of no more than three or four
sentences.

                                                                                                                                                           Body of the article | 48
31. References

Davis, S. & Davis, E. (2009). Think like an editor: 50 strategies from the print and digital world.
   Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
   Harrower, T. (2012). Inside reporting. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education.

Scanlan, C. (2003). Writing from the top down: Pros and cons of the inverted pyramid. Poynter.
   Retrieved from: http://www.poynter.org/2003/writing-from-the-top-down-pros-and-cons-
   of-the-inverted-pyramid/12754/

49 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART VI

CHAPTER 6: FEATURE WRITING

                                                                                                                                               Chapter 6: Feature Writing | 50
32. The purpose of feature writing

In the previous chapter, we touched on using the news media as an informational tool to achieve
your organization's communication goals. One useful writing material is a feature article. Features
are more in-depth than traditional news stories and go beyond providing the most important
facts. The purpose of these stories is to provide a detailed description of a place, person, idea, or
organization.

   Although reporters and editors classify features as news stories, they are not necessarily
structured using the inverted pyramid style. Instead, features use storytelling devices to help
the reader connect with the overall narrative and its central characters. Features are particularly
common in magazine writing, although they frequently appear in other mediums.

   Profiles or personality features that give insight into a person's role, experience, or background
are one type of feature. Among the most common subjects of profiles are celebrities, athletes,
individuals who overcome challenges, and high-profile executives.

   Click here for more information on the different types of features.
   It is important to understand the circumstances that warrant a feature piece from a strategic
communication perspective. Communication professionals write feature articles to provide in-
depth exposure for their client or organization. A feature can increase a client or company's
visibility and even help find new key audiences.
   If you need to quickly get information about your client or organization to the media, a feature
article may not be the best tool because it typically is longer than a traditional news story.
However, you could write a feature article on, for example, your company's new CEO to provide
more background information to key audiences. Feature stories are also used in an organization's
internal communications, such as newsletters and magazines.
   Overall, feature articles use an informative tone while incorporating creative and descriptive
devices in order to increase audience appeal. Here is an example of a feature article from Vogue
magazine.

51 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
33. Feature writing versus traditional news
writing

There are several important differences between feature articles and traditional news stories.
Features typically are longer. Also, while traditional stories use a summary lead, feature stories
use delayed leads or begin with an anecdote. The writing style is different. Traditional news
articles tend to paraphrase information rather than state it verbatim, while feature articles use
many quotes and emotional cues, focusing more on showing the reader what's going on instead
of telling. In this video, Chris Davey, assistant vice president for media and public relations at The
Ohio State University, summarizes some of the differences between traditional news stories and
feature stories and provides general tips for news writing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=115

                                                                                                                   Feature writing versus traditional news writing | 52
34. Feature leads

Unlike the traditional summary lead, feature leads can be several sentences long, and the writer
may not immediately reveal the story's main idea. The most common types used in feature articles
are anecdotal leads and descriptive leads. An anecdotal lead unfolds slowly. It lures the reader in
with a descriptive narrative that focuses on a specific minor aspect of the story that leads to the
overall topic. The following is an example of an anecdotal lead:

       Sharon Jackson was sitting at the table reading an old magazine when the phone rang. It
       was a reporter asking to set up an interview to discuss a social media controversy involving
       Jackson and another young woman."Sorry," she said. "I've already spoken to several reporters
       about the incident and do not wish to make any further comments."
Notice that the lead unfolds more slowly than a traditional lead and centers on a particular aspect
of the larger story. The nut graph, or a paragraph that reveals the importance of the minor story
and how it fits into the broader story, would come after the lead. There will be more on the nut
graph later in this chapter.
   Descriptive leads begin the article by describing a person, place, or event in vivid detail. They
focus on setting the scene for the piece and use language that taps into the five senses in order to
paint a picture for the reader. This type of lead can be used for both traditional news and feature
stories. The following is an example of a descriptive lead:
       Thousands dressed in scarlet and gray T-shirts eagerly shuffled into the football stadium as
       the university fight song blared.
For each article below, identify whether it uses a descriptive or anecdotal lead:
  · A thin line of defense
  · Pediatric patient
  · Inside Jay Z's Roc Nation

53 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
35. Feature article organization

The content in a feature article isn't necessarily presented as an inverted pyramid; instead,
the organization may depend on the writer's style and the story angle. Nevertheless, all of the
information in a feature article should be presented in a logical and coherent fashion that allows
the reader to easily follow the narrative.

   As previously stated, the nut graph follows the lead. This paragraph connects the lead to the
overall story and conveys the story's significance to the readers (Scanlan, 2003).

   The nut graph comes from a commonly used formula for writing features, known as the Wall
Street Journal (WSJ) formula (International Center for Journalists, 2016). The formula was named
after the well-known and respected publication, which created the term "nut graph" and mastered
feature news writing (Rich, 2016).

   The formula consists of beginning the story with feature-style leads to grab the reader's
attention, followed by the nut graph (Scanlan, 2003). After this comes a longer body of the story
that provides the usual background, facts, quotes, and so on. The formula then specifies a return
to the opening focus at the end of the story using another descriptive passage or anecdote, also
known as the "circle kicker" (Rich, 2016). This could be, for example, an update on what eventually
happened to the main character or how the event or issue turned out.

                                                                                                                                              Feature article organization | 54
36. Feature writing devices

Literary Devices

Feature writers use a particular style of writing to convey the story's message. The use of literary
devices helps in this task. These devices include similes and metaphors, onomatopoeia (use of
words that mimic a sound), imagery (figurative language), climax, and more. Here are a few
examples of onomatopoeia and imagery:

   Onomatopoeia: The tires screeched against the concrete as she hit the pedal.
   Imagery: The apartment smelled of old cooking odors, cabbage, and mildew; . . . a haze of dusty
sunlight peeked from the one cobwebbed, gritty window.
   Click here for more information on literary devices, including specific examples.

Descriptive Writing

A good feature writer uses plot devices and dialogues that help move the story forward, while
focusing on the central theme and providing supporting information through descriptive language
and specific examples. You want to show readers what's happening, not simply tell them. They
should be able to visualize the characters, places, and events highlighted in the feature piece.

   Show versus tell
   Tell: Friends describe Amariah as a generous and vibrant person who was involved in several
nonprofit organizations.
   Show: Tracey proudly recalls her friend's generosity. "Amariah is usually the first person to
arrive at a volunteer event, and the last to leave. She spends four hours every Saturday morning
volunteering at the mentoring center. It's rare to not catch her laughing, flashing her perfect smile.
She's just a burst of positive energy."
   It's often tempting to end a feature piece with a summary conclusion. Instead, use an anecdote,
passage, or compelling quote that will leave a lasting impression on your readers.

55 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
37. References

International Center for Journalists. (2016). Use these tools for the story structure. Retrieved
   from: http://www.icfj.org/resources/who%E2%80%99s-running-company-guide-reporting-
   corporate-governance/use-these-tools-story-structure

Literary Devices Editors. (2013). What are literary devices? Retrieved from:
   http://literarydevices.net/
   Rich, C. (2016). Writing and reporting news: A coaching method. Cengage Learning: Boston, MA.

Scanlan, C. (2003). The nut graf, Part I. Poynter. Retrieved from: http://www.poynter.org/2003/
   the-nut-graf-part-i/11371/

                                                                                                                                                                     References | 56
PART VII

CHAPTER 7: PUBLIC RELATIONS
INDUSTRY

57 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
38. What is public relations?

The Public Relations Society of America (PRSA) defines public relations as "a strategic
communication process that builds mutually beneficial relationships between organizations
and their publics" (2016, para. 4). Simply put, public relations helps to influence an audience's
perceptions by building relationships and shaping public conversations about a client or company.
These public conversations often take place through mass media and social media, which is why
public relations professionals need to understand how to work with and write effective messages
for the media. Click here for more information on what you can expect in a public relations career.

   Public relations professionals are in charge of a wide range of communication activities that may
include increasing brand visibility and awareness, planning events, and creating content. Some of
them also deal with crisis communication and help to salvage a brand's integrity and reputation
during a negative event.

   Click on this video from Tayah Frye, a young PR professional, explains what it is like to work at a
public relations agency.

                                                                                                                                                  What is public relations? | 58
39. Four models of public relations

Grunig and Hunt (1984) developed four models of public relations that describe the field's various
management and organizational practices. These models serve as guidelines to create programs,
strategies, and tactics.

         "Four Models of PR" by Michael Shiflet and Jasmine Roberts is licensed under CC BY 2.0

59 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
In the press agent/publicity model, communications professionals use persuasion to shape the
thoughts and opinions of key audiences. In this model, accuracy is not important and
organizations do not seek audience feedback or conduct audience analysis research. It is a one-
way form of communication. One example is propagandist techniques created by news media
outlets in North Korea.

   The public information model moves away from the manipulative tactics used in the press agent
model and presents more accurate information. However, the communication pattern is still one-
way. Practitioners do not conduct audience analysis research to guide their strategies and tactics.
Some press releases and newsletters are created based on this model, when audiences are not
necessarily targeted or researched beforehand.

   The two-way asymmetrical model presents a more "scientifically persuasive" way of
communicating with key audiences. Here, content creators conduct research to better
understand the audience's attitudes and behaviors, which in turn informs the message strategy
and creation. Still, persuasive communication is used in this model to benefit the organization
more so than audiences; therefore, it is considered asymmetrical or imbalanced. The model is
particularly popular in advertising and consumer marketing, fields that are specifically interested
in increasing an organization's profits.

   Finally, the two-way symmetrical model argues that the public relations practitioner should
serve as a liaison between the organization and key publics, rather than as a persuader. Here,
practitioners are negotiators and use communication to ensure that all involved parties benefit,
not just the organization that employs them. The term "symmetrical" is used because the model
attempts to create a mutually beneficial situation. The two-way symmetrical model is deemed
the most ethical model, one that professionals should aspire to use in their everyday tactics and
strategies (Simpson, 2014).

   Some experts think of public relations more broadly. For instance, they may argue that political
lobbying is a form of public relations because lobbyists engage in communication activities and
client advocacy in order to shape the attitudes of Congress (Berg, 2009). However, this book
focuses on a public relations approach based particularly on writing for the media. Furthermore,
the goal is to disseminate communication based on the two-way symmetrical model presented by
Grunig and Hunt (1984).

     Discussion Point

        Do you think the two-way symmetrical model is plausible? Consider this example from Dr. William Sledzik,
     associate professor of journalism and mass communication at Kent State University:

        "Can we realistically serve multiple stakeholders whose needs conflict? For example, can we represent the
     interests of loyal employee groups while our shareholders demand layoffs in favor of low-cost offshore
     suppliers?"

                                                                                                                                         Four models of public relations | 60
40. Why do companies need public
relations?

There was a time when many companies did not see the value of public relations, unless a
crisis happened. Even now, some public relations professionals face challenges in convincing key
executives of their value to the function of the company.

   With the abundance of information readily available to audiences worldwide, companies are
more vulnerable than ever to misinformation about their brand. An audience's attitudes and beliefs
about a company can greatly influence its success. Therefore, the public relations professional
helps to monitor and control conversations about a company or client and manage its reputation
in the marketplace. Viewing public relations as a key management function of a business or an
essential strategy to manage one's individual reputation will help accomplish important goals such
as establishing trust among key publics, increasing news media and social media presence, and
maintaining a consistent voice across communication platforms.

   For more on the impact of reputation on business success, take a look at this article from The
Entrepreneur.

61 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
41. Public relations versus marketing versus
advertising

Many people confuse public relations with marketing and advertising. Although there are
similarities, there also are key differences.

   Probably the most important difference between marketing, public relations, and advertising is
the primary focus. Public relations emphasizes cultivating relationships between an organization
or individual and key publics for the purpose of managing the client's image. Marketing
emphasizes the promotion of products and services for revenue purposes. Advertising is a
communication tool used by marketers in order to get customers to act. The image below
outlines other differences.

                                                                                                            Public relations versus marketing versus advertising | 62
"The difference between marketing, public relations, and advertising" by Jasmine Roberts and Michael Shiflet is
licensed under CC By 2.0.

For more information on the differences between marketing, public relations, and advertising,
read the following articles:

  · US Chamber: Difference between marketing and public relations
  · The real difference between public relations and advertising

63 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
42. General roles in public relations

According to Smith (2013), public relations practitioners can be placed in two groups based
on responsibilities: communication managers and communication technicians. Communication
managers assist in the strategic planning of an organization's communication efforts. The broad
term "communication manager" includes several similar public relations positions: expert
consultant, problem-solving facilitator, and communication liaison. Expert consultants develop
a specific communication plan to help achieve organizational goals. Problem-solving facilitators
provide crisis management to an organization during an obstacle. Liaisons speak on behalf of the
brand and facilitate communication between the organization and its key publics.

   Before entering a managerial role, most public relation practitioners begin their career as a
communication technician. This can refer to a variety of entry-level positions, including public
relations specialist, communication assistant, and junior account executive. Communication
technicians write press releases, pitches, feature articles, and other communication materials and
assist in event planning. Together, communication managers and technicians play a vital role in
relationship building and the management of a brand.

                                                                                                                                        General roles in public relations | 64
43. References

Berg, K. (2009). Finding connections between public relations, lobbying, and advocacy. Public

Relations Journal, 3(3), 2-19.

Grunig, J. & Hunt, T. (1984). Managing public relations. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

Public Relations Society of America. (2016). About public relations. Retrieved

from: https://www.prsa.org/aboutprsa/publicrelationsdefined/#.V7S9x4HF_Hc

Simpson, E. (2014). The four models in Grunig's and Hunt's PR theories. Linkedin.com. Retrieved

from:  https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/20140611205435-83891954-the-four-models-in-

grunig-s-and-hunt-s-pr-theories

Smith, R. (2013). Strategic planning for public relations. New York, NY: Routledge.

65 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART VIII

CHAPTER 8: PUBLIC RELATIONS
WRITING

                                                                                                                                    Chapter 8: Public Relations Writing | 66
44. The role of writing in public relations

Public relations professionals at all levels need to have solid writing skills. White (2016) says,
"To succeed as a PR pro, it's vital to have a passion for writing and communication, and to
be committed to excelling in both. You're bound to fail if you don't" (para. 9). Public relations
professionals are responsible for developing communication materials intended to influence the
attitudes and/or behaviors of key publics. Many employers require candidates for public relations
positions to complete a writing test and provide a writing sample to demonstrate proficiency in
this skill. Therefore, it is critical to understand how to craft effective messages through written
communication.

   Here are some of the many materials and messages that public relations professionals have to
write:

  · Press/News releases
  · Fact sheets
  · Feature articles
  · Social media messages
  · Blog posts
  · Speeches
  · PowerPoint presentations
  · Brochures
  · Media pitches
  · Statements
  · Website messages

67 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
45. News writing versus public relations
writing

Effective public relations writing draws from news writing principles, because the news media
is one of the preferred channels for promoting products and services. However, news writing
and public relations writing differ in terms of audience, tone, and media channels. News writing
should be objective in tone, with the purpose of presenting information to educate an audience
about newsworthy events. On the other hand, public relations writing advocates for the client. It
is informative, but it should also influence key publics' perception of the organization. Some would
also argue that public relations writing is even more concise than news writing.

   Reporters usually write for one audience: readers or listeners of the respective media outlet.
Public relations professionals may have to write for a variety of audiences, including internal
audiences (such as employees, shareholders, and distributors) and external audiences (such as
the media, customers, volunteers, and bloggers). News writing uses one primary communication
channel, the news outlet (which can be a newspaper or a television or radio broadcast). Although
journalists are increasingly using social media to post their articles, this usually entails posting a
link that directs the audience to the news outlet's primary website. Public relations professionals
use a variety of channels to distribute their messages, including news media, social media,
advertisements, blogs, press kits, and many more.

                                                                                                                       News writing versus public relations writing | 68
46. The press release

The press release or news release is one of the most common communication materials written
by public relations professionals. Press releases are sent to outlets such as newspapers, broadcast
stations, and magazines to deliver a strategic message from an organization that the media ideally
will publish or broadcast. The primary audience for the press release is reporters and editors,
although some organizations publish press releases on their own websites for audiences to view.
This may be done due to shrinking newsroom staffs and insufficient resources to develop original
content.

   Journalists use press releases as a reporting tool, relying on them to provide essential
information and therefore make it easier for them to cover a variety of events. With the increase in
media channels and demand for social content, some view press releases as an uninteresting way
to distribute information and connect with audiences (Galant, 2014). Others see them as a concise
and straightforward way to communicate to key publics.

   Although the emergence of digital media has challenged public relations professionals to think
of nontraditional ways to garner publicity, the use of press releases is still widespread in the
profession. Therefore, public relations practitioners should know how to write an effective press
release.

69 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
47. Writing the press release

Traditionally, press releases use the inverted pyramid style, which makes it easy for journalists
and editors to receive the most essential information first. This means the news hook should
be revealed in the headline and lead of the release. Journalists will not take your press release
seriously if the content is not newsworthy and it is not written in an accepted style, such as AP
style. Make sure that the press release contains attributed information with proper sources and is
error free.

   Before writing the release, ask yourself the following questions:
  · Is the announcement or event newsworthy? Does it appeal to the media outlet's audience?

      Some announcements do not warrant a press release and can simply be posted on the
      company website.
  · What is the key message? What should the reader take away?
  · Who is the target audience for the release? Although you're writing the release for the media,
      you need to keep in mind the kind of readers or listeners you hope to attract.
In this video, Gina Bericchia, former senior media strategist at Nationwide Children's Hospital,
discusses proper press release writing.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=601#oembed-1

                                                                                                                                                  Writing the press release | 70
48. Press release structure and format

The release should be written on the company letterhead, with the words "Press Release" or
"News Release" at the top left corner of the page. Below this, indicate when the information is
available for publication. The term "immediate release" means the information is ready to publish
and can be used by journalists as soon as they receive it. Occasionally, you might want more time
to gather other information, or would prefer that the journalist publish the announcement at a
later date. In this case, use the term "under embargo until" followed by the embargo date, which
is when you will allow the journalist to publish the information. Put the press release date below
the "immediate release" or "under embargo until" statement. Always include contact information
for the journalist's reference, preferably at the top right corner.

   Write the body of the press release using news writing techniques and style. Be sure to include
a headline; you also may include a subheadline. Provide a dateline, followed by the summary lead.

   Be sure to use the inverted pyramid to organize the information throughout the press release.
Include at least two quotes, one from the company or organization and another from a third party
(example: customer, volunteer, current or former attendee at the event). After you've finished with
the body, put the boilerplate at the end of the document. The boilerplate provides information
about the company or organization, similar to the "About Us" section that you might find on a
company website.

   The press release should be as concise as possible and ideally no longer than one page. If it
exceeds one page, do not split paragraphs. Instead, put the word "more" at the bottom center of
the first page to indicate to the reader that there is more content on a second page. Include three
pound signs (###) or "-30-" at the bottom of the press release to indicate the end.

   These sample press releases contain some of the basic elements:

  · U.S. Attorney's Office Southern District of Ohio
  · The Ohio State University
  · St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

     Further Reading

         · This article from Ragan's PR Daily provides suggestions to improve your public relations writing.
         · An additional article from Ragan's PR Daily explains common press release mistakes.

71 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
49. Press kit materials

Press kits or media kits are packages or website pages that contain promotional materials and
resources for editors and reporters. The purpose is to provide detailed information about a
company in one location. Although a press kit delivers more information than a press release, the
overall goal is similar: to secure publicity for a company or client.

   Major events or stories that require more information than is typically included in a press
release warrant a press kit. Examples include a company merger, the launch of a new product, a
rebranding campaign, or a major change in organizational leadership. Press kits can be hard copy
or digital. Hard-copy press kits use folders with the company logo, whereas digital press kits use
a website page or are sent in a zip file via email.

   The following materials are found in a press kit:

  · Backgrounder
  · Press release
  · Fact sheet
  · Publicity photos or list of photo opportunities
  · Media alerts

Click here for information on how to assemble a press kit.

Backgrounder

A backgrounder contains the history of a company and biographies of key executives. The purpose
is to supplement the press release and explain the company's story or event, products, services,
and milestones. It is in paragraph format and relatively brief (one to two pages). Click here
for a sample corporate backgrounder from GainSpan, a semiconductor company (creator: Javed
Mohammed).

Fact Sheet

A fact sheet provides a summary of an event, product, service, or person by focusing only on
essential information or key characteristics. It is more concise than a backgrounder and serves
as a quick reference for reporters. However, the fact sheet is not meant for publication. The
headings of a fact sheet vary; the creator of the document chooses how to categorize major
information. The most common type of fact sheet is the organizational profile, which gives basic

                                                                                                                                                            Press kit materials | 72
information about an organization. This includes descriptions of products or services, annual
revenues, markets served, and number of employees.

   The standard fact sheet contains a company letterhead and contact information. The body is
single-spaced, with an extra space between paragraphs and subheadings. Although the fact sheet
is typically one page, put the word "-more-" at the bottom of the first page to indicate additional
pages. Similar to the press release format, include three number signs or "-30-" at the bottom of
the document to indicate the end. To make it easy to read, group similar information together and
include bulleted items if appropriate.

   Click here for an example of a fact sheet. Keep in mind that the subheadings/categories used in
this example may not be used in another one. Writers have some flexibility in the categories they
choose in a fact sheet.

Media Alert

There are times when announcements do not require the distribution of a press release, but rather
a concise notice to the media. This is called a media alert or advisory. Media alerts are memos to
reporters about an interview opportunity, press conference, or upcoming event. They use the 5Ws
and H format to quickly deliver information.

   The illustration below explains the key differences between a press release and a media
advisory:

73 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
                             &quot;News Release vs. Media Advisory&quot; by Alyson
                             Moses and Mary Sterenberg is licensed under CC BY 2.0

                            "News Release vs. Media Advisory" by Alyson Moses and Mary
                            Sterenberg is licensed under CC BY 2.0

Here is an example of a media alert:
         Economic Policy Institute

                                                                                                                                                            Press kit materials | 74
50. References

Galant, G. (2014). The end of the press release? PR Say: The Voice of Public Relations. Retrieved
   from: http://prsay.prsa.org/2014/05/22/the-end-of-the-press-release/

White, R. (2016). 13 PR truths--how many do you believe? PR Daily. Retrieved
   from: http://www.prdaily.com/Main/Articles/0eb7ac16-f3f1-4fc5-a467-32d56b4ba7f4.aspx

75 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART IX

CHAPTER 9: MEDIA RELATIONS

                                                                                                                                               Chapter 9: Media Relations | 76
51. What are media relations?

A large part of the public relations profession

involves working with the media. Public

relations seeks to garner publicity that benefits

a client. Mass media is the preferred channel

for reaching out to the public because

audiences view media coverage as more

credible than traditional advertising or

promotional efforts. Therefore, learning how to

develop and manage relationships with

reporters and editors is critical to your

outreach strategy.

Media relations refer to the mutually

beneficial relationship between journalists and      "News Reporters and a TV Cameraman" by Digital
public relations professionals. One of the           Vision is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
biggest benefits for journalists is the easy

access to story ideas and sources. As previously discussed, reporters spend a large amount of time

and effort gathering information in order to write a story. Working with public relations

professionals cuts down on the time needed to look for sources and other information to validate

an article's content. Public relations practitioners benefit from media relations because it secures

free publicity and promotion for a client. By using media as a promotional tool, they are able to

reach a large audience without high costs.

77 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
52. Working with journalists

As with any professional relationship, there are do's and don'ts to be aware of when developing
relationships with journalists. Take the time to research reporters or content creators to identify
those who will help you achieve your organization's publicity goals. Once you've found an
appropriate journalist or blogger, think carefully about how you plan to pitch your story to the
individual. Avoid gimmicky or hyped-up press releases; they may catch the reporter's attention,
but for the wrong reason. Also avoid jarring language such as "urgent," "must read," or "extremely
important," even if you need to secure media coverage quickly.

   In general, developing a rapport with journalists takes time, strategy, skill, and practice. For
more information on what you can do to develop a good working relationship with the media, take
a look at this video with Alissa Widman Neese, a journalist at the Columbus Dispatch. She discusses
her experiences working with public relations professionals and some of the factors that made
them positive.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=134#oembed-1

                                                                                                                                                   Working with journalists | 78
53. Pitching to the media

Simply contacting the media will not guarantee coverage for your client. You have to persuade
the journalist that your story idea is newsworthy. Public relations professionals typically pitch to
reporters, editors, bloggers, and social media influencers. Pitches can take place via email, phone
calls, and increasingly through Twitter. The channel you choose for your pitch depends upon the
intended individual's preference.

   Pitching is a skill that requires creative thinking, persuasive communication skills, and knowing
how your story idea benefits the reporter and the audience. Your pitching skills can improve with
time and practice. You will feel more confident reaching out to reporters if you write pitches
regularly.

Before pitching

Before you send an email pitch or call a reporter, it is important to have a solid understanding of
your key audience. Carefully examine the interests, preferences, media consumption behaviors,
and key demographic information associated with that group. Then you can more accurately
select which media outlet will help reach the target audience.

   Go where your audience is located. For example, as you conduct research about your target
audience, you might learn that members read blog posts more than news articles. Therefore,
reaching out to bloggers could be more beneficial than targeting news reporters. Place your
message or story in media outlets that your intended audience frequently visits or reads.

   One of the most common complaints from journalists about public relations pitches involves the
use of mass emails. Generic pitches sent out to anyone and everyone come across to reporters and
bloggers as careless and can compromise your credibility among media professionals. Remember,
reporters are going to look at how your story will appeal to their specific readers; therefore,
your pitch needs to be strategic. Failure to keep this in mind may result in a rejected pitch or no
response at all.

   Before you pitch to a particular media outlet, be sure to research which specific writer within
the organization can help you target your audience. Each reporter covers a different topic, or
"beat." Reading some of a reporter's previous stories will give you an indication of whether he
or she is the right person to cover your story. Let's say your client is a restaurant that wants to
publicize the opening of a new location. A reporter who covers food topics and brands, lifestyle
topics, or the restaurant industry would be the most logical choice to write your story.

79 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Writing the pitch

Now that you've done your homework on the audience, media outlet, and specific writer, pay close
attention to how you craft your pitch message.

   The subject line is especially important if you're using email. It needs to be creative enough to
catch the attention of the writer; however, avoid exaggerated phrases or visual gimmicks such as
all capital letters. Do not use generic headlines such as "Story Idea" or "Cool Upcoming Event." Try
to create a headline similar to one the journalist might use in writing the story.

   Next, address the reporter or blogger by name and begin the body of the pitch. State why you're
writing, and provide some information about yourself and the company or client you represent.
Next, summarize the lead of the story. Writing in this manner resonates with some reporters, as
it is the style they are accustomed to. You also can start the email with a catchy line that will
hook the journalist, but be careful not to overdo this. Reporters and editors do not like flowery
or gimmicky language because it sounds more like a hard sales pitch than a public relations
pitch. Continue with the pitch by providing important details about the story and talking about
why it would be interesting to the media outlet's audience. Doing this indicates that the story has
news value, which is very important in pitching. Toward the end of the email pitch, state when you
would like a response, indicate when you plan to follow up if necessary, and offer specific help. Be
sure to thank the reporter or blogger for his or her time.

                                                                                                                                                       Pitching to the media | 80
from "How to Bootstrap Your PR Like a Boss" by Kate Finley

Don't feel discouraged if the person does not respond immediately. Journalists are extremely busy,
and sometimes they simply overlook emails. If necessary, send a reminder email by the follow-up
date you mentioned in the first communication.

   This date depends on when the story should hit the press. If you pitched a story that needs to
be published relatively quickly, you may want to follow up no later than two days after sending the
initial pitch. If there's more flexibility in the desired publication date, you may indicate that you
will follow up within a week. If the person still does not respond to your pitch, move on to another
outlet, reporter, or blogger who can help you accomplish your publicity goals. It is important to
also consider timing; for example, do not make a follow-up call at 4:55 p.m. on a Friday when the
journalist may be getting ready to head home for the weekend.

   Grammar, punctuation, tone, and spelling are important when writing email pitches. Some
journalists have admitted to not responding to a pitch that contains grammatical and spelling
errors. Reread your message several times to check for errors. Here are more articles that discuss
media relations, proper etiquette, and tips on gaining media exposure:

81 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
· Surprising tips to get the media's attention
· Best practices for pitching

                                                                                                                                                   Pitching to the media | 82
54. References

Finley, K. (2014). How to bootstrap your PR like a BOSS. Retrieved
   from: http://www.thinkbelle.com/resources/

83 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART X

CHAPTER 10: SOCIAL MEDIA--USES AND
MESSAGING

                                                                                                                   Chapter 10: Social Media--Uses and Messaging | 84
55. What are social media?

Social media are online communications platforms that allow people to share content. The phrase
typically brings to mind sites such as TikTok, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Facebook; however, there
are many other forms of social media where people share photos, text, videos, podcasts, music,
discussions, and ideas. Social media also include a range of professional communication forums,
online review sites (for example, Yelp and Rotten Tomatoes), and microblogging (for example,
Twitter or Instagram's "Threads").

   Social media have increasingly become everyday communication tools. Many brands use social
media to leverage their marketing and public relations efforts. Specifically, organizations can use
social media to enhance brand awareness, roll out promotions, and build website traffic. Social
media also provide opportunities to develop relationships with audiences through engagement
and key messaging. Valentini and Kruckeberg (2012) note that "social media provide a relatively
inexpensive means to communicate with, and, more importantly, to enter into a dialogue with
strategic publics" (p. 11).

85 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
56. Factors to consider before posting

Identify the message goal

It is counterproductive to create social media messages that do not have a specific goal.
Furthermore, social media message goals should reflect the organization's overall mission.
Message goals can include increasing brand awareness, creating a favorable perception of an
organization, and convincing the audience to buy a product. The goal should be clearly articulated
in the content. Also, select the social media platform that would be the most effective in
accomplishing the message goal. Each social media tool has specific characteristics and audiences,
which will affect whether the message goals are achieved.

Identify the target audience

Similar to public relations writing, social media messages need to be targeted. After identifying
the key audience, examine what they're talking about: their interests, attitudes, and beliefs. Social
media content should reflect audience analysis research findings. As you tailor the content of the
message to this audience, do not exaggerate attempts to be interesting or relevant. Because social
media messages are audience centered, they're not necessarily grounded in what you personally
think is appealing.

   The lack of attention to audience analysis can have serious consequences. One example is
IHOP's Twitter controversy in 2015. In an attempt to reach a young audience and produce
attention-grabbing content, IHOP tweeted about its pancakes, making a provocative comment
that compared them to a woman with small breasts: "Flat but has a GREAT personality." Audiences
quickly reacted with outrage, causing the company to issue an apology.

   A more recent example can be found in the case of social media influencer, Logan Paul, who
was the center of a public outcry in response to a video he posted while on a trip to Japan. Paul
specifically filmed his visit to Aokigahara, a forest and location known for its high suicide rates.
The video appeared to show the body of a deceased individual. He posted the video on his YouTube
channel and clips of it later surfaced on Twitter, gaining more than 100,000 retweets and a swift
negative response from the public. Although Paul apologized for the insensitive nature of the video
and temporarily suspended his vlog, the negative impact of this crisis on his reputation largely
remained. Some companies even pulled their advertisements from his YouTube Channel.

   These mishaps demonstrate the need for careful message and audience analysis. They also
reinforce the point that although you may react favorably to a message, your target audience may
not.

                                                                                                                                     Factors to consider before posting | 86
Identify the organization's social media approach

Communication choices should reflect organizational strategies. Wilson et al. (2011) identified
four general ways in which companies use social media. They are determined by the "company's
tolerance for uncertain outcomes and the level of results sought" (para. 2).

   The "predictive practitioner" approach uses caution when sending out social media messages.
Instead of launching a social media strategy that involves all departments in a company, only a
specific department (example: marketing or human resources) uses its social media platforms.
This allows more control of social media messaging and guarantees some level of certainty in
accomplishing the stated objectives.

   The "creative experimenter" approach accepts uncertainty and deploys small social media
"experiments" to learn and improve overall business functions. Sometimes, businesses will take to
Facebook or Twitter to receive feedback on products or business practices from internal (example:
employees) or external (example: customers) audiences. The overall goal is to listen and learn from
interactions; therefore, unpredictable results are accepted.

   The "social media champion" approach takes strategies to a more advanced level. A designated
team is in charge of the organization's overall social media presence. The team also creates
an official social media policy and guidelines for the organization. Larger social media projects
typically use this strategy. Unlike the predictive practitioner strategy, this approach does not
confine social media use to a particular department and considers social media messages across
various functions.

   The "social media transformer" strategy targets both internal and external audiences by
launching large-scale projects that involve multiple departments. As with the social media
champion approach, a team is devoted to planning, creating, and launching the organization's
social media projects. However, these projects are usually larger and more advanced than those
using the social media champion approach. This strategy specifically considers how social media
can influence business strategy, brand, and culture.

   Organizations can use multiple approaches when designing a social media message. What is
important is that they carefully consider their approach before posting any content to social media
platforms.

87 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
57. The impact of social media in strategic
communication industries

The rise of social media has had significant effects on the strategic communication industry.
Marketers use social media to enhance traditional efforts such as direct mail fliers and television
advertisements. Social media also enable marketers to create interactive content for audiences.
In the public relations field, social media give professionals easier access to journalists and news
media outlets. For example, it is becoming common for public relations professionals to reach out
to reporters via Twitter and other platforms.

   In many ways, social media have made it easier for consumers to hold organizations, public
figures, and large institutions accountable (Green, 2012). Users can easily find and reveal
information about a previous event involving an organization, whether it was advantageous or
damaging to the brand. Users can also provide instant public feedback by voicing their opinions
via social media networks. Furthermore, social media have made it challenging for many
organizations to control their brand and present a consistent message across platforms.
Audiences can generate information that can be damaging to a brand's reputation. Take a look at
this video from Sherry Lloyd, social media and marketing manager for Vineyard Columbus, who
discusses brand management and the challenges of controlling a company's identity in the social
media age.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=154#oembed-1

                                                                                         The impact of social media in strategic communication industries | 88
58. Social media characteristics

Several characteristics make social media a unique communication tool. First, social media users
are content creators. People can create their own blogs, create a TikTok video for comedic
purposes or to express their thoughts on an issue, post images on Instagram and Facebook, or
post a video blog ("vlog") about their latest travel adventures on YouTube. This enables users to
be active participants in the communication process. Audiences are more engaged with brand
messages because they can provide feedback to companies, creating a two-way conversation.

   Another characteristic of social media is instant communication. Audiences do not have to
wait until scheduled news broadcasts to receive information because reporters and media outlets
can bring the news directly to social media platforms. Furthermore, people can easily share and
post news content on their networks. Social media also foster a sense of interconnectedness and
community by bringing people across the globe together online. Those living in the United States
can easily interact with those living in Australia. Valentini and Kruckeberg (2012) write that social
media could not exist without their users, given that the interactivity characteristics create a
community feeling. As noted by Green (2012): "Social media [provide] the means by which clusters
of like-minded individuals can easily swap ideas and scrutinise data on public matters" (para. 4).

89 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
59. Creating social media messages

The goal of creating social media messages is not only to reach your audience, but also to achieve
an intended effect. Proper grammar and punctuation are important in social media writing, as is
accuracy. A careless error could undermine the credibility of your brand. Here are a few other
factors to consider when creating social media messages.

Engagement, engagement, engagement

More than many forms of communication, social media messages need to motivate the audience
to engage with the content. Several strategies can encourage engagement, such as responding
quickly to feedback from audience members, creating contests, and inviting the audience to
respond to a question. Including photos and videos in social media posts substantially increases
engagement, as does integrating trending topics (Redsicker, 2014). This requires careful
consideration and research that will pay off if the trending hashtags are chosen wisely. Hai Poke,
a startup restaurant in Columbus, did this by tapping into the Pokemon Go craze in the summer
of 2016. The restaurant launched a social media contest and created a fun, timely, interactive
message.

                                                                                                                                        Creating social media messages | 90
                 "Poké" social media campaign image from Hai Poké's Facebook page.

Consistency

The core message needs to be articulated across all social media platforms in a consistent way
that conveys a unified voice. The message also needs to reflect the brand image; in other words, it
should reinforce the brand "feel" or personality. Referring back to the IHOP Twitter controversy,
one reason audiences disliked the message was because its suggestive tone was inconsistent with
the company's family-friendly brand personality.

91 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
Concise writing

Similar to news writing, social media writing is straightforward. Because you're competing against
countless other messages in the social media sphere, you do not have much time and space
to capture the audience's attention. This is especially the case with Twitter, with its current
140-character limit. You have to think carefully not only about what the message will say but how
to say it in a concise manner that has the intended effect.

   For more information on effective social media writing, take a look at this video with Nicholas
Love, a former social media director at The Ohio State University.

                    One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them online here:
                    https://ohiostate.pressbooks.pub/stratcommwriting/?p=651#oembed-1

                                                                                                                                         Creating social media messages | 92
60. References

Black, L. (2011). 5 smart social PR campaigns to learn from. Mashable. Retrieved from:
   http://mashable.com/2011/03/08/social-pr-campaigns/#zE8n38EXNOqB

Green, D. (2012). How to think about social media. New Statesman. Retrieved from:

http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/david-allen-green/2012/01 social-media-regulation

Redsicker, P. (2014). Social photos generate more engagement: New research. Social Media

Examiner.  Retrieved  from: http://www.socialmediaexaminer.com/photos-generate-

engagement-research/

Valentini, C. & Kruckeberg, D. (2012). New media versus social media: A conceptualization of their

meanings, uses, and implication for public relations. In S. Duhe (ed.), New media and public

relations (pp. 3-12). New York: Peter Lang.

Wilson, H., Guinan, P., Parise, S. & Weinberg, B. (2011). What's your social media strategy? Harvard

Business Review. Retrieved from: https://hbr.org/2011/07/whats-your-social-media-strategy

93 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART XI

CHAPTER 11: ADVERTISING INDUSTRY

                                                                                                                                        Chapter 11: Advertising Industry | 94
61. The role of advertising in society

Advertising is the paid promotion that uses strategy and messaging about the benefits of a product
or service to influence a target audience's attitudes and/or behaviors. Between online, television,
radio, and print platforms, the average American sees hundreds, even thousands of advertisements
daily.

   Although many consumers find them annoying, advertisements play a prominent role in shaping
opinions about everything from products to politics. A Forbes article (2012) stated: "Advertising
plays the same role in your media diet that vegetables play in your regular diet; most of us would
prefer to skip that course and go straight to dessert. But, just like veggies, advertising plays an
important role in sustaining a body; in this case, a diverse body of content" (para. 1). Advertising
heavily supports many institutions, including news media outlets, the television industry, search
engine companies, and social media websites. For example, advertising contributes up to 80
percent of revenue for newspapers and therefore is critical to maintaining the circulation of the
press (Newspaper Association of America, 2014).

   The advertising industry is also lucrative. According to AdWeek (2024), the United States spent
approximately $259 billion on digital advertising alone in 2024. With its economic and cultural
function in society, the advertising industry has an expansive reach.

95 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
62. Job responsibilities in advertising

The Advertising Educational Foundation (2016) defines several broad categories for jobs in the
industry. Account managers serve as a liaison between the client and the advertising agency.
They conduct research and oversee creative aspects, production, and more. Account planners are
responsible for presenting information about the consumer. They analyze audiences and figure
out ways to achieve brand loyalty through advertising.

   Those in the creative department are responsible for developing the advertising message and
images. They also pitch the advertising plan to clients. Employees in the media department work
on advertising placement strategies, media buying, and analyzing consumer media behaviors.
These roles are diverse but also interdependent in that they all contribute to the advertising
process.

                                                                                                                                      Job responsibilities in advertising | 96
63. Advertising campaign model: Social
marketing

Numerous conceptual frameworks and models help to explain the design of advertising

campaigns. This book will focus primarily on the social marketing model. This framework

describes how to design information campaigns that focus on improving social welfare, such as

health and environmental campaigns. However, Atkin and Rice (2012) state that it is appropriate

to apply the social marketing model to consumer advertising campaigns because they share

similarities with health and environmental campaigns. The primary difference between consumer

advertising campaigns and information campaigns is the goal.

The social marketing model identifies five steps in the campaign process: planning, theory,

communication analysis, implementation, and evaluation. In the planning stage, advertisers

establish the message goals. This is a critical step in the campaign process as it informs the

strategies and tactics. What kind of response do you want from the audience? What do you want

them to do, or how do you want them to feel?

In the theory step, advertisers try to determine the best way to achieve the campaign objectives.

Perloff (2010) states, "Theories suggest a host of specific campaign strategies, appeals, and ways

to modify projects that aren't meeting stated objectives" (p. 332). This step is also when advertisers

complete a creative brief that further outlines the overall strategy. (There will be more on this in a

later section.) There are two types of strategies: product-oriented and consumer-oriented.

                                                     The product-oriented strategy focuses on

                                                     highlighting specific benefits related to the

                                                     product or service (Felton, 2013). One example

                                                     is commercials for paper towels that compare

                                                     the product's specific features, such as

                                                     absorbency and strength, to those of

                                                     competitors. These commercials often show

                                                     side-by-side shots of people using the featured

                                                     brand and the competing brand, with the

                                                     featured brand as the better option. Other

                                                     product-oriented strategies may focus on

                                                     something that can be found only at a particular

                                                     company or under a specific brand. McDonald's

                                                     occasionally uses this strategy in its

                                                     advertisements, reminding viewers that they

                                                     can purchase America's favorite french fries

                                                     only at its restaurants.

"Digital marketing concept" by Ellagrin is licensed     Another broad advertising strategy connects
under CC BY 2.0                                      the audience's daily experience or lifestyle with

                                                     the advertised product or service. This is

97 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
referred to as the consumer-oriented strategy. Advertisers frequently use this strategy for
branding purposes. The idea is to associate the company with a particular lifestyle, personality, or
characteristic that the audience identifies with or aspires to. Car companies often use consumer-
oriented strategies in their commercials. Rather than focusing on the specific features of the car,
consumer-oriented commercials might simply show an attractive person driving along a winding
road.

   The luxury motor company Lincoln recently used this strategy in a campaign. The commercials
featured actor Matthew McConaughey simply talking and driving the vehicle. There is very little
mention of the product features; however, the advertisements associate McConaughey's wealth,
talent, confidence, and attractive physical features with the car. In doing so, they help to shape
Lincoln's brand identity and personality.

   You do not have to choose one strategy over the other. Advertising essentially involves
persuading people to act or feel a certain way about the message topic. Therefore, incorporating
several ideas and strategies may increase the odds of accomplishing the goal.

   The third step in the social marketing model is communication analysis. Here, advertisers
conduct market research and audience analysis to test the campaign idea. This step helps the
advertisers further craft their strategies. For example, if you are designing a campaign to convince
the target audience to try a local cuisine, you want to examine perceptions of the food prior to
launching the campaign. You can do this through focus groups or audience surveys.

   The next step involves implementing the campaign. This is done by carefully considering the
four Ps of marketing: product, placement, price, and promotion.

   The last step in the social marketing model is evaluation. This provides an opportunity for the
campaign designers to see whether their efforts succeeded in accomplishing the stated goals.
One way to do this is through evaluating sales after the launch of the campaign, tabulating media
impressions or audience attendance at events, or conducting exit focus groups.

                                                                                                                    Advertising campaign model: Social marketing | 98
64. Creative brief

Before they begin the design process, advertising professionals work on explaining and outlining
the advertising plan in a creative brief. This is a document for the creative team, the advertising
director, and the client that gives a clear objective for the copy material and explains the overall
concept of the campaign. The creative brief is like a game plan--without it, the advertisement
may not be successful. You do not have to use a particular writing style, such as AP style, when
completing the creative brief. However, grammar, spelling, punctuation, and concise writing are
still important. Here are several broad categories to consider when completing the creative brief.

Key consumer insight

The key consumer insight demonstrates a clear understanding of the consumer's general
behaviors, beliefs, and attitudes as they relate to the message topic. It also considers general
opinions and thoughts about the subject matter. Let's say you're developing a creative brief for a
cookie brand. Market research and careful audience analysis can reveal key insights into consumer
behaviors, such as the fact that many consumers believe that so-called healthy cookies do not
taste as good as their high-calorie, sugar-filled counterparts. This knowledge will help you as you
design your advertisement.

Advertising problem

The phrase "advertising problem" does not refer to addressing a problem within the advertisement
itself, or challenges in advertising to the key audience. The term refers to the product's biggest
consumer-related stumbling block. In the cookie example above, the advertising problem is that
consumers face a choice between buying great-tasting cookies that are loaded with calories and
sugar and buying ones that are low in sugar and calories but don't taste as good. The consumer
insight can inform or help you to come up with the advertising problem. The advertising strategy
should address a consumer need or consumer-related problem. Without this, the advertisement
will appear pointless.

Advertising objective

The advertising objective explains the intended effects of the promotion on the target audience

99 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
and clearly articulates the overall goal. The goal is not simply to persuade the audience. Think
about how you want the audience to feel or believe about the featured product or service. Or, what
do you want them to do in response to seeing the advertisement? An example of the objective for
the cookie advertisement might be to convince cookie lovers that the featured product is a healthy
option that doesn't compromise rich, fulfilling taste.

Target consumer

The target consumers are people you specifically want to communicate the message to. In order to
fully understand the audience, consider their psychographics, or the analysis of their lifestyles and
interests. Also include information about demographics, as this factor influences the audience's
day-to-day experiences. Clarify why you've chosen this particular audience. Why would these
people be attracted to the featured product or service? How would they help the organization
achieve its goals? What are the benefits of targeting this particular group? Answering these
questions will help justify the selection of the target audience.

Competition

In this section of the creative brief, perform a complete assessment of the competition that
considers strengths and weaknesses. Specifically, examine the competitor's history, products,
services, brand, and target audiences. Analyzing key competitors will help you articulate your
company's or product's marketplace niche, which is very important. You need to establish how
your product or company stands out from similar products or companies.

Key consumer benefit

The key consumer benefit describes what the consumer would gain from using the advertised
product or service. This section also discusses how the product or service solves the advertising
problem laid out earlier in the creative brief. Narratives, testimonials, and sometimes research
findings can be used as support in the actual advertisement, which helps enhance its
persuasiveness.

                                                                                                                                                                Creative brief | 100
Support

The support section explains the validity of the proposed advertising plan. It makes a case for why
the campaign will motivate the audience or make them believe that the claims are true. This is
particularly important because in order to secure the advertising account, you need to convince
your client or high-level executives that the plan will work. Include evidence from third-party
sources such as external research studies or polls. Also include feedback from focus groups to
persuade the client that the advertising plan is effective.

Other categories to consider

Some creative briefs might include a section called tonality. This explains the desired feel or
attitude of the advertising campaign, such as "hip," "classy," "fun," "flashy," or "modern." You could
also include a description of the advertisement's visual elements, or the creative mandatories. This
section should provide a detailed explanation of the images, slogan, logo, and other visual factors
so that the client can imagine how the advertisement will look. The creative team usually presents
a sample advertisement to the client in the pitch presentation.

101 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
65. Copywriting

After completing the creative brief and receiving approval from the client, it is now time to
develop the advertisement. A large part of this process involves copywriting. Copywriting puts
together the headlines, subheadlines, and images included in the advertisement. It uses persuasive
communication to influence the target audience. It also helps to create the advertisement's call to
action, logo, and slogan.

   The AIDA model is a popular framework used in designing advertising copy. The acronym stands
for Attention, Interest, Desire, and Action. Good advertising copy should effectively grab the
audience's attention through words and/or imagery. This can be challenging. Because consumers
may see thousands of advertisements daily, capturing their attention needs to be informed by
strategy.

   After getting the audience's attention, the copy should maintain the focus of the consumer
by generating interest. This involves creating messages that are relevant to the target audience
(Altstiel and Grow, 2016). The AIDA model states that the copy should provoke a desire for the
advertised product or service. When the desire is instilled, the copy should then motivate the
audience to act or perform the call to action in the advertisement. This could be buying the
product, visiting the organization's social media page, volunteering, or attending an event. The call
to action should be memorable. For further information on the AIDA model, click on this article.

                                                                                                                                                                  Copywriting | 102
66. References

Advertising Educational Foundation. (2016). Advertising career possibilities. Retrieved from:
   http://www.aef.com/industry/careers/9000

Altstiel, T. & Grow, J. (2016). Advertising creative: Strategy, copy, and design. Washington, DC: Sage
   Publications.

Atkin, C.K. & Rice, R.E. (2012). Theory and principles of public communication campaigns. In R.E.
   Rice and C.K. Atkin (eds.), Public communication campaigns (pp. 3-19). Thousands Oaks, CA: Sage.
   Felton, G. (2013). Advertising: Concept and copy. New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.

Newspaper Association of America. (2014). Public policy: Advertising. Retrieved
   from: http://www.naa.org/Public-Policy/Government-Affairs/Advertising.aspx

Perloff, R.M. (2010). The dynamics of persuasion: Communication and attitudes in the 21st
   century. New York, NY: Routledge.

Thierer, A. (2012). We all hate advertising, but we can't live without it. Forbes. Retrieved from:
   http://www.forbes.com/sites/adamthierer/2012/05/13/we-all-hate-advertising-but-we-
   cant-live-without-it/#3bc70705e1c7

103 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
PART XII

CHAPTER 12: CREATING A WRITING
PORTFOLIO

                                                                                                                            Chapter 12: Creating a Writing Portfolio | 104
67. Why create a writing portfolio?

In today's job market, recent college graduates or those entering the strategic communication
profession need to demonstrate job preparedness beyond academic achievements. Excelling in
the classroom is important, but many employers are just as interested in your work experience,
expertise, and job-related skills.

   Demonstrating your writing skills is especially important, and creating a portfolio of samples
will help you in your next job interview. Writing portfolios supplement what you've learned in the
classroom. They provide an advantage in today's competitive market by illustrating and marketing
your brand. Regardless of career level, strategic communication professionals should have a
portfolio to showcase their work.

105 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
68. Other important points about the
writing portfolio

As you work on more projects and articles, remember to include them in your portfolio. Constantly
update the portfolio so that employers and professional contacts can see your most recent work.
Include a minimum of two to three writing samples, although the quality of the portfolio materials
matters more than the quantity (Lovering, 2016).

   Some employers may not ask for a portfolio, but will require you to take a writing test.
Employers use this assessment to determine your editing skills, understanding of AP style,
knowledge of grammar and punctuation, and ability to write under a strict deadline. It might be
a timed test or a take-home assessment. The following sentences are examples from the editing
section of a writing test.

     Exercise

        Please edit the following sentences:
         1. To kick off the days event, XX Partners Inc. will be hosting a special guest speaker, Dr. P.

             Richardson from 8:30 to 9:30 am in lexington Auditorium.
        2. Employees that volunteered for the community service event should contact there manager for further

             instructions.
        3. To compete effectively for full-time, entry-level talent in a highly-competitive and shrinking talent

             pool, we are placing a stronger emphasize on how we define a intern.

Platforms to create your online writing portfolio:
  · clippings.me
  · WordPress
  · Wix

                                                                                                            Other important points about the writing portfolio | 106
69. Online versus hardcopy portfolios

Online portfolios are much more common than hardcopy portfolios because most communication
materials are digital. However, you may, although not common, run into a prospective employer
who could ask you to bring a hardcopy portfolio to the interview. Create an online portfolio, such
as a professional website, so that the general public can see your work. Send the online portfolio
to professional contacts in your network or to potential employers before the job interview so they
can see your writing samples. As a precautionary measure, also print some of the writing samples
and put them in a leather zip-up portfolio or a professional binder when you're preparing for the
job interview.

107 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
70. Writing portfolio content

When considering what to include in your writing portfolio, look at relevant class assignments
or work produced in a previous or current role. Save everything in a file, especially work from a
class that requires you to write common communication materials such as marketing campaigns,
newsletters, press releases, social media content, and news articles. If you do not have internship
or work experience, you may want to consider volunteer writing for a nonprofit organization or
a small project for a startup company (if you can afford to do this). What matters is that you have
writing samples to show.

   The first page of a hard-copy portfolio is usually a resume. Online portfolios include a
description or summary of your professional background. From there, create clear sections and
headings and arrange the content by article or document type. Tailor the portfolio to jobs or
industries you're interested in and by chronological order, with the most recent work first or at the
top of the online portfolio. For example, if you're applying for a job that requires proficiency in AP
style writing, include writing samples that use this style, such as press releases or feature articles.
If you're applying for a job that requires social media writing skills, include social media posts that
you've created for an organization. Here's a list of some of the materials you could include in the
portfolio:

  · Press releases
  · Website copy
  · Feature articles
  · Media pitches
  · Social media posts that you created for an organization
  · A sample RFP (request for proposal) for a campaign or a detailed public relations campaign

      proposal
  · News media clippings of coverage you secured from pitches (it helps if you provide the

      original pitch that led to the media coverage)

Include brief information about each document, such as the name of the organization it was
created for and the date. Be ready to discuss your writing samples during a job interview. You may
explain why you created the material and the results that came from it, such as increased website
traffic and social media followers from your content. For more examples of writing portfolios, click
on the following links:

  · Alexis Christie, Social Media Coordinator for the Cleveland Browns
  · Gari Cruze, copywriter
  · Brandi Uyemura, features writer

                                                                                                                                                Writing portfolio content | 108
71. References

Lovering, C. (2016). How to make an impressive writing portfolio. Houston Chronicle. Retrieved
   from: http://work.chron.com/make-impressive-writing-portfolio-3214.html

109 | Writing for Strategic Communication Industries
