Utah State University                           Open Texts

DigitalCommons@USU

Textbooks

2017

Writing for Electronic Media

Brian Champagne
Utah State University, brian.champagne@usu.edu
Kiera Farimond
Utah State University
Brianna Bodily
Utah State University

Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/oer_textbooks

    Part of the Communication Technology and New Media Commons, and the Journalism Studies
Commons

Recommended Citation
Champagne, Brian; Farimond, Kiera; and Bodily, Brianna, "Writing for Electronic Media" (2017). Textbooks.
3.
https://digitalcommons.usu.edu/oer_textbooks/3

This Book is brought to you for free and open access by
the Open Texts at DigitalCommons@USU. It has been
accepted for inclusion in Textbooks by an authorized
administrator of DigitalCommons@USU. For more
information, please contact digitalcommons@usu.edu.
         Writing for
Electronic Media
  WRITING FOR
   ELECTRONIC

             MEDIA

                  BRIAN CHAMPAGNE

Kiera Farrimond and Brianna Bodily
Writing for Electronic Media by Brian Champagne is licensed
under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International
License, except where otherwise noted.

Writing for Electronic Media by Brian Champagne is licensed
under CC-BY-NC-SA
                                Contents

Introduction                    1

1. The Newsroom                 5

2. Leads                        19

3. Common Mistakes              27

4. Interviewing                 33

5. VOs                          41

6. VOSOTs                       45

7. PKG                          51

8. Producing                    61

9. Teases and Promos            85

10. Live Shots                  91

11. Social Media                103

12. Working With Photographers  109

13. Radio                       117

14. Sports                      135

15. Motivation and Ethics       141

16. The Job Market              145

About the Authors               153
               Introduction

Welcome to Writing for Electronic Media, an OER textbook.
OER stands for Open Educational Resource, which means
it's free for all who access. Since it is electronic, I will do
what I can to keep it updated with the changing media.

   People's viewing habits are changing as they migrate to
mobile sources, social media, and kitten videos. Television
News is still a dominant #1 source, and radio is still the
safest way to stay informed in your car. Hopefully, you
already have some journalism background. This book
does not teach the who, what, when, where, why, and how
of reporting; its goal is to teach how to present the
journalism you already know via electronic media,
primarily television.

We Write Differently

A reporter who understands her medium knows she must
write words to fit her video. In this book it is Rule #1:
Write to Video. Write that on your hand, the wall, and
your computer monitor. Needlepoint it onto fabric, etch it
in metal, and carve it in wood.

   Consider a scenario where I tell you some facts about a
new cellphone app, all while showing you photos of bears

                                                                                                    1
Brian Champagne

going through campers' garbage. You would be confused,
and your brain wouldn't know whether to think about
bears or the app. As a reporter you are doing the same
thing when you show money-printing presses and tell me
about the fight over federal budget. Words and pictures
acting together give us the most powerful medium we
have. Words and pictures deviated, if I may extrapolate
on studies showing the dangers of multitasking, confuse
people and damage their brains. Perhaps I'm getting
extreme here, but just know that it's Rule #1 for a reason.
And follow it. This will be repeated later in the book.

   Rule #1 affects the stories we choose and how we tell
them. We struggle with stories about future events:
There's nothing to shoot. We might still do them, but
they'll be shorter. We change our sentences around to fit
the video we have.

   We write our words to be read in a teleprompter, not
a newspaper. We spell out certain numbers, like 18
MILLION. We don't use symbols like @, #, %, & for two
reasons: First, they could trip up an anchor. How do we
pronounce "#?" Is it "number" or "hashtag"? Second, our
producing software automatically times the show, and "#"
is one character, judged to be one syllable, but the word it
represents it two.

   We would write out acronyms for the same reasons.
NAACP is five characters, good for about two syllables.
But spoken aloud, N-DOUBLE-A-C-P, it is six. Also,
when anchor sees N-DOUBLE-A-C-P in the teleprompter
he is less likely to pronounce it NACKIP.

   We avoid quotations, preferring a soundbite. If we can't
get a sound bite, we'll paraphrase. We prefer contractions,
but not if they sound strange when read aloud. We read
everything we write aloud ahead of time to make sure it

2
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

sounds OK. We write in active voice, except where Rule
#1 supersedes. Let's say you're writing to video of an
armadillo walking in a crosswalk when a car suddenly
comes into frame and hits it. The active voice way to write
this is A WESTBOUND CAR HIT THE ARMADILLO
AS IT CROSSED THE STREET. This is a good, active
sentence, but the video follows the armadillo. To write
to what we have, we say THE ARMADILLO WAS
CROSSING THE STREET WHEN IT WAS HIT BY A
WESTBOUND CAR. This sentence is passive voice, but
while writing is active voice is high on the list, it is not
Rule #1. The armadillo was not hurt in this scenario.

   We will also use more words and a longer script to
describe interesting video that is longer, and tighten up for
shorter clips. If it takes six seconds for the kangaroo to hop
up to the ball and kick it, we will describe the action in six
seconds. When done right, it can be fun.

   We write in present-tense; what is true at news time: A
KANGAROO IS NOT HOPPING TONIGHT AFTER
MISTAKENLY KICKING A ROCK IT THOUGHT
WAS A BALL. This is true at news time and is real
present-tense. Overworked news writers might write in
false present: A KANGAROO KICKS A ROCK IT
THOUGHT WAS A BALL AND BROKE ITS FOOT.
This has the present tense verb KICKS but it is wrong, like
the "A dinosaur walks into a bar..." joke. Dinosaurs are in
the past just like the kicking is, and changing the verb to
present tense does not make it real present tense. We also
like future tense.

   We like good verbs. Some anchors and writers drop
verbs: A MAN...IN JAIL TONIGHT AFTER POLICE
SAY HE REPLACED A KANGAROO'S BALL WITH
A ROCK. This happens a lot because the verb "to be" is

                                                                                                    3
Brian Champagne

considered weak. Rather than replacing it with a better
one, or just attaching the smallest "S" sound to the end of
MAN, which would give us a verb, the verb is just dropped
altogether. Think of the children and come up with a real
sentence: IT HURTS TO BE THE KANGAROO AND
THE MAN WHO TRICKED IT TONIGHT... "Hurts" is
the verb, and "tricked" rides along as it describes the man.

   We write to be heard once and understood. Our
sentences are short and clear. You can re-read a sentence
in a newspaper or web story, and you can back up a
YouTube video. Get it unclear on TV or radio and your
audience is confused and lost. It takes us longer to write
that way, and our newsrooms look funny when we're all
reading aloud to ourselves, but it's worth it.

Audience

Television newscasts are targeted for specific audiences,
which are researched and broken down into demographics
and interests. Your writing and story selection should be
influenced by who's watching. Many noon and early
afternoon shows do not have sportscasts because they
target women at home. Some of this audience data is very
specific--like who as home workout equipment--and is
also used by the sales department to sell advertising.

What Lies Ahead

This book will take you through the process in chapter-
sized steps, but it is meant to accompany a class with
lecture and lots of writing practice. As this is the first
edition, any reasonable feedback is welcome.

4
                                  1.

               The Newsroom

Introduction

W elcome to the television newsroom. Around 3:30
       p.m. crews are returning from the field, producers
are getting their afternoon shows straightened up,
reporters are writing scripts, and editors are hunting down
video and getting it cut.

   It's hard to find a place with more buzz and energy. But
we're getting ahead of ourselves. Let's start your visit in
the morning, and a take a look at the jobs in a typical
newsroom. In a smaller market, one person might perform
several of these jobs, while bigger-market stations may
divide one job among several people.

Director

The newscast director runs the booth. He or she calls the
shots when the newscast airs and is the one making
commands like, "Ready camera one--take!" Hours before,
and during, the newscast the director works with the

                                                                                                    5
Brian Champagne

producer to make the producer's plan a technical reality.
The director may also supervise, train and schedule the
rest of the crew.

   Technical Director: This person sits in front of the
video switcher and punches the buttons to bring up the
cameras, video, graphics, and other sources.

   Audio Board Operator: This person turns on the
microphone when an anchor talks (and hopefully off when
the anchor is done), lets the video and live sources be
heard, and brings in the music.

   Teleprompter: When the anchor looks right into the
lens and speaks, they're probably reading the script
reflected over top of the lens. The prompter operator
scrolls the words like movie credits (but much faster)
keeping the lines in the right place to be read by the
anchor. When you see an anchor suddenly stumble over
their words and look down at their scripts a lot, something
has gone wrong with the teleprompter.

   Studio Camera: These are the people who move
cameras around and set them up, mostly pointing at the
anchors. The exceptions are close shots for things like
cooking segments. Because the shots are consistent day
after day, studio cameras are getting roboticized; this
means one person can control several cameras remotely
and automation may eliminate the controller position
entirely.

   Floor Director: This person is out in the studio with
the anchors. He or she listens to the director's cues on
their headsets and conveys the information to the anchors,
often non-verbally. For instance, if the newscast is
showing video and the next thing on the rundown is the
anchor talking into Camera two, the floor director will put
a ready sign above Camera two. When the director calls

6
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

"take" for Camera two, the floor director points to the lens
purposefully, which lets the anchor know when and where
to talk.

   All of the above jobs fall under news production. They
put the newscast on the air live from the studio. The
following jobs originate from the newsroom, but may go
far beyond it.

Assignment Desk

This is a place and a position. The desk can have 2-10
police and fire scanners on it, depending on your market's
coverage area, all chattering all day long. This is also where
incoming newsroom calls are answered. And if there's a
programming problem after business hours, they'll answer
questions about why some viewer's favorite show isn't on
tonight. The two-way radio base station, paging, contact
lists, maps and other information are also kept here.

   "The desk" also refers to the person/people staffing it.
If there are several, one is usually called the "Assignment
Manager" and oversees the others. The desk listens to the
police and fire scanners, answers phones, sets up
interviews, reads press releases and monitors social media.
Should they hear something interesting on a scanner, they
would call the dispatch center to confirm and/or get more
details. They would then tell a producer about it, and if
the producer wanted the story checked out for the show,
they would send a photographer or reporter/photographer
team to drive to the scene. If all crews are already working
on other stories, desk and producer would decide which
crew to pull from a story. The original story might gets
kicked down to a small version, held for another shift or

                                                                                                    7
Brian Champagne

day, or maybe it is gets dropped altogether; it depends on
the story and progress already made on it.

   The assignment desk is not a glory position. They end
up listening to whe whining from both viewers and crews,
but it is the hub of activity in the newsroom -- almost
everything done in a day of news-gathering channels
through it. Former KUTV assignment manager and
KCAL assistant operations manager, Mark Biljanic, said
the job requires "the willingness to learn what news is, and
be able to multitask. Really have a brain...keeping track of
reporters and photographers in the field, and move chess
pieces around efficiently and know who to call when."

Director

Marks, programs, coordinates, schedules.

Photographers

These are the people with the cameras on their shoulders
driving out to shoot the stories. Even though they shoot
video on video cameras, they are called "photographers,"
often shortened to "photog." Possibly due to the weight
of the early equipment, photography staffs run 90 percent
male. Now that cameras, batteries and tripods are smaller,
people not built like offensive linemen can handle the
gear. Women are highly sought after for this position.

   Photographers are typically paid less than reporters but
can close the gap some if they have a take-home news
vehicle and can work overtime.

   On a typical day, a photographer arrives to work, and
if not allowed a take-home vehicle, will load up his or
her gear in a station vehicle as he or she checks batteries,
memory cards and vehicle fuel to make sure they are ready

8
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

for the day. The assignment desk will then give them a list
of assignments to shoot on their own or pair them with a
reporter for the day. They may be asked to edit their own,
or someone else's video, in a station edit bay or a laptop
computer in the field. Photographers may also run live
equipment including backpacks, microwave trucks, and if
trained, the station's satellite truck.

   NASA trained its astronauts how to run their own
cameras, and scuba divers do the same; everything in
between, from stunt planes to underground mining, a
photographer has shot. Photographers go everywhere.
This can be exciting and dreadful, depending on where
you go.

Reporters

These are the people in the field. Working with
photographers, they set up interviews, conduct them, log
them (choose the best parts to use as "soundbites"), write
a script, record their voice and often introduce the edited
story live in the studio or the field.

   Reporters must maintain a professional appearance
since they represent the station on television and to those
they seek to interview. They may be assigned stories but
are expected to come up with their own ideas too.

Multi-Media Journalist (MMJs)

The term replaced "One-Man Band," which is a reporter
who runs their own camera for their story. "MMJ" sounds
more modern, but if they shoot just for TV, it's not
"multi." Small starter markets use MMJs almost
exclusively, but you can find MMJs in some large markets
too. Doing the job of a reporter and photographer at the

                                                                                                    9
Brian Champagne

same time gives you more freedom, but can also be hard
work.

Producers

These staffers are assigned to a specific show and decide
what stories, and how much of them, they will use to fill
the show. They write the anchors' copy and time the entire
show, live from in the control booth. They will work an
eight-hour shift that ends with their show. There is a
forthcoming chapter exclusively about producing.

Associate Producers

APs assist producers in writing the show. They may be
assigned anchor packages, voice-overs, teases or anything
else the producer asks. Most are trained to become
producers themselves.

Executive Producers

Usually former producers themselves, they oversee
producers. They coordinate between shows (if there's a
major story, they might see that all shows don't use the
exact same material), edit and approve scripts and may
help with scheduling.

Assistant News Director

This position is between EP and news director, and so are
its responsibilities. An assistant news director might work
on the editorial, logistics and scheduling in a newsroom.

10
               WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

News Director

This is the boss of the newsroom, typically answering to
the station's general manager. He or she oversees
everything described in the preceding jobs. In addition,
hiring, firing, audience research, news philosophy and
direction, and discipline, falls on the news director.

   As mentioned earlier, this list expands or contracts,
depending on market size. In very small markets, it is not
uncommon for a weekend anchor to act as desk and
producer, shoot some video in the field and use a foot
controller to run their own teleprompter. By "not
uncommon" we mean "don't complain if you're asked to
do everything."

The Planning Meeting

At the start of each shift, usually once in the morning
and again in the early afternoon, all hands gather for the
planning meeting. Reporters present their story ideas, the
desk presents what is in the daybook, and producers
choose what they want in their shows. Their choices are
governed by management and the day's logistics.

Story ideas come from:

PRESS RELEASES

Public relation firms and amateurs pitch stories via email,
U.S. mail, telephone and in person. Some of these stories
are worthwhile and others are business-promoting fluff.

                        11
Brian Champagne

SOCIAL MEDIA

See above, and add trending topics and observations from
your local viewers and population.

OTHER PROFESSIONAL MEDIA

Television newsrooms subscribe to all the local
newspapers and newspaper newsrooms have TVs in them.

WIRES

Besides Associated Press, newsrooms get constantly
updated feeds from their affiliates, e.g., NBC and CNN.

VIEWER TIPS

These can come in via telephone, email or social media.
Some will make you shake your head. Others will have
you turning it. Do not ignore all the eyes and ears out there
that think to notify you when they see something going
on.

ENTERPRISING

Staff should be thinking of questions and possible story
ideas everywhere they go. Everybody has a story. A simple
tip for this came from a National Press Photographers
Association speaker who advised photographers to drive
back to the station using a different route than the one
they took to the story; this exposes you to more of your
community.

12
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

POLICE AND FIRE SCANNERS

The time you stop listening is the time some major news
breaks in your area and you'll miss it. Stories I've picked
up off a scanner besides fires and shootings include:

· A four year-old boy who caught a fish bigger than
   he was in a city park

· Wild dogs who were killing cattle over the course
   of weeks

· Valets at a restaurant who were doing burnouts
   in customers' cars in the parking garage next
   door; the smoke was so bad someone thought
   there was a fire.

From a compiled list from the above sources, or just ideas

thrown out there, producers and managers choose the

story and its treatment.

Television is a different medium than print, web and

radio. The story selection criteria is different, too.

First, we consider newsworthiness. The PBS Newshour

Student                   Training                      Manual

(https://d12grbbaljejv6.cloudfront.net/wp-content/

uploads/2016/05/Worksheet-1.1.pdf) lists five criteria:

1. TIMELINESS

Things that have just happened are "fresh" and new.
Besides new information, the timeliness of a story can be
affected on an hourly level: If a story happens around the
time of a newscast, it lends itself to live reporting,
especially for breaking news. In Utah, Governor Herbert
has started important announcements at 5:02 p.m., lending
itself to a news open, anchor toss to a reporter live, and the

                                                                                                  13
Brian Champagne

reporter can quickly introduce the governor who is just
arriving at the podium.

2. PROXIMITY

Local news affects people in the area. The farther away the
story, the more extraordinary it needs to be. In your area,
a minor traffic crash that snarls traffic may affect hundreds
of your viewers, but U.S. media also covered a traffic jam
in China in 2015. Why? Because it was 50-lanes wide with
hours of waiting. Another in 2010 had some Chinese
drivers waiting in for five days; that was extraordinary
enough for most producers.

3. CONFLICT AND CONTROVERSY

"When violence strikes or when people argue about
actions, events, ideas or policies, we care. Conflict and
controversy attract our attention by highlighting problems
or differences within the community." This can be a pair
of Trump vs. anti-Trump rallies, or simply one of your
locals taking on city hall or even a neighbor. Make sure
you have both sides of the issue covered.

4. HUMAN INTEREST

Everyone has a story, and some are quite amazing. People
overcome great obstacles, handle crises or can just be
amusing. PBS says we like these stories because we can
identify with them. They are seldom lead stories, however.

5. RELEVANCE

"People are attracted to information that helps them make

14
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

good decisions," PBS says. Information about hobbies,
consumer prices or a proposed law can and will affect your
viewer's lives. Viewers will be drawn to these stories and
you have an obligation to provide them (maybe not the
hobbies part). KTVX in Salt Lake City had a series of
posters on the walls of its newsrooms to help producers
target their product. The posters showed the results of
audience research they had done where viewers tell what's
important to them.

   When I was doing live feature reporting on Saturday
mornings, I stayed away from wacky setups; instead, I
tried to show viewers a good option for where to spend
their day off. Eventually, that show became the highest-
rated morning show of the week.

BONUS: PROMINENCE (THIS IS NOT ONE OF THE
PBS CRITERIA)

The more famous a person is, the more likely things they
do will be of interest to your viewers. If someone throws
an egg at a neighbor's house, has his car stolen or gets
arrested for a DUI, is that news? It is if that person is
Justin Bieber, your city's mayor or a local news anchor,
respectively.

   I grumble about the interest our society has on
celebrities, but cannot deny it. When a woman and her
date were killed in car wreck half a world away, my wife
was glued to her TV for days because the woman was
Princess Diana. Following the same formula as the other
criteria, the more famous/local the person is, the more
newsworthy the things they do will be.

   Other factors come into play every day.
   What are the other stories of the day? While other

                                                                                                  15
Brian Champagne

media may be able to expand or contract as needed,
television news programs are precisely timed and must fit
into a finite slot (as a rule, though major breaking news can
expand as needed). Bigger stories may push out human-
interest stories for the day. The good news is human
interest stories are often evergreen (confusing. Use a
different word/say this differently). enough to be run later,
when things calm down.

News Philosophy

This can be dictated by a news director and heavily
influenced by your programming. When KTXL-TV in
Sacramento picked up the Fox affiliation, its politically
heavy, buttoned-down newscast gradually adapted to the
style of Fox programming, even calling the approach
"Foxified." One of KTXL's competitors -- KRBK at the
time -- had an "If it bleeds, it leads" philosophy for a
time. Another, KXTV, tried family-friendly for a while,
not showing any body bags or disturbing footage.

   What is your lead-in? Who is watching that night that
you can draw in with teases? Your sales department
knows. When I finished an in-depth piece about animals
at the local shelter, my station's promotions director
suggested we run the piece on a Wednesday night, since
that's the night we had the highest percentage of pet
ownership. Indeed, we ran teases during breaks in
programming, introducing viewers to Tank the dogand
asking them to watch the news to see if Tank gets adopted.
Viewers called in throughout the evening offering to take
Tank. Pit Bull Tank was already in a good home before the
story ran.

   It is important to consider your medium when choosing

16
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

stories, or at least their treatment. Television is the
medium, or motion, and sound. Used properly, it is
powerful. Budget stories, stories of future events or other
stories where there's no obvious thing to point the camera
at, present a challenge. Some stations may shy away from
these stories, but they can be done; it just takes more effort
and some ingenuity.

   It has been said, "there are no boring stories, only
boring reporters." While many reporters might argue that
saying, a visual story will often take precedence over a
non-visual one.

                                                                                                  17
                                  2.

                            Leads

T he first words out of an anchor's mouth as he or she
       introduces a story is the lead; some spell it lede. A
television news lead differs greatly from the newspaper
lead. In TV, we don't give all the information up front; we
try to grab and hold a viewer's interest, so they will
continue watching.

   Lead writing is an art form, meaning it can be hard to
define exactly how to write a good one, but you know
a good lead when you hear it. They are a chance to be
creative, catchy and clever. They are also very important,
get one wrong, and you could lose your viewer. Your
competition is fiercer than ever, and you need to guide
your viewer along.

   You must accomplish three basic things in a lead, all
three, every time (well, almost every time. This is an art,
after all):

      1. Capture the viewer's attention.
      2. Set the tone of the story.
      3. Prepare them for the information to follow.

                                                                                                  19
Brian Champagne

Leave out such information like names, ages, addresses
and other details if they are not interesting or part of the
news hook. If someone has the same name as Taylor Swift
and her mail is getting mixed up, the name could be in
the lead. If an address is, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, that
could work. If a 100-year-old just graduated from high
school, the age could belong. Notice that in all of these
examples we use could, because you could take another
angle in the lead and not use any details.

   Present-tense leads are preferred, and future-tense leads
are even better. Present-tense leads make your newscast
sound up-to-the-minute, allowing your viewer to feel the
same.

   You write a present-tense lead by writing what is true
now. The woman who robbed the quilt shop was arrested
at 10:00 this morning, so what is present for your six
o'clock newscast? She is in jail. The owners are relieved.
Police are building a case against her. Pick whichever of
these you can write the most compelling lead about.

   Example 1:
   A WOMAN IS WEARING ORANGE TONIGHT
AFTER POLICE SAY SHE ROBBED A QUILT STORE
TO SEW OWN CREATIONS.
   Example 2:
   THE OWNERS OF A QUILT STORE ARE
RELIEVED TO KNOW THE WOMAN WHO
ROBBED THEM WON'T BE COMING BACK SOON.
   Example 3:
   POLICE ARE PATCHING TOGETHER THEIR
CASE TO PROVE A LOCAL WOMAN GOT HER
SEWING DONE BY STEALING IT.
   These examples just show the first two purposes of a
lead; they still need to prepare the viewer for what follows.

20
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

If these introduced VOSOTs or VOs, you could take the
video next. A lead for a package might finish up like this:

   SOME QUILT STORE OWNERS ARE RELIEVED
TO KNOW THE WOMAN WHO POLICE SAY
ROBBED THEM WON'T BE COMING BACK SOON.
OUR MISTY INGLET TAKES YOU BACK TO THE
STORE WHERE ONE PHONE CALL FROM POLICE
MADE THINGS A LOT LESS TENSE.

   A plaguing problem in broadcast news writing is false
present-tense. The basic form is, a man walks into a bar...
We tell jokes in false present-tense, but news should not
be done this way.

   Past tense:
   A MAN WALKED INTO A QUICK-D MART THIS
MORNING, POINTED A GUN, AND DEMANDED
ALL OF THE BEEF JERKY ON THE COUNTER.
   False present tense:
   A MAN WALKS INTO A QUICK-D MART THIS
MORNING, POINTS A GUN, AND DEMANDS ALL
OF THE BEEF JERKY ON THE COUNTER.
   Real present tense:
   POLICE ARE LOOKING FOR A MAN WITH A
GUN AND A LOT OF BEEF JERKY TONIGHT. THEY
SAY HE COULD BE THE ONE WHO ROBBED A
QUICK-D MART AT GUNPOINT.
   Once again, past tense:
   A BABY FELL OUT OF A WINDOW YESTERDAY,
BUT IS OK BECAUSE IT LANDED IN A PILE OF
SHAVING CREAM.
   False present:
   A BABY FALLS OUT OF A WINDOW YESTERDAY
(now we're getting confusing), O-K BECAUSE IT
LANDS IN A PILE OF SHAVING CREAM.

                                                                                                  21
Brian Champagne

   Real present tense:
   A BABY IS O-K TODAY THANKS TO A PILE OF
SHAVING CREAM. THAT WAS AFTER IT FELL
OUT OF A WINDOW.
   Maybe for something like this example (based on a
camp song), a present-tense lead is not the way to go.
There are, instead, plenty of other types of leads.
   Narrative Lead - start telling the story from the
beginning:
   SHE PUT HER BABY IN HIS CRIB BY THE
WINDOW, BUT WHEN SHE CAME BACK STARTED
EVERY PARENT'S NIGHTMARE.
   Connection with viewer - try to get them involved:
   YOU CAN IMAGINE THE TERROR OF YOUR
BABY FALLING OUT OF THE WINDOW. NOW CAN
YOU IMAGINE IT BEING SAVED BY A PILE OF
SHAVING CREAM?
   Mystery lead - keep something out to keep your viewer
curious:
   A LIFE COULD'VE ENDED IN STRANGE WAY...
BUT IT WAS SAVED BY SOMETHING EVEN
STRANGER.
   Update lead - this is for a story you have reported on
previously:
   WE TOLD YOU OF THE BABY WHO FELL OUT
OF A WINDOW. TURNS OUT HE'S O-K... SAVED BY
A PILE OF SHAVING CREAM.
   Build on a quote - you have to be careful with this one,
but it can be done:
   LOU GEHRIG SAID HE WAS "THE LUCKIEST
MAN ON THE FACE OF THE EARTH." IF HE COULD
TALK... A BABY WOULD BE SAYING THE SAME
THING TONIGHT.

22
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   Significant detail - if there is something
extraordinary-yes, even a statistic, you can lead with that:

   FIVE-THOUSAND CHILDREN FALL OUT OF
WINDOWS EVERY YEAR. FOR MOST... IT GOES
BADLY. BUT ONE LOCAL BABY ESCAPED
WITHOUT INJURY...THANKS TO A PILE OF
SHAVING CREAM.

   We can be amazed and try many approaches because the
baby was uninjured. When people are hurt, your choices
narrow, as you must stay respectful of their situations.

   Every writer will tell you some things to avoid. We
assembled our own list of eight to avoid:

   1) Don't start with a turn-off. "This is the most
disturbing thing you'll hear all day...." Why would I stick
around for that? Of course, you will do stories that disturb
your viewers, but don't start off with that as a lead.

   2) Don't give orders, telling them to check this out or
other bossy commands.

   3) Don't tell your viewers the news is good, bad,
disappointing or whatever. First, respect their intelligence
to know; second, they may be more engaged if they have
to figure it out for themselves; third, you may be showing
a bias; and last, good news for some is bad for others. At
my first TV job in California's oil country, when gas prices
went up, more people got work in the oil fields. Very low
gas prices meant layoffs. If you keep judgments out of your
writing, you'll never be on one side or the other.

   4) Don't start a story with a question viewers can answer
no to and move on:

   "Have you ever wondered how they time traffic lights?"
"No, next channel." Instead, try, "sometimes it seems like
you hit every traffic light red..."

   5) Don't date your story in the lead. If you're not using

                                                                                                  23
Brian Champagne

a present-tense lead, that's OK, but don't use words like
yesterday or last month off the top.

   6) Don't start a story with the word, another, or a similar
word that lets viewers know it's more of the same. If there
is a rash of something, that information should be
included, but not off the top.

   7) Don't cram too much information into the lead. The
lead has its purposes, and that is all. Get to the video as
soon as you can and start telling your video-driven story.

   8) Don't congratulate each other. Let the viewer decide
if you did a good job or not.

   9) Don't drop verbs. Is, isn't the best verb, but at least
it is one. A MAN... IN JAIL TONIGHT AFTER POLICE
SAY HE ROBBED THE QUICK-D MART. This is
common, and it tortures English teachers and anyone else
who cares about humanity's need to communicate.
Changing MAN to MAN'S won't tell but a fraction of a
second more of your show.

   Now, four keys to successful leads:
   1) Write in active voice. If you can stay SUBJECT-
VERB-OBJECT, you'll avoid passive voice. Tell your
viewer the person/force/organization that did something,
and speak in a conversational tone.
   2) Use the most powerful verbs you can. The verb, to be,
is not one of these. Use verbs instead of nouns where you
can. Try, "fire burned the building;" not, "the building was
burned."
   3) Read the lead aloud to make sure it flows, is well
spoken and sounds right coming from the anchor's
mouth. Good anchors will change things around a little so
scripts sound the way they talk. Lazy or rushed anchors
read whatever pops up in the prompter cold and
sometimes are burned.

24
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   4) Stay viewer-centric. Relate news directly to your
viewer whenever possible. I knew a news director who
paid his main producer 25 cents every time he used the
word, you, in his writing (25 cents was more money back
then). Sometimes it's not appropriate, but if you can make
it work, bring in the viewers and their interests. Treat them
like selfish, self-centered people and you'll keep them
engaged. I am not saying viewers are self-centered, but
most people would have a harder time turning off your
newscast if it were all about them.

   These lists, guidelines, rules and laws might seem
paralyzing. I hope the opposite is true. When you sit in
front of a blank script, I would hope a rule or guideline can
help you get started.

                                                                                                  25
                                  3.

         Common Mistakes

W hy take a course in writing for broadcast? Why not
       just watch, listen and emulate what you see and
hear? The reason is simple: because even people who are
good at this get in a hurry and write poor and sometimes
libelous copy. In this chapter, we'll look at four common
mistakes and some just annoying stuff that keeps getting
used.

Allegedly

Do your viewers know what this word means? Do you?
Reporters use it to avoid accusing or convicting people
who may have committed a crime: NED WAS
ARRESTED AFTER HE ALLEGEDLY ROBBED THE
FIRST NATIONAL BANK. THE ALLEGED ROBBER
WAS FOUND ON THE SIDE OF THE FREEWAY
WITH A MONEY-BAG LOCATING DEVICE
SHORTLY AFTER THE BANK WAS ROBBED. There
are two writing crimes here: First, the word alleged gives
you no legal protection from lawsuits. This situation

                                                                                                  27
Brian Champagne

happened in Sacramento, California, when I worked
there. Person A robbed a bank and threw the security
device from the bag out the window on Interstate 5. Person
B picked it up before the police arrived and they arrested
him. Person B was later cleared, but not before his image
and name were dragged around on the evening news.

   According to the Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press, you can use allege:

   Only if you attribute the statement to an official source
that you are privileged to report. If you opt to use the verb,
allege in a crime story, the subject of the sentence should
be police, the lawsuit, an indictment or some other official
source, which is then fairly and accurately reported.

   When used legally, it is essentially a non-conversational
way to say said.

   Second, allegedly, in all its forms, is a throwaway word
your viewer doesn't understand. It would be more
conversational and understandable to say: POLICE
ARRESTED NED AFTER THEY SAY HE ROBBED
THE FIRST NATIONAL BANK. THEY SAY THEY
FOUND HIM ON THE SIDE OF THE FREEWAY
WITH A MONEY-BAG LOCATING DEVICE
SHORTLY AFTER THE BANK WAS ROBBED. All
alleging is gone, whatever that is, and we know who is
accusing him. We can also form our own doubts about
whether Ned robbed the bank or not. If you never use
allege, alleged, allegedly, you will do well.

Suspect

This word is a problem waiting for a good lawyer. We
begin with a three-part syllogism:

   Socrates is a man.

28
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   All men are mortal.
   Therefore, Socrates is a mortal.
   When someone says a suspect committed a crime, as
opposed to a criminal, and then name someone as a
suspect, they are convicting that person the same way:
   The suspect robbed the bank.
   Ned is the suspect.
   Therefore Ned robbed the bank.
   Once again, a crime with two consequences. First, you
convicted Ned. Give the guy a trial first. Second, you have
missed the opportunity to use much better words.
Robbers rob, not suspects. Rapists rape. Thieves steal
things. Burglars burgle (which is fun to say aloud). Killers
and murderers kill people. Crooks do all the other stuff
you don't have a good crime word for. All suspects do is
get arrested and tried. I heard a tease recently where the
anchor said there was a "suspect on the loose." A suspect?
Who cares? Tell me there's a rapist, a murderer, or a
burglar on the loose and I may react.
   A suspect is someone with a name or very distinct look,
which comes from a photo or video, not a written
description. Even when that person is in custody, they
are still a suspect accused of the crime that the robber,
murderer, or scam-artist did. Do not convict them by
using the same word.

Apparently

What does this mean? Does it mean X may have
happened? Does it mean you're not sure exactly what
happened, but it looks like A may have caused B? It's not
only OK to say that, but it's far more conversational.
Exhibit A:

                                                                                                  29
Brian Champagne

   NEIGHBORS FOUND NED WITH A BRUISED HIP
AFTER HE APPARENTLY FELL OFF HIS
SKATEBOARD.

   Neighbors saw Ned on the ground with his skateboard
nearby, but no one saw him fall, so apparently is a cheap
guess. Try it again with just facts and honesty:

   NEIGHBORS FOUND NED ON THE GROUND
WITH A BRUISED HIP. HIS SKATEBOARD WAS
NEARBY, AND THEY SAY HE MAY HAVE FALLEN
OFF IT.

   The guesswork is out, viewers can weigh the evidence
for themselves, and you can sleep at night knowing you
weren't part of unclear, lazy writing.

Undetermined

This is a common mix-up with undisclosed. Law
enforcement hates telling how much a robber gets away
with after a robbery for fear of encouraging copycats, so
they won't tell you. Undetermined means they don't
know. If you hear that your bank doesn't know how much
money they have in every part of the bank, move your
money from that disorganized mess into a bank that keeps
track of things.

   Undisclosed is not conversational, either. Try:
   POLICE WON'T SAY HOW MUCH MONEY THE
ROBBER TOOK.
   It is honest and sounds like how people talk.
   A close relative of this is someone's medical condition:
   NED IS IN THE HOSPITAL TONIGHT WITH
UNKNOWN INJURIES.
   If I were Ned, I would demand X-rays so they could
figure out my injuries. Try:

30
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   NED IS IN THE HOSPITAL TONIGHT. STAFF
WON'T RELEASE WHAT HIS INJURIES ARE.

   Now we've told viewers why we don't tell them Ned's
injuries and we make the staff seem tight-lipped, not
stupid.

Other Newsy Cliché Nonsense

Hack
   A real hack is when someone without permission

circumvents protocol or security to create a different
result. Some are illegal; some just void your warranty.
Using baking soda to clean your fridge is not a hack.

   Speaking Up/ Speaking Out/ Speaking
   Speaking up is letting your voice be heard. Maybe you
have been quiet while those around you ran things in your
community, and now you've raised your hand at the city
council meeting. You are now speaking up. Speaking out
happens when you voice opposition to something. It is
more dramatic if it's against a group you were involved
in or if it involves some controversy. Speaking is uttering
words. If you are a reclusive celebrity who gives an
interview after years of not being in public, you are
speaking. Maybe you are finally speaking, but unless
you're telling how some celebrities prefer the quiet life,
you are not speaking up. Unless you're taking a stand
against something, you are not speaking out. You are
merely speaking, talking, or doing an interview. Watch
Matt Lauer on the Today Show for examples of this.
   Raising the Question Begging the Question
   If you talk to someone and it brings up something
unknown to you or curious, it has raised a question.
Begging the question is a logical fallacy, wherein a premise

                                                                                                  31
Brian Champagne

is used to prove the conclusion: "freedom of speech is
important because we all need to speak our minds."

   The news nonsense goes on and on as writers mix up
terms and they somehow make it through to anchors'
mouths. Stay conversational, stay factual, stay honest and
you won't get sued, and we'll all be able to understand you.

32
                                  4.

               Interviewing

F or many of your stories, most information will come
       from interviews. You will talk to eyewitnesses, crime
victims, prosecutors and defense attorneys, and experts
on a plethora of topics. You will work with people who
give you information, and, in the video medium,
soundbites you will use to tell your story. Some of these
people will have just gone through or witnessed
something traumatic, and you will be one of the first
people they talk to afterward. While being respectful, you
want to capture the emotion they are feeling. My motto is
that I want to conduct, edit, and air the interview in such
a way the person will do another interview with me in the
future.

   That respect starts with the way you dress. My reporter
dress code is always a shirt and tie, and never jeans. As
a photographer, my dress code was no jeans, always a
collared shirt, and never athletic shoes. Other
photographers might wear shorts, but I never did. Shorts
are not allowed in courtrooms, and I needed to be
prepared to go anywhere. Doc Marten's shoes work well

                                                                                                  33
Brian Champagne

for photographers because they are formal enough and
tough enough. If you are assigned to cover a funeral, you
should wear a necktie at the minimum; a full suit shows
more respect. These are male dress code guidelines;
females should dress in an equivalent. A skirt or dress
pants for funerals, business-casual skirts or pants for basic
newsgathering. Shoes should be professional, but must
also be able to handle almost any terrain. Athletic shoes
or other clothes are not appropriate unless the story is
something athletic and the reporter will be involving
herself.

   Your dress shows others what you think of your job
and what you think of them. Think of your own reactions
when someone in a t-shirt and cargo shorts asks you for
something and compare it to someone asking the for the
same thing, but wearing at least khakis and a collared shirt.
When you approach or call someone, introduce yourself
first and state your affiliation. If you are a reporter
alongside a photographer, introduce the two of you. Tell
the person why you are there. If there is anything tragic,
tell the person you are sorry for their loss. Sometimes you
can just ask for the interview next. Other times you must
first build some degree of trust and show a reason why the
person should give you an interview. No one owes you an
interview.

   Some people might seem unapproachable, but you
never know until you ask. If you knock on the door of
a grieving family, they might invite you in and tell you
all about their loved one. What do people do at funerals?
Talk. They talk about the deceased, and it helps the
survivors feel better. Some families will invite you in to
talk, and possibly to the funeral.

   Others will not. They might slam the door in your face.

34
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

Even if they do, you have just communicated that
someone cares about what happened. Most responses are
somewhere in between. Leave a business card if they are
not ready to talk yet.

   If you are conducting an interview that has been set up
ahead of time, do some background research. Preparing for
an interview:

      1. Saves the interviewer's time because they don't
          have to educate you from square one.

      2. Shows the interviewee you care enough about the
          topic do do the research.

      3. Lets them know they can't walk all over you.

For experts or victims, use empathy: Try to think of that
stupid question they've already been asked a hundred
times, and don't ask it. You could ask something like, "Is
there something that frustrates you that you wish people
understood?" That could allow them to handle the
question they've been asked so much already while getting
the word out to thousands so they hopefully will have to
answer it less in the future.

   If you meet someone with a strange name, ask what
dumb jokes they hear about it instead of trying to make
one yourself. I had heard all the jokes about my name by
5th grade; none were ever funny. Apply this reasoning to
your interviews' names and situations. Law Enforcement
officials are a common interview. They're used to giving
you the who, what, when, where, why, and how. Tip: the
one that often stumps them is "when." Before you roll the
camera, tell them you're going to ask them the time the
incident happened; it will save time on camera. After you
get the basics from an official, try to get a soundbite. A

                                                                                                  35
Brian Champagne

soundbite adds color and emotion to a story. A cop telling
you the name or location of an intersection where a bad
traffic crash happened is not a soundbite; him telling you
he's never seen a crash this bad in his 20 years on the force
is.

   Use the same reasoning for experts: You can tell us that
one in every ten children in your area goes to bed hungry
every night more efficiently than the food bank manager
can (you might even use a graphic for this); use the
soundbite for her to describe what it's like to see the faces
of children who don't have enough to eat, or her outrage
that your community doesn't do more to help.

   Young kids are often the toughest interview subjects.
"Do you like the carnival?" will usually be answered with
"yes." "What's your favorite part of the carnival?" will
often get you a shrug, "all of it," or "I like turtles."

   Try "What would you tell your friends about this?" or
give them a quick multiple choice: "Do you like the rides
best, the clowns, the food, or what? Tell me about that."
Sometimes this works because it gives them some options
and an idea of where you are headed with your questions.
Still, you never know: I've seen outgoing kids clam up on
camera and shy ones go on and on.

   Some reporters pre-interview with just a notebook.
They get all the facts down they need, then turn on the
camera for soundbites. This can save battery power, time
during the interview, and time spent afterward logging
and editing.

   Do not make assumptions about people's age, gender,
or politics. Ask open questions that can lead you to
understanding their positions. Ask questions open
enough to not show any bias. The other extreme is trying

36
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

to compensate for you own perceived bias by asking a
question that leans the opposite direction.

Location

Don't interview people in front of a wall unless they just
built it. Put people somewhere they're comfortable. This
will put them at ease and into a better visual setting.
Interview a cowgirl sitting on her horse. A farmer on his
tractor. A mechanic over an engine. If you have a wireless
mic, talk to your interviews as they do something: The
soda jerk as he scoops ice cream. The flower judge as she
works in her roses. The kid who wants a better skate park
as she skates around the old one pointing out the
problems. Once again, you'll get a far more interesting
shot, all while your interviewee will feel more relaxed and
in their element.

   Once you get the camera rolling, have the interviewee
pronounce and spell their name. They will try to hand
you a business card instead. Cards are kept in different
places than video, so don't skip the name. This also serves
to let them know you're recording and check your mic
levels. Skip this step if they're nervous and you want to
just slide into the on-camera part of your interview (do
not be deceptive and trick innocent people into talking on
camera);, but remember to get the name recorded at the
end.

   Start with the easy questions first, letting the
interviewee warm up and forget about the lights, camera,
and microphone. Tell them to address you, not the camera,
and try to have a conversation. An interview is not a
conversation, however. You are here to record what they
think, not exchange thoughts like a good chat. You may

                                                                                                  37
Brian Champagne

use yourself just enough to set up the next question: "I've
had a tough day myself in this heat on the ground, but
you're up here roofing; what is different up here?"

   Listen. If you hear a useable soundbite, you can quick
jot down the timecode if it's easily visible. It is not worth it
to break the rhythm of the conversation if it is not handy.
After you know you have one good bite, you might want
to change your shot a little for the next one if you are an
MMJ, or cue your photographer to do it if you are part of a
team. Think of a subtle signal, not: "That was a great bite!
Now zoom in more for this next question!"

   If you know you don't have a couple good bites, do
not stop interviewing. Once while I was being interviewed
for a story, the reporter asked me the same question four
times. It got a little nerve-wracking because we worked
at the same station and I didn't know what she wanted.
It turned out she wanted me to state the problem, "too
many single drivers in the carpool lane," more succinctly.
It's better to ask again than try to tell someone to say
something in fewer words.

   After you know you have enough material to put your
story together, ask the interviewee if they have anything
else they want to add, or if there is something you, the
reporter, might have neglected to ask. It's surprising how
many people say "no" and then proceed to bring up
something very important. Ask the photographer or
interns, if they're on site, if they have any questions. Many
times the reporter I was shooting for would end up using
my question. I was no better than they, but may have been
listening in a different way or had a different relationship
where I could ask a question uniquely. During a group
interview, after Michael Dorn (who played Worf on Star
Trek: The Next Generation) had just landed his own vintage

38
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

fighter jet, the pros finished their questions for the stiff
interview on the tarmac. I then shot out: "What's the
difference between your jet and the Enterprise?" The
reporters there rolled their eyes at me. Then Dorn gave a
quick chuckle and said "The Enterprise is just a set where
we pretend... this is the real thing." Soundbite.

   Thank the interviewee for their time. Offer a business
card if they think of anything else later, and ask for their
number in case you do the same.

                                                                                                  39
                                  5.

                               VOs

What is a VO?

V O (we never write it V.O.) stands for voice over.
       Outside of television news, a VO is any time you
hear a narrator or interview covered with video.

   In a newsroom, however, it is a brief news story where
you may not see the anchor read the lead. The anchor will
continue to read as video is shown. A VO may or may not
return to the anchor after the video. If the anchor is seen
after the video, putting in a final bit of information about
the story, that is called a tag. VOs may be chained together
(usually with a graphic transition) so the viewer doesn't see
the anchor introduce or segue stories.

   Your script should have an opening sentence that hooks
your viewer. It should then get right into the script, or VO
as soon as and then get right to the rest of the script, into
the VO portion as soon as you can, or when your producer
dictates. VOs can run anywhere from 15 to 40 seconds,
depending on the video. If the video is compelling, it

                                                                                                  41
Brian Champagne

should run longer; if not, the script should be tightened
up.

Writing to Video

Let's apply some of what we learned in Chapter 1 here.
   When we don't write to video and it doesn't match our

words, it's called wallpaper video. It happens all the time:
The anchor reads a story about a property tax proposal
that would benefit schools and you see video of kids at
recess. A professional athlete is arrested and we video of
him scoring a touchdown.

   Try this exercise: Have someone read you Little Red
Riding Hood while showing you pictures from Goldilocks
and the Three Bears. There's a splitting effect as you try to
process what you're seeing and hearing separately. Why
would you say one thing and show another? You can do
better.

Rule #1

Your script should be determined by your video.
   Let's say you're writing a VO about gas prices. What

could you show? Editors probably have file footage of
people pumping gas, cars on the highway, expansive
oilfields and gas station signs. With this video, you could
write whatever you want about gas prices. This is
wallpaper video. It's just usual TV news junk. The words
don't match up with what we see, but they could.

   Side case in point: A new diet study just came out, and
you're writing the script. You will que up video of
overweight people - shot from the neck down - walking
on a crowded public street. It doesn't matter if the study
says weight loss will now be harder, easier, more

42
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

dangerous, safer, or impossible; it will be the same video
you use for any story about fitness and weight. I know
this because when my station converted to HD the same
week we ran a weight-loss story, I had to go out and get
new video of overweight people with their heads cut off
(fortunately I wasn't around for the first post-HD story
about smoking or aging).

   Now, back to your gas prices story: What can you do
instead of just calling up wallpaper video? You can
remember Rule #1. Look at the video, whether it's new or
file footage, before you write. If it's several shots of people
sliding credit cards, pulling out the nozzle and putting it
into their cars, create a stronger script by writing to those
images:

   NEXT TIME YOU SLIDE YOUR CARD AND
START PUMPING YOUR GAS... IT'S GOING TO
SHOW UP SMALLER ON YOUR BILL. GAS PRICES
ARE HEADED DOWN GOING INTO THE HOLIDAY
WEEKEND. YOU AND HUNDREDS OF OTHER
DRIVERS ON THE ROAD WILL PAY AN AVERAGE
OF FOUR CENTS A GALLON LESS THANKS TO
MORE PETROLEUM RESERVES FOR MOST MAJOR
SUPPLIERS.

   We could've started this story more directly, saying that
more petroleum reserves are lowering gas prices. Maybe
that could be in the lead, but for the video we follow Rule
#1 and write to the shots we have while including our
viewer. Does our viewer care more about major suppliers
or her credit card bill? We move the elements of the VO,
and even a sentence, around so they follow the video while
keeping our viewer engaged.

   Let's try another example involving a city's budget for
road repairs after a winter of heavy rain damage. If we are

                                                                                                  43
Brian Champagne

going straight to video without an on-camera lead, this is
how we would write directly to the video:

   THE LOGAN CITY BUDGET IS STRAINED AND
PLANNERS ARE JUGGLING FUNDS TO KEEP OUR
ROADS IN SHAPE THIS SPRING....

   This is present tense and puts the subject first, which
is good. However, what video will you show when your
anchor reads about the city budget? What do planners
juggling funds look like? This doesn't work well for the
broadcast medium. Instead, we use file footage of flooded
roads and crews working on them and write to the footage:

   THESE FLOODED ROADS AND THE DAMAGED
PAVEMENT KEPT CREWS WORKING AT ALL
HOURS THIS WINTER. NOW CITY BUDGET
PLANNERS ARE JUGGLING TO PAY THE BILL....

   Yes, we start with file footage, but this approach is more
dramatic and better shows the winter's impact than freshly
shot video of cars on well-paved roads.

   If you were using on-camera anchors before the video
started, you could write a present-tense lead, but when
you're not looking at an anchor's, follow Rule #1.

44
                                  6.

                         VOSOTs

T he next step up from a VO in television news is the
       VOSOT. Some people pronounce it by saying all
the letters, "V-O-S-O-T," and others pronounce the
acronym "VOH-sot." It stands for voice-over sound on
tape, meaning the anchor reads a voice-over portion, then
stops talking while a sound bite is heard full. After the
SOT, it may return to more voice-over (VO-SOT-VO),
return to an anchor for a tag, or go directly on to the next
story. We use bite, sound bite, and SOT interchangeably.

   The VO chapter covered how to write to your video.
With a VOSOT, you also need to write to, and in some
cases, from your sound bite. It is usually easier to do this if
you choose the sound bite first.

Choosing A Soundbite

Sound bites are typically 5-15 seconds long, though the
closer you get to 15, the more you must justify the added
length. When you are logging your interview, listen for
something the person says that can add flavor, personal

                                                                                                  45
Brian Champagne

insight, or emotion to your story. Someone stating facts
is not a good bite unless the facts are astounding or in
question.

   After a fire or car crash, an official from the fire or police
department will usually grant an on-camera interview.
They will tell the time the call came in, their response,
extent of injuries or damage, where the incident
happened, who was involved and how it happened. Use all
of this information to write your VO; you can probably
say it more concisely, faster, and in more conversational
language than the official did. The sound bite, however,
should not be some of these facts. Perhaps a motorcycle
crash story can include a sound bite about the importance
of helmets or drivers checking their blind spots if either
were a factor. A house fire story could use a plea for smoke
detectors or fire escape plans. A robbery might include a
SOT about how dangerous the robber is and the urgency
of getting her behind bars.

   The only time you should use a fact in a sound bite
is when the fact is the story, and even then, consider a
reaction:

   "This is the tenth fire caused by fireworks this year."
   "A man went skiing on his 100th birthday in June. He
can ski at that age and there's enough snow to do it that
late into the season."
   "Even though the crash was minor, it's tragic that the
victim died when a seat belt could've easily saved her."
   All of these are stories because of an interesting fact.
That fact should go in your lead, and the SOT should be
a reaction to it. Getting police and fire officials to give a
candid, heartfelt comment is getting harder to do. Often,
you can see them carefully choosing their words to not
offend or cause any legal issues.

46
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   Choose a bite that is representative of your interview.
If your advocate for lead paint removal does a 10-minute
interview about the dangers of the paint, and takes a quick
moment to say asbestos is still a problem, use a lead paint
bite. Unless, of course, her acknowledgment of asbestos is
dramatic for some reason -- perhaps she was an asbestos-
denier up until then.

Setting Up The Bite

If you choose your sound bite before you write your VO,
you can artfully craft your script to lead right into it. You
want the SOT to fit right after the anchor's last words. You
also don't want to the bite to repeat what the anchor just
said.

   Bad example:
   FARMER BROWN SAYS HE CAN'T BELIEVE HIS
COW GOT OUT, followed by "I just can't believe the
cow would get out like this. I thought she was happy.
Maybe I need to..."
   Better example:
   FARMER BROWN IS SURPRISED HIS COW IS
GONE, works better to set up that same bite, as it does not
repeat the same words Farmer Brown uses, rather sets up
his reaction.
   You can set up a bite with a something like, WE ASKED
MAYOR HOBBS HOW HE FELT ABOUT
IMMIGRANTS IN THE COMMUNITY. Don't repeat
this same setup multiple times in the same newscast. If
you were going from the mayor's sound bite to one of
his critics, you wouldn't want to say; WE ASKED
IMMIGRATION ADVOCATE SYLVIA CALVIN
HOW SHE FELT ABOUT IMMIGRANTS. You might,

                                                                                                  47
Brian Champagne

instead, say, IMMIGRATION ADVOCATE SYLVIA
CALVIN DISAGREES or perhaps, IMMIGRATION
ADVOCATE SYLVIA CALVIN SAYS THE MAYOR'S
VIEWS ARE DATED before going to her bite, "he has no
idea what immigrants can add to our town. They are hard-
working people, more so than he is."

   You're OK with all those pronouns because of the way
you set up the SOT.

   If you set up a bite with HAD THIS TO SAY, you are
doing it wrong. First, it is obvious they had that to say.
Second, you are also missing a chance to use better and
more interesting words to set things up. Make sure your
setups are factual. You only use the CALVIN SAYS THE
MAYOR'S VIEWS ARE DATED line if she also spoke
about that. It need not be used in the SOT, but if
challenged you should be able to play back a section of the
raw interview wherein she talks about his views in a way
that suggests they are from a past era of thought. It could
be Calvin or Hobbs who challenges you on this later.

   You can make almost any VO into a VOSOT. If a solar
eclipse is coming to your area, you may pull information
and animated graphics off the NASA website, but the
reaction from a local scientist, merchant who might make
money off the crowds or amateur astronomer will
humanize it. Of course, rule #1 says you need to get some
setup video of the person you choose. No matter the story,
there is probably a geek group for it who would love to
speak, speak up, or speak out about it.

   VOSOTS are a great way to break up the rhythm of a
show. You can break up packages and VOs with VOSOTs
to change things up. In a fast-paced show, fewer packages
can give the anchor a chance to at least clear his/her

48
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

throat. They can also add color and a human element to
your story and newscast.

                                                                                                  49
                                  7.

                               PKG

What is a Package?

T he package, abbreviated PKG or PAK, is the basic
       reporter's report. It is pre-written, and the voice
track is pre-recorded, so it can be edited to have video very
precisely match the audio track. Soundbites and natural
sound breaks (called NATS) can be edited tightly since
they are pre-produced on an editing system.

   Typically, the anchor introduces the PKG on set, then
the director calls for it to play, and the anchors' mics are
cut as the viewers see the story full-screen. A variation
of this is the anchor tossing to the reporter either on set,
on a side set, or in the field live. The reporter takes the
toss from the anchor and introduces her own PAK (we are
using PAK and PKG interchangeably). After the package
runs, the anchor may tag it and then toss back to the
anchor. If the reporter introduces her own PKG in the
field, it may be called a donut.

   The script for the anchor or reporter to introduce the
PKG is called the intro. The last words the anchor or

                                                                                                  51
Brian Champagne

reporter says that let the director know when to switch to
the PKG are called the roll cue. Ad-libbing a little in the
intro is OK, but should end with a roll cue the director can
recognize. If you throw off a director while introducing
your package, you're going to end up staring at the camera
and waiting for him to figure out you're done talking and
get the package going.

   Packages can run 50 seconds (typically called a mini-
pak) on the light side. The average in the 1980s and 1990s
was about two minutes, but that has been shrinking, and
averages about 1:30 now. In-depth stories can run longer
than three minutes, but not without planning with the
producer.

   Reporters are typically assigned stories in the morning
meetings. Some stations' assignment desk might help set
up interviews and b-roll, but at others, it is solely the
responsibility of the reporter.

How To Produce Packages

The minimum number of interviews for a package is two,
but more people/sources are better. Find the experts from
both sides of an issue and the affected and/or witnesses,
depending on the topic. Log and choose soundbites using
the criteria from Chapter 7.

   Often you can shoot b-roll after the interviews, which
helps ensure you have video of what the interviewees
talked about. For spot news this is often not the case: If
a building is burning, shoot the flames first, get reactions
and official information after; usually the fire chief is busy
until things cool down anyway.

   As you shoot (MMJ) or assist (reporters with
photographers), look for natural sounds that will help

52
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

bring your viewer into the story. These can be the sound
of traffic going by, a siren, a bird chirping, swimmers
splashing, a nurse checking on a patient--whatever. If you
hear a good sound that could introduce a new area of your
story, shoot more video to complete a sequence. Repeat
this for every new thought or area you want to cover. For
example, imagine you have been sent to do a story about
winter's first snowstorm and its effects on a well-travelled
canyon. You get solid sound of the cars driving in snow,
and then a few more shots of cars, a mix of telephoto and
near shots.

   Then you get to the bad area. You get shots of spinning
tires, people pushing cars, and cars getting stuck. Make
sure some of these are close enough for good sound.
Interview a few stuck or struggling drivers. Later you find
someone from the Highway Patrol. In Utah, all troopers
are authorized to talk on camera. In other agencies, you
may need a sergeant or lieutenant. The trooper can give
you the who, what, when, where, why, and how about
what is happening. She might also give some reaction,
whether it be advice, frustration, or surprise.

   After the interview you set out to shoot things the
trooper talked about that you want to put in your story.
You don't need b-roll of everything she said, but when in
doubt of whether you'll use the footage, shoot it. Better to
have and not need than need and not have.

   Looking for what is out of the ordinary, you stop for
some tow trucks pulling cars out of snowbanks. If it's safe,
you can get close enough for NATS. Try to shoot these
from the shoulder side, not the highway side. If the tow
drivers look too busy to clip your mic on, just shout a
question at `em as they work. If they shout back loud
enough, you can use a quick response. In my experience

                                                                                                  53
Brian Champagne

covering this kind of story, the driver said he loved the
first storm of the year because they were "money makers."
I wasn't sure it was loud enough for the mic to pick up, so I
yelled "what?" and he repeated the same words louder and
clearer.

   Once again, after you get a quick NATS or SOT, get
more video to follow up for your future script.

   With interviews from an official, reactions from drivers
and tow drivers, and plenty of video and sound of each,
you can go log. If your station is nearby, log there. If not,
you might be spending the day in your car. Rather than
idling your engine for hours, try logging in a nearby library
or empty restaurant (don't take up tables if they need them
for new customers).

   How do you start your script? Use these guidelines to
help you put something on that blank page:

   Start the package and each new aspect or thought, with
natural sound or a compelling thought.

   In this case, we can start with a quick NATS pop of cars
driving by in snow, followed by the script THE SNOW
DIDN'T LOOK THAT BAD AT THE BOTTOM OF
SARDINE CANYON.

   Your package has started. Now on to the next thought
in it, where the road conditions get bad. Use the NATS
of a spinning tire, then BUT GRIPPING TURNED TO
SLIPPING JUST THREE MILES UP. You used the
natural sound full to transition, and the next words
addressed the NATS. You might have to adjust the order
of your sentence, slipping into passive voice if absolutely
necessary to put the words about the NATS right up next
to the NATS. Awkward sentence structure is not good,
but our rule number one is Write to Video. Now that you
have shown action, put in some reaction with a stuck

54
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

driver and/or Highway Trooper SOT(s). You could then
put in more track as you summarize the conditions and
response.

   Use NATS again to transition to the tow truck driver,
write a line that ties the NATS up to the SOT: THOUGH
THEIR CHAINS AND HYDRAULICS ARE GETTING
A WORKOUT, THE TOW DRIVERS DON'T MIND
THEIR WORKOUT [TAKE SOT] "The first storms of
the season are great. They're moneymakers." Close the
package{Ibid.} with perhaps another SOT from a driver
or trooper, then give your sign-out: "Joe Reporter, A-TV
News."

   This book is about writing, and not editing. When you
edit, however, lay down all of the NATS, SOTS, and track
first. These affect the length of the piece. Once they're
down, you can tell your producer about how long the story
will be. If the producer gasps, you can remove or rewrite
before you've invested all the time to cover the track with
video.

   Once you get the script delivered to your editor, write
the anchor intro and tag and supers for your producer. If
you are are an MMJ, write them whenever it fits best in
your environment.

   Those are the basics of how a package is done-now let's
look at how to do them well.

Recording Your Voice Track

You should record your voice in a professional audio
booth if your station has one. A good booth will have
sound deadening foam, a microphone on a stand, and
hopefully something to hold your script like a clip or a

                                                                                                  55
Brian Champagne

music stand. Your hands should be free so you can make
gestures.

   If you don't have access to a professional booth, try to
create one as best as you can in your environment. If you
are in a car, shut off the engine, or the air conditioning
at the very least. If you're in a home, find an area with
soft surfaces like the side of a bed on a carpeted floor.
Kitchens and bathrooms give too much echo. If you're
stuck somewhere with hard surfaces, consider using a
jacket, blanket, or towel to surround you and the
microphone; put them over your head like an old-time
photographer if need be.

   I assume you'll be recording your voice with a camera.
If a photographer is recording for you, have her hold up a
finger in front of the lens with the track number; this will
make it easier to find the right track later.

   You may consider using an audio recorder, like a
Samsung Zoom. I use a basic Zoom H1 for my voice and
end up with an mp3 file when I'm done. The Zoom plugs
into my computer so I can drag the file right over when I'm
done, and mp3 or even wave files are much smaller than
the video file would be if you used your camera to track.

   As you track, try to tell the story, not just read words.
Talk as you would to your friends, and use gestures--yes,
you can hear the difference if someone is physically
animated as they speak. It's OK if you goof up, you can
just start up again and patch it together in editing. Edited
track needs to be perfect.

Standups

The standup is the part of the package where the viewers
get to see who's talking to them, which is important. They

56
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

run between 5-20 seconds depending on what you're
saying and doing. If you stand in front of a building or
sign, while holding a stick mic and just talking, you are
doing what is called a "thumbsucker." You have shown
viewers your face, and have just shown everyone else you
are not very creative. Better to treat standups as show-and-
tell. Demonstrate something or point out how or where
something was done. Your station gave you a wireless mic
for a reason. If you don't have a wireless, you can still walk,
talk, show, and tell. This is a chance to show viewers (and
potential employers watching your resume reel) that you
understand and command your medium.

   Standups should be flawless, since you can do as many
takes as is necessary to get them right. I usually need 3-5
takes to get everything right. As a photographer in a top-
market, I have shot 20 takes for a reporter who just
couldn't get it right. In market 111 (at the time) I worked
with a reporter who did his stand up in one take. The
problem was, I was doing a pan/zoom out and assumed he
would need multiple takes like everyone else and I'd have a
few chances to practice my camera moves. I had to ask him
to do it again.

   If you're doing 10 or fewer takes you'll be fine. I ask
reporters (and especially students and interns) to say their
standup three times perfectly before I even turn the
camera on.

   So where in the story does a standup go? Rarely at the
beginning--these days that may be done, but it is called an
as-live or look-live and mimics the look of a real live shot.
You can end a package with a standup, but these often end
up as thumbsuckers.

   Besides a demonstration, standups can be used as a
bridge from one thought to another. Going back to the

                                                                                                  57
Brian Champagne

Snow Drivers story, perhaps you want to visit a local tire
store to see if snow tire sales picked up on the first day
of real snow. Up in the canyon, you crouch down by a
stuck car and say THIS CAR'S TIRES ARE STUCK .
BUT MAYBE THE TRACTION PROBLEM ISN'T ALL
SNOW. SOME OF IT COULD BE THE TIRES
THEMSELVES. This sets you up to have your next shot
be at the tire store. You could use a NATS pop of the air-
impact wrench taking off lug nuts, or a sound bite of the
tire store manager saying, "First storm of every year people
find out their tires aren't going to make it."

   Notice how the sentence was arranged to have you
mention the tires at the beginning so it's clear why you're
cuddling up to a tire and ends ready for the soundbite or
NATS pop.

   Standups can bridge two soundbites in a less-visual
story: Follow the guidelines for writing up to a soundbite.
Because packages keep going, remember to write to and
from SOTs and NATS.

The Diamond Approach

When given a story about a larger problem (or good thing),
you can try the diamond approach to the story by finding
someone/something representative or affected by it. A
local county was cutting its supplemented housing checks.
We found a mother who depended on the assistance. We
started the story with NATS of her doing some dishes,
learned her story, and then introduced the county-wide
cuts. We used soundbites from the country administrator
explaining why this was happening, and then wrapped the
story up by going back to the mother.

   What is a budget cut? What does it look like? Budgets

58
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

don't watch TV; introduce us to people affected by both
sides of an issue.

People

If you are describing your story to your producer, you had
better include people. A new stop sign on a once-peaceful
road is not about signs, safety, or traffic; it is about how
people will/won't like it, people will be safer/in more
danger, and people who tried to stop it/get it done.

   I arrived at KEYT a month or two after the big Santa
Barbara fire. Photographers got lots of great video of
enormous flames. There were signs up at the station that
read, "Flames don't watch TV." Yes, get a shot (and write
about) of big, house-devouring flames, but your next shot
should be about the people affected.

   Crashed cars don't watch TV: Shoot the people and
record their reactions and changed lives.

   Torrential rains, extreme heat/cold, blizzards,
hurricanes, and tornadoes don't watch TV: Shoot how
these will affect your viewers.

   Heart-warming puppies and kittens don't watch TV:
Can your viewers adopt them? Do the puppies help people
with PTSD?

   New construction projects don't watch TV: Whose
lives will be affected?

   Basically, every story is about people. A comet that only
passes earth every 100 years is interesting, but still should
be tied into people.

                     Thinking Visually

Television is the medium of motion and sound. Many
stories get advanced because they are motion- and sound-

                                                                                                  59
Brian Champagne

rich; others get rejected because they are considered too
abstract. There are, however, ways to overcome what
might be a visually-poor story. When deciding if a story is
visual or not, ask, "What can I point the camera at?" and
beware of wallpaper answers.

   Most stories, through the Diamond Approach, can be
made visual. What do layoffs look like? Higher internet
speeds? Kindness? Discrimination? Love? Economic
Sanctions? Poverty? Most stories with an abstract (nothing
to point the camera at) topic can be made visual by finding
an example of the effects on people.

   You might also consider metaphor, if appropriate. You
can use a popular, established metaphor: "They say time is
money. With the new highway project's delays, what uses
to cost you 35 cents in time (coins clink) will now cost you
three dollars and sixty-five cents (more clink, or you slide
the stacks next to each other for comparison).

   Some government reporters are quite good at creating
their own metaphors. If uninsured people are dragging
down the progress of a government program, hitch a
trailer to a car, get a rowboat and someone to hang on
the outside of it, or just tie a heavy weight around
someone--you could try this at a gym. Just make sure to
explain it and not let it get too distracting.

   One of your biggest challenges in the future is that more
and more newsworthy stories happen on computers and
mobile devices, and not in the "real world." You'll need
creative ways to cover apps, internet fraud, and programs.

60
                                  8.

                    Producing

                                            BY KIERA FARRIMOND

                                   KSL EXECUTIVE PRODUCER

T ake the image of a big shot Hollywood producer out
       of your head. That is NOT what we're about to talk
about. News producers don't have their name in the
credits. They don't sit back and make decisions while
other people do all the work. And they don't make
millions of dollars.

   News producers work entirely behind the scenes, do
most of the hard labor and generally get no credit for their
work (at least from the public). Sounds glamorous right?
In the newsroom, producers are the workhorses. Some
days, producers will work nonstop from the moment they
sit down until the moment their show goes off the air. It's
a demanding, thankless job. So why be a news producer?
Because it can also be the most exhilarating and rewarding
job in the newsroom. We'll let these long time producers
explain why they love what they do:

                                                                                                  61
Brian Champagne

   "Just when I think I can't take it anymore, something
happens that makes me realize how important my job is
and how many lives I can positively impact." - Erica
Thomas, WBRC Producer

   "Never the same day twice." - Atish Patel, WTSP
Producer

   "There's nothing quite like creating something from
nothing every single day. Then, erasing it all and starting
over. You learn to condense a ton of information into
digestible portions every day. And you absolutely rely on
teamwork to get things done." - Melissa Dies, KXLY
Executive Producer

What Is a News Producer?

Producers are the brains behind every newscast.
   They're the ones who decide which stories make the

show, which stories get cut, and just how much time each
story is worth. It's up to a producer to give viewers an all-
encompassing look at what's going on in the world that
day, which is not an easy task in such a short amount
of time. Producers decide how much of the newscast is
dedicated to crime and how much is reserved for happy
stories.

   Producers are the writers of the newscast.
   The only things in a newscast not written by the
producer are the meteorologist's weather report, the
sports report and stories filed in the field by a reporter. If
an anchor reads it off the teleprompter, there's a 99 percent
chance the producer wrote it. In some stations, you'll find
anchors who like to help out and write some scripts, but
in others, you'll find anchors who couldn't say their name
right on TV if the producer hadn't typed it into the

62
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

teleprompter for them. This obviously means producers
need to have good writing skills, good grammar and even
good spelling because the last thing you want during a live
newscast is for an anchor to say pubic instead of public,
Osama instead of Obama, moron instead of Mormon, you
get the idea. They've all hit air in my career, and you can
bet the anchor, executive producer and news directors
were not thrilled after the show.

   Producers are the vision behind the newscast.
   The look, the feel and the tone of the show come
entirely from the producer. Will the show start off with a
reporter on a house fire or will the lead story be a different
reporter on a big scandal at the state capitol? Will the
anchors read story after story about robberies, stabbings
or will the show be filled with stories on the economy
or consumer alerts? The producer makes all of those
decisions. Each newscast a station airs is going to have
a different feel. Early morning news should be different
than mid-day news, early evening and late-evening news.
The story choices, the length of those stories and even
the way the stories are written will be different, and it's
the producer's job to know their show and their audience.
Meanwhile, while it's important for ALL journalists to be
impartial and not show bias, but as a producer you face
this is two ways. Where a reporter must make sure his or
her story is not right- or left-leaning or missing interviews
to give the story balance, a producer has to make sure each
story is the same AND make sure that the mix of stories
chosen to fill the newscast does not show bias as well.
   Good producers take ownership of their newscast.
   Producers come to work each day hoping to craft their best
newscast.
   To good producers, a rundown is not a template to be

                                                                                                  63
Brian Champagne

filled in. It is a blank canvas providing timing parameters
to the day's biggest stories and best videos. Good
producers cultivate relationships with the anchors,
editors, reporters, photographers and other members of
the newsroom. They accept responsibility for their
mistakes that make air and work to correct the errors and
learn from the mistakes. They also accept the
responsibility of figuring out what did go wrong, if it
wasn't something they caused. Anchors want to know
why when they were supposed to be on-camera reading
a story, the director took a different camera or the wrong
video or graphic came up. It's the producer's job to talk
to everyone involved after the show and help ensure it
doesn't happen again.

Duties of a Producer

Find the News - From helping determine which stories your
reporters are going to cover and which of those will end
up in your show, producers are also in charge of finding
all the other news of the day to fill the show. This can be
more local news, national or world news, consumer news,
medical news, and even some news that just plain fun here
and there. We'll talk more in depth about how producers
find the news later on in this chapter.

   Stack the News - Once a producer has found the news,
or as they are finding it, they are stacking it in a rundown.
This means they're deciding which order the stories will
go on air. Producers have to keep in mind what's coming
before and what's coming after a story. You want to group
like stories together, i.e. crime stories, health stories, etc.
But you also don't want to have five straight minutes of
crime in the newscast. That's just depressing for everyone

64
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

watching, and if you depress your viewers, they won't
watch you again.

   Write the News - When a show is stacked, the producer
will spend time writing all of the great stories they've
chosen for their newscast. Information for these stories
can come from local press releases, on-camera interviews
from the scene of a local news event, national and
international wire feeds and other news video feed
services.

   Edit the News - If a news anchor says it, it'd better be
true. One of the BIGGEST jobs of a producer is to edit
the news. This includes looking for factual errors but also
grammar errors and spelling errors. Producers should read
EVERYTHING they've written out-loud before it goes on
air. You want to make sure the story will make sense to a
viewer who has to hear and understand the story in a very
short period.

   Time the News - Once you're on the air, the production
team takes over most of the hard work. But a producer
can't sit back and relax in the control room. At this point,
their biggest job is to time the show. Each newscast is given
a specific amount of airtime to fill, down to the second
or even the frame. There is no budging. If your show is
scheduled to start at 5:00:00 and end at 5:28:35 and your
anchors are still talking at 5:28:36, they will be cut off, and
your station will move on to the next program without
them. Not only does this look unprofessional on the air
but it makes the anchors look bad and you never, ever
want to make your anchors look bad on the air.

   Coordinate with the Production Team - During their shift,
a producer is typically in the zone for most of the day. That
means, sitting at their desk with multiple windows open
on their computer, typically with headphones on listening

                                                                                                  65
Brian Champagne

to stories or video, getting information, writing stories,
editing stories, etc. There's not a lot of group discussion
taking place. But as you get nearer to air, you have to come
out of your zone and begin to communicate with your
director and other people on your production staff. These
guys are the experts in getting it done. Do you want to
try a new camera shot or angle? Run that by your director,
maybe even take a field trip to the studio to see the angle
for yourself and adjust with the director's guidance. Most
directors are happy to try new things, as long as they're
physically possible AND as long as a producer gives plenty
of time to plan and practice. Good producers are willing
to take risks, think outside the box and give viewers a new
experience every now and then and they absolutely can't
do that without a great relationship with their director.

   Coordinate with the Assignment Desk - The assignment
desk is the heart of all the action in a newsroom. It's where
the police scanners are blaring, the phones are ringing and
the crews are being dispatched. It's critical that a producer
keep close communication with the assignment desk, so
they know of any changes to big stories or of any new
stories that are breaking and need to be added to their
show. In some newsrooms, and on some shifts, it's part
of the producer's job to listen to those police scanners
and react with appropriate crews. But even if it's not your
job, you should learn the police lingo, train your ears to
understand the jumbled mess that comes out of those
speakers and at the very least, pay attention enough so that
you can tell when there's breaking news because of all the
extra noise coming from the assignment desk.

   Coordinate with the Reporters - Producer/reporter
communication is critical in every newsroom. Producers
should be checking in with their reporters throughout the

66
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

day. They should know if the reporter scored an exclusive
interview or if the reporter is struggling to get anyone to
do an interview. Producers can help redirect reporters in
the event their story falls through, or they can help come
up with ideas of different angles to pursue. A reporter's
story should never surprise a producer live on the air, so
it's important to make sure that two-way communication
is open up until the show is on the air and then during the
newscast through interruptible feedback or IFB. Reporters
in the field are relying on the producer during the show
to let them know how long they have until their live, how
long they have left in their time and when to wrap things
up. Clear communication here is critical, and a good
producer doesn't forget about their crews in the field, even
when things are falling apart in the studio.

   Coordinate with the Anchors - They make the big bucks
for a reason. They are the face on the TV and it's their
reputation on the line every single time that the "On Air"
light turns on. Anchors are typically more seasoned
journalists with years more experience than most
producers have. This is a valuable tool for a producer. If
you're questioning what story to lead with or whether or
not to use a certain piece of video or soundbite, on top
of getting guidance from an executive producer or news
director, ask the anchor. In most newsrooms, the anchors
are happy to be included in the discussion. Producers also
want to make sure they warn anchors about anything new
or different happening in the show. If you want your
anchor to use a touchscreen, for example, and they've
never done it before, you need to give them a heads up
well before air time, so they have time to practice and get
comfortable. Let's be honest; you'd never have an anchor
who had never used the touchscreen before, use it for the

                                                                                                  67
Brian Champagne

first time on the air. It would be a complete and total
nightmare. But let's say you took that field trip with your
director and decided to try out a new camera shot.
Anchors are creatures of habit, and when the camera isn't
where they think it should be, they get nervous. Alerting
them before air gives them a chance to prepare. During
the show, producers are the anchors' connection to the
control room. Producers have the ability to get in their
ear at any moment and let them know a story has been
killed or cut out of the show, tell them a reporter's live
shot has died or even let them know their necklace or tie is
crooked. Good producers know how to balance between
talking to the anchors too much and leaving the anchors
out there feeling lost and alone with no clue what's going
on in production control. Trust me; anchors want to know
what's going on when things start going away from the
plan. A calm, collected producer in their ear will do
wonders for their nerves, even if all the producer can say is
"I don't know what's wrong but we're working on it, and
this is what we're going to go to next."

   Be a Newsroom Leader - Producers get to work with
nearly everyone in a newsroom which means you get to
build relationships across and outside the building. That
puts producers in the position to take a leadership role
even if they're not in any sort of management role. Again,
producers are the vision behind the newscast. They have
the big picture in their mind, so it's their job to help
everyone from the talent to the art department understand
the vision so that everyone comes together nicely on the
air.

68
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

Where Does All The News Come From?

In a newscast, you'll typically see six types of news: local,
national, world, interesting news from out of your local
market, weather and sports. Producers get to decide how
much of each newscast is dedicated to each. Let's take
a brief look at what each of those mean and then we'll
explore where the producer finds those stories to include
in their newscast.

      1. Local News - Producers in local TV markets will
          fill the majority of their newscasts with local
          news. These can come in multiple formats
          including reporter PKGs, VOs, VO/SOTs,
          NatPKGs, Maps and full-screen graphics.

      2. National News - These are the top stories of
          interest across the country that day. This could
          be political news coming out of Washington,
          D.C., or it could be a mass tragedy in a different
          state. These are stories you're likely to see the
          networks cover heavily during the morning and
          evening network news. Typically, local TV
          producers will include this news is smaller forms.
          Instead of dedicating 2-3 minutes to the story, it
          might get only 25-45 seconds during a local
          newscast.

      3. World News - Following national news, this one is
          self-explanatory. These are stories with
          international interest. This could be political, or
          it could be a major weather incident in another
          country.

      4. Interesting news from across the country - Think
          incredible video of a swift-water rescue during

                                                                                                  69
Brian Champagne

          flooding in the Midwest, aerial footage of a wild
          llama chase through the streets of Phoenix or the
          story of how a 4-year-old girl in Florida helped
          save her little brother from an alligator attack and
          she retells the entire thing in front of the camera.
          These are stories that have some kind of wow
          factor that makes them interesting to viewers
          everywhere.
      5. Weather - This is almost always the biggest factor
          in why a viewer turns on a newscast. Viewers
          want to know how to prepare for the day, or the
          next day, with what to wear, what to bring, etc.
      6. Sports Headlines - Not an element of EVERY
          newscast, but generally you'll see some kind of
          sports segment in most morning news and late-
          evening news.

Now that you understand the basic content categories that
can make up a newscast, let's look at where producers find
stories that fall into those categories.

      1. Local News - These are stories shot locally by your
          own station's photography staff and/or reporters.
          You might have a story that doesn't have any
          video but you can have a map built to show the
          location of the event, or you can have a graphic
          made to show a person's mugshot or describe the
          suspect police are looking for.

      2. National News - Producers can find these stories
          in a handful of places. Obviously, it's impossible
          for a local TV producer in Boise, Idaho to call
          police in Boston, Massachusetts for information
          regarding a news event happening there. Just as it

70
                                    WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

    would be impossible for a producer in San Diego,
    California to gather his own information about
    the G20 summit happening overseas. But it's
    important for most daily newscasts to include
    elements of news from out of your local area.
    That's where news wires and news video feeds
    come in.
    Each station typically subscribes to 2-3 of these
    services. The Associated Press is probably the
    most widely used by a majority of stations. The
    Associated Press is a standard resource most
    producers have access to, and it's a great place to
    start the day and get a feel for what's making
    news nationally, internationally and even locally
    in some markets. The AP Wires include National
    Newsminutes that are sent out every hour. This is
    typically very short, but informative bulletins
    giving the very latest in the top 6-7 national
    stories of that day.
    Video to accompany your national news will
    come from the affiliate video news service. For
    CBS stations, that's generally CBS Newspath.
    For NBC, it's NBC VideoOnDemand (VOD).
    CNN also has a video news feed that many
    stations pay a subscription to. These services
    usually have staff reporters who are available for
    affiliate stations to use on the air, typically on the
    top 2-3 stories of the day. Producers can choose to
    use those reporters to cover a big story (for a fee)
    or rewrite the story using the feed's information,
    for one of their own anchors or reporters to read.
3. World News - Producers can find these stories on

                                                                                         71
Brian Champagne

          the wires and video news feeds just like national
          news
      4. Interesting news from across the country - Here is
          where you'll REALLY thank your news director
          for paying for CNN Newsource or your affiliate
          news feed. Stations across the country subscribe
          to these feeds and share video with each other so
          that when a station in Texas has a story about a
          really cool kid who saved his grandma by calling
          9-1-1, you can air that too. These are the stories
          that make GREAT teases and can keep your
          viewers around through commercial breaks.
      5. Weather - Luckily for producers, meteorologists
          typically handle their own content. Producers can
          help guide what that looks like, for example, if
          you want to do an extra weather segment tied to a
          local wildfire and you want the meteorologist to
          talk specifically about winds or lightning in that
          area, the producer should absolutely make that
          request. This is one spot where communication is
          critical to keep the flow of the show going.
      6. Sports Headlines - This is another place where
          producers help guide instead of doing the heavy
          lifting. Most sports departments will create their
          own segments with input from the producer.

Where Does All That News Go?

The Rundown
   Once a producer has decided a story is important

enough to make their newscast, they'll start organizing the
stories in what's called a show rundown. This is a place
where everyone from the producer to the director,

72
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

anchors and everyone in-between can see throughout the
day what the newscast is looking like. Anchors can select a
story and pre-read through a script, directors can plan for
certain shots, and field crews can see where they've landed
in the mix of stories and generally input their scripts from
wherever they are on location.

   The show producer fills out the majority of the
rundown when they are choosing the stories they want to
run. The rundown is also where the producer will indicate
to the director which anchor is reading that story, what
format it is (a reporter toss, a VO/SOT, a PKG, etc.) and
in some stations where anchors move around the set. The
producer will also indicate where that anchor will read the
story. Producers will typically indicate whether or not a
story includes extra graphic elements in the rundown and
it's also where they'll give each story an allotted time and
be able to see how much more news they need to fill the
show.

   There are two main news rundown programs, ENPS
and iNews. Both work similarly but have a little different
look. Ask any producer that's used both, they'll usually
tell you they like the program they learned on better, but
both do the job and are easy enough once you get the
hang of them. Both have the feeling of a spreadsheet with
columns and rows dedicated to certain information. Let's
look at what some of those most common columns are for:

   Page - This is how a rundown is numbered so that when
the scripts are printed, there's a page number to keep
things in order. In news, the shows are divided into blocks
which encompass the airtime between commercial breaks.
These blocks are alphabetical starting with A and
generally ending with C or D for a 30-minute news
program and G or H for a 60-minute newscast. Page

                                                                                                  73
Brian Champagne

numbers are tied to those blocks and numerals start over
again at the beginning of each block.
Story Slug - This is the name of the story. Each station will
have different ways of determining story slugs. In some
stations, the story will be slugged the same thing in all
newscasts to simplify archive searches in the future while
in other stations the producer is free to give a story
whatever slug they'd like (so long as it pertains to the
actual information the story contains).
Segment - Here is where a producer indicates the story
format. Reader, VO, VO/SOT, PKG, reporter story.
Stories that have multiple elements, like an anchor intro
to a reporter live shot then a reporter PKG, will typically
take up multiple rows of the rundown with each element
described in the segment column.
Anchor - Who is reading the story? Producers decide and
indicate that here.
Estimated Duration - Here a producer can decide how
much time they want to allot to each story. VOs typically
should run :20-:25, VO/SOTs should run :35-:45. PKG
times will vary by station and by content, but a general
assignment daily report will typically run somewhere
between 1:15-1:30. Since each show has a specific amount
of air-time to fill, producers will also use this column to
judge how close their content is to filling that time. News
software will help calculate that time and generally
indicate for the producer how "light" or "heavy" they are
on time. Most producers are comfortable going into a
newscast :30 light. This can allot for reporter stories that
go long, unexpected delays or issues that can take extra
seconds, etc.
Actual Duration - This column will populate on its own
once a story is written. Both ENPS and iNews calculate the

74
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

length of scripts as they're being written. Producers need
to pay attention to the actual time of scripts to make sure a
story isn't written for more time than they've given it.

   Other columns in the rundown can include columns
for graphic elements, assigned editors and notes for where
editors can find the video for the story. There are also
columns used only by the production team and director to
indicate which camera will be used or where the video will
come from once you're on the air.

Stacking a Show

Putting everything into your rundown is referred to as
stacking your show. It's what will take the majority of a
producer's day. Typically, a producer will start with stories
in one order and throughout the day, more stories come
in, breaking news happens and what eventually goes on air
is nowhere near how the show was stacked hours before.

                          News Blocks

Earlier we briefly described news blocks when it comes to
page numbers in a rundown. Now, let's talk in more detail
about those blocks and how they differ from each other.

   A Block - In most newscasts, the A Block is where the
biggest news of the day belongs. It's where your show
kicks off and where most of the hard news will come.
These stories are the most urgent and important for
viewers to know about. Not for cat fashion shows and viral
videos of water skiing squirrels - and if you get either
of those references, you should get bonus points on your
next test.
B Block - This second block following the first commercial
break is usually reserved for stories that are on the lighter

                                                                                                  75
Brian Champagne

side (NOT murders, robberies, etc.). Producers also like
to have stories with great video or other "teasable" stories
that can help keep viewers watching as the news stories
become less urgent as the newscast moves along.
The B Block is also where, in most 30-minute newscasts,
you'll find the main weather segment. How much time
you spend on weather will depend on several things, your
market, the forecast and your meteorologist. In some
places, main weather, as it's called, gets just 1:30 and in
others, it gets 3:00 or more.
C Block - For some 30-minute shows, the C Block is where
you'll find the sports segment. This is another segment
where the timing will be determined by the news of the
day and general station practices.

   In other 30-minute shows where sports do not have a
presence, the C Block will be your end block. The last
block of the show sometimes reserved for a kicker, think
zoo babies, water skiing squirrels or other fun, very light
hearted stories, and a goodbye.
In a longer, 60-minute newscast, the C Block can be
reserved for just about anything. It's a good place to throw
in a few interesting consumer stories or health stories. The
C Block is a shorter block that will get you to the bottom
of the hour where you'll restart things with another hard
news block for the D Block.

Selecting a Lead

One of the biggest decisions of the day for a producer is
answering the question "What is my lead?" This should
be a story that's urgent and has wide appeal. Some days
there's late breaking news that slides into the role of lead
story, other days producers rely on reporters to find the

76
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

biggest story of the day. If the lead story has been
happening all day, producers need to figure out what's the
very latest or what comes next so that the viewer knows
it's not the same story they saw on an earlier newscast or
read online hours ago.

   Lead stories do not always have to be about death and
destruction. Yes, the news should be harder, but given the
right scripting and set-up, an argument can be made for
many different stories to lead the newscast. Even stories
about ducks stalling traffic on the interstate, yes, I led a
show with that once.

Pacing

As a producer is stacking the show and inputting all of
the stories he/she wants in the broadcast, they also need
to consider the pacing of the show. Viewers get bored.
Easily. They're like toddlers. Or college students. To keep
viewers watching, producers need to keep their attention.
One way to do this is to keep the pace of the show "up."
To maintain a fast-paced show, producers should not go
from one live reporter to another, unless you're in a big
story, breaking news, team coverage on multiple-scenes
type event. Having anchors toss out to a live reporter, who
then tosses to a pre-recorded PKG and then gets tossed
back, takes roughly 2:00. If you have three of those back
to back you've just spent 6:00 of your newscast on just
three stories. Instead, a producer should try to break up
the bigger reporter stories with quick, shorter news that
the anchors read.

   Tight writing that's straight to the point also helps
pacing. You have such a limited amount of time to get
information to viewers; every sentence should provide the

                                                                                                  77
Brian Champagne

viewer with NEW information and not repeat something
that's already been said.

Meters

Speaking of viewers' attention spans, producers have
another thing to keep in mind while stacking their show.
TV News is driven by ratings, right? The higher the
ratings, the higher the sales team can charge for
commercial time. Ratings are important and a producer
plays a key role in a show's ratings, for obvious reasons.

   In a nutshell, when it comes to ratings, a newscast is
broken down into 15-minute segments. Shows get rating
points for each 15-minute segment. Those are then
averaged for the entire newscast. As long as a viewer
watches for 5 minutes during that 15-minute window, they
are counted in the rating. If they turn off the TV or change
the channel after watching just 4:59 of the show, they
count for nothing. BAM. Quickest description of ratings
you'll ever get. It's a lot more complicated, but for our
purposes here that's all you need to know.

   Meters help ensure viewers stick around for the time
needed to count. Producers stack their blocks with meters
in mind. The A Block should obviously be more than 5
minutes long so that you count all those viewers who
watched for the first part of the news. Ideally, the A Block
is more like 9-10 minutes long. Weather is generally
stacked during that second quarter hour since it's one of
the very top reasons why viewers tune in to the news. If
they stick around through at least 20-minutes after the
show started, the station gets to count their viewership in
both 15-minute segments of the newscast. Does your brain

78
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

hurt yet? Just wait until you see a ratings report at your first
job.

Showcasing

Good producers do more than just stack the news, write
the news and get ready to go live. They showcase the news.
This means they add elements that go beyond a typical
anchor on-camera-VO-SOT-next story repeat. In the
least, it means adding graphics that accent the story during
anchor reads but even better would be a producer who
researched extra information that added context, history
or more details to a story and had special graphics built
to help visually show the audience that information.
Showcasing skills develop over time and new producers
can find inspiration by watching other newscasts online.
It's always fun to see how other markets do the news and
then try implementing something new in your own show.

Writing for TV - Reminders

You've covered this in detail in other chapters but here are
a few more things to remember when it comes to writing
specifically for TV:

      1. Short sentences. Think ten words or less, that's
          not a hard and fast rule but a number to keep in
          mind.

      2. Keep things simple. Remember, your audience
          doesn't have the luxury of going back and
          rereading a sentence that didn't make sense the
          first time.

      3. DON'T leave out important facts. Even :20

                                                                                                  79
Brian Champagne

          stories should have the who, what, when, where
          and why answered.
      4. ALWAYS read what you've written out loud. You
          will catch things like mistakes or even just
          sentences that don't quite sound right.
      5. Write to video. DO NOT write a story without
          looking at the video you have.

Writing Teases - Reminders

      1. Decide if the most interesting part of the story is
          amazing video, sound or some other detail.

      2. Make a promise.
      3. Be SPECIFIC. No, "we'll have the latest, coming

          up next." Duh. That's your job.
      4. Make sure your video doesn't give away the story.

          Communicate with your editors.
      5. Deliver whatever you promised.

Putting It All on the Air

Okay, now that your show is stacked, written, showcased
and ready to go, it's time to head to the control room.
This is where a director will take the show you've carefully
crafted and poured your heart and soul into for 8 hours
and bring it to life on the air. When everything goes to
plan, you'll leave the booth feeling extremely proud of
your team.

Timing

This is one of the main jobs of a producer during the
live show. Both iNews and ENPS, and any other news
producing software out there contain an internal timing

80
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

function. Producers will control this timing bar as the
show progresses. As you move from one story to the next,
you'll follow along with the timing bar which will help you
know if stories are running on time or if something took
longer than you allotted, like that reporter who always
thinks their story is worth more than the 1:15 you gave him.
When stories start to go heavy, as we say, you'll have to
figure out how to make that time back somewhere else.
This can be done in a handful of ways, but the most
common is to choose another story to kill or drop out of
the show. That's called floating. Floating the story in your
rundown takes it out of the teleprompter, but it's still very
important to communicate and let your director and then
anchors know about the story you're dropping.
Producers should confirm their show's end before air time,
so they know exactly what time they need to be off the
air. Some morning shows don't have hard outs or specific
times the next program will take over, but it's still
important to finish at a time that leaves the next hour
or half-hour newscast beginning at its scheduled time. In
some stations, producers will count the anchors down in
their IFB for the last 10 seconds, in other stations, the
director or floor director will give the anchors that count
so that no one is still talking when you've faded to black.

Breaking News

Good producers are never afraid to add breaking news at
the last minute. Trust me; breaking news is what you'll
live for. It adds excitement to your day and can leave you
feeling extra fulfilled when you leave.

   In today's world, your viewers have up-to-the-minute
news available right at their fingertips on a smartphone,

                                                                                                  81
Brian Champagne

laptop or tablet. If your show doesn't have the VERY
newest information, they will turn you off. Newscasts
should be updated as much as possible leading up to and
even during the show. As a brand new producer, this can
feel daunting, but I promise with time adding breaking
news while you're timing the show you already created,
will become second nature.

Why be a Producer?

If this sounds like an easy job, you clearly didn't read the
whole chapter. Producing is hard. It's a jam-packed, non-
stop day filled with writing and rewriting, researching,
editing, checking in on reporters and eating lunch at your
desk because you don't have time to step away or your
show won't be done before deadline. There's quite a bit of
pressure on a producer in the newsroom. They spend the
day making decisions that will shape the entire newscast
that market will see. They're making ethical calls,
sometimes on the fly, and after everything goes on air and
you head home to sleep, the rest of the team will pour over
that night's ratings and try and determine why you won or
didn't win.

   Different producers are driven by different factors. Each
has a different reason for loving what they do. Some
producers love producing because they love to be in
charge. They love calling the shots, especially in the
control room. Other producers choose the job because
they really enjoy writing. Some producers enjoy the job
because it's different every single day. You will never
produce the same show twice, which can keep things
interesting.

   If you've never considered producing, I urge you to give

82
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

it a shot. You may find it's something you hate but you
might also find that it's something you love and something
you excel at. Good producers are hard to find, and that
means it's a job where you'll ALWAYS be in demand.
Where jobs for on-air talent like reporters and anchors can
be hard to come by, especially as stations try to cut down
on costs, jobs for producers are abundant. Producers with
proven ability can find themselves being fought over and
that means, in the end, the producer can end up on top
with the pick of where they want to work and how much
they want to work for.

                                                                                                  83
                                  9.

       Teases and Promos

What is a tease?

A tease is usually a few lines of copy, preferably
      accompanied by video, promising something to
viewers if they stick around through a commercial break.
They can also appear during programming, exhorting
viewers to watch your news, which may be a week, day(s),
hours or minutes away.

   At many stations, the promotions and tease producer
is its own position. The tease producer attends planning
meetings and works with producers to determine which
stories would be tease-able. At stations without tease
producers, the producer is on their own to write the teases.

   Teases can be just a few seconds long or up to thirty
seconds for one that occupies its own spot. They may
appear in the newscast before a commercial break, right
before the show starts or even mid-block. They may also
run on social media as you let your friends and followers
know what's coming up.

                                                                                                  85
Brian Champagne

Examples of Non-News Teases

Movie trailers are teases. They show you parts of the movie
and may even develop characters and a plot line, but the
good ones leave enough out to get you to want to pay to
see the rest of it.

   The people who give out free samples at Costco are
teasing. They give you a taste of how yummy the product
they're pushing is and you can buy more from the display
right behind them. The good ones make you buy a $9 bag
of a new snack food you have somehow lived without up
to this point.

   Social media is full of teases. The good ones get you to
click over when you are in a hurry and went online for
something entirely different.

How to Write a Tease

The "Golden Nugget"
   A good tease provides some information, enough to set

up and/or arouse curiosity, and then you hold back what
KSTU producer Kelton Wells calls the "Golden Nugget."
This nugget you promise is some missing or additional
information your viewers will want to know about so
badly they'll stay with your newscast. If they hear it on the
radio, they'll want to get home and turn on your news.

   Choosing the Nugget
   You need to choose a specific aspect or fact to tease.
"Details," "More" and "A look at" are not concrete. Could
you imagine a couple sitting at home watching your
newscast: As you go to break, you promise them details
on a new lunch program that might not be as healthy for
children. Would they fight over the remote for details?
Maybe if they had school-aged children.

86
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   Instead of "details," you write COULD YOU FEED A
KID A HEALTHY SCHOOL LUNCH FOR $2.68?
WE'LL SHOW YOU HOW THAT NUMBER IS
MAKING OUR KIDS FAT. Or perhaps hold back the
budget fact: EXPERTS SAY SCHOOL LUNCHES ARE
MAKING OUR KIDS FAT. GUESS HOW MUCH
MONEY YOUR SCHOOL GETS TO TRY TO GIVE
KIDS HEALTHY LUNCHES.

   Another example: Police arrested a 92-year-old bank
robber. He said he fell on hard times, hates banks and has
been robbing them since he was 80. He handed a note
to the teller who asked twice if he was kidding. He was
arrested 30 minutes after the robbery, and was just
sentenced to 12 years in prison. He says the prison serves
better food than his rest home.

   All of the facts above are tease-able; this is not the time
to say A 92-YEAR-OLD MAN WAS SENTENCED FOR
ROBBING A BANK. MORE COMING UP. This might
arouse some curiosity, but a concrete tease will seal the
deal. Some possibilities:

   A MAN GETS JUST 20 MILES AFTER ROBBING A
TEXAS BANK. WAS IT A BAD GETAWAY PLAN OR
HIS AGE?

   A JUDGE SENTENCED A TEXAS MAN FOR
ROBBING A BANK. WE'LL TELL YOU WHY HE'LL
PROBABLY SPEND THE REST OF HIS LIFE IN
PRISON... AND HE'S O-K WITH IT.

   HE MIGHT BE THE OLDEST BANK ROBBER IN
THE COUNTRY... WE'LL TELL YOU WHICH
BIRTHDAY HE'LL BE CELEBRATING IN PRISON.

   LAST TIME HE ROBBED A BANK HE WAS
EIGHTY-SEVEN AND GOT PROBATION. WE'LL
TELL YOU HOW MUCH OLDER HE IS NOW... AND

                                                                                                  87
Brian Champagne

HOW THINGS GOT MORE SERIOUS AT HIS
SENTENCING TODAY.

   Obviously the man's age is the reason he's in the news,
but his motivations are curious too, so all are possibilities.
You could use your viewer demographics to help you
decide which elements to tease: A younger audience won't
relate to his age, so the logistics might be better. You might
tease the fact that the teller asked if he was serious twice.
Older viewers would appreciate that this guy prefers
prison food and is even physically able to rob a bank. Since
no one was hurt, you can use a lighter mood.

Tease With Care

Do not tell viewers YOU WON'T BELIEVE or YOU'LL
BE SHOCKED. First, maybe they won't be, and second,
you can do better. You may have fallen for these for the
first few click bait articles you went to, but are probably
done with "...is amazing!" for a while.

   Do not promise what you don't deliver. Viewers won't
fall for this twice. A trailer for Marvel's Avengers: Age of
Ultron showed a cracked Captain America shield and
enough costume wreckage, and sad music to have me
believe they were beaten. I saw the movie, they were not,
and I've been skeptical of their trailers since. If you
promise to tell how to safely observe a solar eclipse, you
had better have a list of places and/or conditions, a
viewing box I can make or buy and some warnings from
experts. If all your report says is "don't look directly at the
sun," you have over-promised and delivered only what our
mothers taught us as small children. The Golden Nugget
must be revealed and it can't be something cheap. The
social media and internet teases that lead you to pointless

88
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

or drawn out articles are called click bait; now we all laugh
at people dumb enough to fall for them. Don't make your
viewers feel dumb or else they'll go somewhere that
doesn't. The second time someone says, "made you look,"
you don't. Do not trick viewers; tease honestly with real
information. Promotions Promotions, or promos, may its
own job title or department, depending on the size of the
operation. They can tease to the upcoming newscast called
"topicals" or promote an anchor, your investigative unit,
or promote your station's newscast or general image. The
image ads have more in common with advertising than
journalism. Promos may run on air or social media.
Nightly topical teases must be ready to air in a few hours.
Some generic promos may be weeks in the making and use
more Hollywood-style cameras and lighting, and may use
external companies to produce them.

                                                                                                  89
                                10.

                   Live Shots

L ive shots are an integral part of most television
       newscasts; they used to be what set us apart from
other media. The live capability of social media is
changing the game, but for the moment, television is the
medium that can take you anywhere in the world at that
instant in full broadcast quality.

What Is a Live Shot?

An anchor reading at a desk might be live, but that does
not constitute a live shot in our definition here. Tossing
to the weather center or the studio sports desk is not a
live shot: Positions in the studio laid out by a producer
and shot by studio cameras are not live shots. Reporters
fronting packages live in the newsroom (often with
teleprompter) are not live shots, either.

   Live shots are done outside the studio. They can be as
close as the roof of your building or the sidewalk outside
your station. They are usually staffed by photographers
with ENG cameras, not news production staff.

                                                                                                  91
Brian Champagne

   For a typical lead-story live shot, the show might start
with a tease, go to an open (optional), and then the anchors
greet the viewers from the anchor desk. The anchors
might use a VO or graphics to set up the story (or not; they
could just get right to it) and introduce the reporter live
in the field. The intro might be done with a two-box, or
more commonly, a graphic video transition. The reporter
is then taken full-screen where she explains what is going
on. If there is a donut, she will first refer to her current
surroundings, and then introduce the pkg. After the pkg
runs, she will add some concluding information and toss
back to the anchors. The anchors can move on to the next
story;, or if it's a major event, they might read a related VO
or VOSOT or toss to another reporter.

   In this chapter we will use the term "anchor" to refer to
someone reading the news from the studio and "reporter"
for someone in the field. Sometimes anchors report or go
live from the field, and sometimes reporters are on the
anchor desk, but we will keep the jobs separated here for
clarity.

How Live Shots Are Done

Live shots take more planning than studio shots because
there are more factors to coordinate and things that can
mess them up.

   Live Equipment
   Technology is changing the way live shots are done. In
the old days (up until 2010-ish) there were two options:
satellite truck or microwave truck. There are more paths to
get video back to the station now.
   Satellite trucks are the ones with the dish on the back or
roof. They send their signal to satellites orbiting above the

92
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

earth, which send them back down to where your station
has a dish that can pick it up. First-generation satellite
trucks were built on large truck bodies. There was room
for three+ people to work in them, but they needed extra
space to maneuver and park.

   Newer satellite trucks have downsized and might be
built on full-size vans or SUVs. These smaller vehicles
take up much less space, and do not fall under commercial
vehicle laws, but have less space in which to work. Satellite
trucks can send signals that reach all around the globe,
although, because of the curvature of the earth's surface a
signal can't go up in China and back down in New York.
A satellite visible to a truck in China cannot be seen by
a New York receiver, so the signal might go up and down
a couple of times (think of an "M" pattern) before it gets
to the station. You can usually see this effect on the air:
When stations send their reporters abroad to cover
something like the Olympic Games, after the anchor asks
them a question, it takes several seconds for them to
respond. In most cases, the reporter answered as soon as
she heard the question, but the signal had to go off to
space a couple of times before it made it back.

   Microwave trucks are more local. They have smaller
dishes (about 2-3 feet) usually mounted on top of an
inflatable mast. The dish must point to a receiver antenna,
and the mast can be pumped up with air from an onboard
compressor to help it clear obstructions like trees, houses,
and shorter buildings. Microwave trucks can be on full-
size vans and SUVs, but are showing up on smaller SUVs
and crossovers.

   Portable microwave gear works like the truck-mounted
system, but can break down into a suitcase-and-a-half of

                                                                                                  93
Brian Champagne

equipment, hauled in any vehicle it'll fit in, and set up
wherever it can see its receiving antenna.

   COFDM stands for Coded Orthogonal Frequency
Domain Multiplex, and don't worry, you don't need to
know that. You should know it is a compact transmitter,
small enough to attach to the back of the camera, and with
a shorter range.

   Cellphone backpacks are often called by their brand
names: Dejero, LiveU, and TVU. They are the size of a
student's backpack and getting smaller. They split their
signals over multiple cell phonecarriers. The signals are
put into a network and decoded back at the station. They
are very simple to use and are very mobile and portable.
They scale down quality and increase delay according to
the quality of signals they are able to establish with
cellphone networks.

   Social Media allows live signals over Facebook or other
systems. It can be done as simply as pointing a cellphone.
There are pros and cons to each system, and knowing
them can help you choose the right one for your live shot.

   Satellite trucks cost the most to purchase, train
operators, and run. You will have to buy and coordinate
time on the satellite (called a "bird") you want to bounce
your signal off. They require some expertise to operate and
are subject to strict FCC rules, since they're in a position
to interfere with others' signals. They must "see" their
satellite, meaning there are no obstructions between the
dish and the (in North American, at least) southern sky,
where most TV satellites orbit. Satellite trucks must have
a clear upward-arcing view to the south, which means they
cannot operate on the north side of tall buildings or in
steep east-west canyons. They have the longest reliable

94
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

range--the cellphone backpacks can go pretty far, but are
subject to third-party problems.

   Microwave trucks are second in cost, but simpler and
cheaper. Since their receivers are usually mounted on
hilltops, tall antennas, or buildings, their signals go more
horizontal and are subject to more things blocking them.
Masts can run anywhere from 8-40 feet tall to help with
this, but once you go around the first curve of most
canyons, microwave trucks are done.

   Since most stations own their own receive sites,
microwaves can transmit whenever they want for as long
as they want. They are reliable, but still can have hiccups
from the transmitter or truck. With the gear on top, they
cannot be driven in parking garages, car washes, low-
hanging trees, or a Sonic Drive-In.

   Microwave gear is portable and reliable (no truck issues
to worry about), but can be tougher to establish a signal
with a receive site since it can't raise its transmitter above
obstructions. It also takes longer to set up than a truck
system.

   COFDM systems are more portable than microwave
gear, but have less range. One company claims 40 miles of
range from an airborne source, but a signal coming from
the air wouldn't be subject to terrestrial obstructions. The
system I used attached to my camera and used my camera's
battery, which worried me that it might kill the battery
while my shot was live.

   Cellphone Backpacks are subject to the availability of
multiple cell phone networks' signals, which rules out
most canyons and outlying rural areas. They may also have
signal issues where lots of people are using their
cellphones, like a stadium full of people.

   Social media live shots, if you use your phone, will have

                                                                                                  95
Brian Champagne

poorer audio quality and be subject to data speed for your
phone and the connection of those watching.

   Setting Up and Establishing Uplink
   Live shots are set up as long as is feasibly possible before
they air. Some stations ask that shots are established 45
minutes before they air; I was still driving to my shot three
minutes before I was to be live once; with the reporter's
help we made our slot. It wasn't worth the stress of
everyone involved.
   No matter which live system you are using, you will
need to establish a signal back to the station with clean
audio and video. There will be someone on the station end
to ensure this happens and let you know when your signal
is good. This can be very technical or simple, depending
on the live transmission gear you are using.
   You will also need IFB, or Interruptible Feedback. Just
the acronym is used in most newsrooms. IFB is the signal
the station sends back to the reporter and/or
photographer on a live shot. It usually goes through a
cellphone or wireless box the reporter wears and into an
earpiece. You cannot go live without it, or else how will a
reporter answer an anchor's question, or even know when
to begin speaking? In a bind without reporter IFB, a
photographer can be told when to cue a reporter to begin
talking. The photographer just gives a hand signal to the
reporter at the appropriate time. If reporter IFB is missing,
the anchors need to be told so they don't ask specific
questions of the reporter.
   Live shots require audio, video, and IFB or you can't
take them. You've seen them, either on the air or a blooper
reel: the anchor tosses to a live reporter who just sits there
looking like an idiot. The irony is that a technical person

96
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

made the mistake and it's the reporter who looks bad to
viewers.

   IFB is typically the sound of the show in progress, with a
producer interrupting to give time cues. Producers should
keep their live shots apprised with a short cue every
minute or two as the time of the live shot approaches. The
last cue is "stand by" so the reporter can be looking into
the camera as the toss comes. Producers will also give brief
cues to let reporters know when they are covered by video,
which lets them know it's OK to look down at their notes.
On longer shots there may be time cues given.

   As mentioned, reporters also hear the show live, but
depending on the live system used, there may be from 2-4
seconds' delay. For this reason, they are given mix-minus
in their IFB. Mix-minus is the news program minus the
reporter's own voice. Hearing yourself talk with even a
one-second delay is very distracting, so it is not fed back
to them. As a viewer you can tell when a reporter has
not been fed mix-minus in her IFB because right after
the anchor toss and she begins talking, she will pull her
earpiece out of her ear. If she tosses to a donut or SOT, the
station will usually correct the problem while she is not on
camera, and she'll usually have her earpiece back in when
the camera comes back.

   Live Shot Safety
   Power lines and lightning can injure or kill live crews.
As a rule, give 10 feet of distance for every 10,000 volts a
power line carries. The bigger the voltage, the higher the
wires.
   Electricity seeks the easiest path to ground, so if your
truck's mast can give it a path down, it will take it. If there
are power lines in one section of a tree's branches and your
mast in the other, the electricity can take a path through

                                                                                                  97
Brian Champagne

the water-filled branches to your mast, and then down to
you.

   If your truck becomes energized, stay in it. Your tires
should insulate you. Call 911 and stay put, even if you
fear the career consequences: Any workplace disciplinary
action is better than getting electrocuted. If your energized
truck catches fire, you may have to leave it. Remembering
that electricity will take the easiest path to ground, and
if you touch the truck and the ground at the same time,
the power will go through the water-filled body link you
set up between truck and ground. Jump out instead, never
touching ground and truck at the same time.

   In higher-voltage situations, electricity will spread out
from the contact point--your truck--in concentric rings
like a pebble in a pond. It is easier to go through your body
than across the ground, so do not take normal steps as you
move away. Either hop with your feet together or shuffle
while keeping your feet together. The common guideline
of how far to do this is to go past the first person laughing
at you.

   This is not advice just for tech staff; in a power line-
contact accident in Los Angeles, it was the reporter who
got her hands burned off. Lightning is another form of
electricity you don't want flowing through your truck.
Most stations will respect your decision to drop your mast
and/or pack up your gear if lightning is approaching; those
that don't expose themselves to the possibility of
expensive lawsuits. Even if you're not near the truck itself
you can be shocked or electrocuted. If you are at the end
of a video or mic cable hooked up to a truck or equipment
that gets struck by lightning, that bolt has an easy path
down your copper cable, through your water-filled body,

98
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

and to the ground. I have called off at least two shots for
fear of lightning; no shot is worth the risk.

   That was a lot of technical and scary information for
a book about writing the news, but the more you know
about how things work, the better job you can do working
with them.

   Planning Good Live Shots
   Breaking news live shots don't get much planning;
when something major is happening unexpectedly, you
just put your training to use and get a reporter on the air
at the scene, wherever it might be. The reporter gathers
information as quickly as she can and relates it to the
viewers.
   Planned live shots can be more meaningful with some
forethought. First, ask why you're going live. Are you
doing a story about saving for retirement for your 10pm
show? Why not go live in front of a savings and loan office?
Because it closed five hours before your newscast, that's
why. That might be better fronted by the reporter in
studio.
   The reporter should have some interaction and/or
show-and-tell with the setting. Most IFBs and
microphones are wireless now, so reporters have all the
freedom they need. When my career started, we had
clumsy cables for IFB, microphones, and video cables, but
we still moved around a lot back then anyway
   Live interviews are a bit risky, since you don't know how
things might go with them. It is extra risky to try to pull
passersby aside to ask them questions. Examples of this
range from the "I Like Turtles" kid to things that raised the
ire of the FCC.
   Usually, if you talk to an interview ahead of time you

                                                                                                  99
Brian Champagne

can get a feel for the knowledge and intent of the person,
but you never know, and that's what makes live TV so fun.

   As-Lives, aka Look-Lives or Fake Lives are not live
shots, though they look like them to viewers who don't
notice the absence of a "live" bug. Reporters pre-record
stand-up intros and tags for packages while looking and
acting like they do on real live shots, sometimes even
adding a "thanks" to the anchors at the beginning and a
"back to you" at the end.

   As-Lives can be good for logistics; you can look live in
places you can't get live signals, and they are "in the can,"
meaning they are set up and good-to-go well before the
newscast begins.

   Producers need to keep in communication with live
reporters to let them know what is expected from them,
and when.

   Reporters need to send producers anchor tosses,
location info for supers, and roll cues to any VOs, SOTs,
or PKGs they might introduce. In a suddenly-breaking
news situation there might not be time for all or some of
these; a good director and producer should be able to keep
up, using obvious cues like, "Let's take a look at that video
from earlier" and tone of voice to know when to take video
or cameras.

   After the reporter tosses back to the anchor, the anchor
might ask a pre-planned question. These were popular a
few years back, but sound canned now. Some anchors will
ask spontaneous questions. Doing so is a little risky
because a reporter might have to find an intelligent way to
say, "I don't know," but if the anchor asks what viewers are
wondering it can be a good thing.

   After the toss back to the anchors, it is unusual for

100
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

anchors to tag with additional information; it makes it
look like the reporter left something out.

   We'll close this chapter with a cautionary tale: The day
before I wrote this, I did a rushed live shot. The story was
shot hours earlier and we wrote and edited at the station.
Editing and logistics problems kept the photographer and
I from leaving when we should have. Rush-hour traffic was
terrible, and we arrived at our live shot less than 10 minutes
before it was to air. I helped set up the live equipment, but
did not have enough time to practice my role. I stumbled
through, tripping over words and looking at my notes far
too much. Give yourself time.

                                                                                                101
                                11.

               Social Media

S ocial media includes: YouTube, Facebook, Twitter,
       Snapchat, Instagram, Periscope and whatever other
platforms may develop in the years to come.

   News organizations have gone from teasing with social
media to displaying their product on it. Reporters go live
on Facebook with regularity, and quality is improving.
Ideally, you should tease back to your website and
newscast. Your tease guidelines are to give a sample of the
information you have, and then leave your readers with a
question or fact that can be answered on your platform.

Social Media Can Be Used To:

       · Interact with your viewers and get their feedback
       · Research people and get their photos or videos

          (Facebook is public)
       · Reach out to people who are newsmakers
       · Poll your viewers
       · Use your followers to locate people who may be

          affected by a news item; e.g., if the governor is

                                                                                                103
Brian Champagne

          proposing a cut to farm subsidies, you can ask if
          anyone knows a farmer who would be affected by
          those cuts.
       · Add extra features that your newscast didn't have
          time for
       · Show the personal side of yourself, reporters,
          anchors and staff

Keeping In Touch With Viewers

The one-way medium of television is over, with a two-
way communication network enabled via social media.
Viewers can now feel like they are better connected to
your anchors and reporters and give feedback on your
stories.

   This allows for some good exchanges of ideas, and also
some trolling. There is a private Facebook page devoted
entirely to the crazy and inappropriate comments some
viewers post on stations' social media pages. It has no
shortage of submissions.

   Some newscasts, mostly morning shows, will read
viewers' Facebook feedback on the air. If the posts aren't
insightful or funny, they can be viewed as a waste time and
send viewers reaching for the remote. Maybe I'm old, and
other people do like to hear comments from people they
don't know.

Researching People and Pages

Many photos and videos of people that make it into news
broadcasts are downloaded from social media. It is ethical
to credit your source on the air with at least a courtesy.

   Wanted criminals will often have uploaded photos of
themselves posing with guns and money before they

104
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

became wanted, and felons on the run rarely take the time
to clean up their feeds. After a person has done something
newsworthy, check social media quickly to find media of
them. The interest they have created may be good or bad,
but the bad ones are more likely to remove uploads. After
President Trump named Anthony Scaramucci as the
White House Director of Communications, Scaramucci
quickly deleted older anti-Trump posts. Outlets that did
not act quickly or preemptively would have missed out.

Polling Your Viewers

There are perhaps two types of polls: for research and for
fun. You can run a research poll to see how your viewers
feel about a given topic. KSL was working on a story about
a special-needs girl who made noise at a restaurant
prompting other diners to complain. On-air promotions
directed viewers to weigh in on the issue of the rights
of the diners versus those of the girl and her family;
promising commenters would have input on the story.

   Fun polls can also provide some value. "Do you like our
warm weather?" is a time-waster, but "What's your secret
to beating the heat?" might produce some responses that
other readers might find useful.

Facebook Live

If you're going to use this or other apps that allow going
live with your phone, do it sparingly. Let your viewers
know they can trust you to show them something
important when they receive a notification. This may be
the shortest-lived phenomenon for me as after a few times
checking in when friends and family go live; I rarely act on
a live notification now. Did I say rarely? I meant, stopped

                                                                                                105
Brian Champagne

completely. Funny, right as I typed that I received a live
notification, which I ignored.

Comments

Have a friend read comments about you, for you. If there
is anything you need to know, they can tell you. They can
filter out the sickos for you. The comments following a
story I did about car idling included someone calling me a
fag. The story was strictly about running cars wasting gas,
but whatever. Unmediated comments get stupid, mean
and pointless fast. Many outlets have them disabled on
some or all stories.

Personal Pages Are Not Personal

It is tough for some to understand that social media is not
private. Consider nothing transmitted to be secret. If you
wouldn't scream it to a crowd of your biggest detractors
waiting to fault you and bring you down, don't post it,
tweet it, snap it, whatever.

   I'm not saying not to make jokes about people, groups
or organizations; I'm saying tell those comments to your
friends in person, not via electronic transmission of any
kind.

   I'm not saying to not drink alcohol, I'm saying don't post
photos or texts of yourself drinking alcohol.

   I'm not saying don't have your arsenal of weapons; I'm
saying don't post pictures or texts of yourself with them.
It's bad tactical judgment to inform your enemies and
potential burglars of your resources anyway.

   I'm not saying not to hunt and kill animals; I'm saying
don't post pictures or texts of yourself with them.

   I'm not saying don't hold deep religious and political

106
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

views; I'm saying don't post them with your professional
working name. Better yet, save them for parties and in-
person discussions.

   I'm not saying there's never anything funny at a bad
situation; I'm saying don't transmit or post any dark
humor. Save it to deliver verbally, only for your most-
trusted friends who will appreciate it.

   Have you ever run into a friend who posts so much on
social media that you already know everything they are
up to and there is little need to catch up? Don't be that
person. And if you've ever participated in sexting, you
should think twice about seeking an on-camera job. Ever.

   If these guidelines sound too restrictive, remember that
for thousands of years mankind has survived and enjoyed
life without sharing food, politics and thought-provoking
videos across the world. If you're still not convinced,
Google "fired over..." with any of the items on the list.

   The website mentioned earlier whereon reporters can
share the stupid and offensive stuff viewers say was
breached in 2016, leading to a bunch of angry people
aghast that reporters and anchors would share such
things. If you're accepted into this group, and it is stress-
relieving and funny, have a username your viewers would
not recognize.

                                                                                                107
                                12.

               Working With
             Photographers

T his book is about news writing and will stay true to
       that throughout this chapter. At your first reporting
job, you will probably be shooting your own video. If not,
you may have slipped into a bigger market and are denying
yourself your small-market, dues-paying, respect-earning
opportunity to make mistakes somewhere it's forgivable,
and after your leave, forgettable.

   In your second market, you will probably get to work
with a photographer. Yes, they shoot and edit video but
are still called photographers, photogs, or shooters. Why
are we devoting a chapter to working with one? Rule
Number One. How can you write to video if you don't
have it?

What Is a Photographer?

Photographers are issued a camera, tripod, mics,
peripherals, and a station vehicle. They are sent out to

                                                                                                109
Brian Champagne

shoot video with or without a reporter. If working alone
they will ask the interview questions themselves. A non-
writing photographer (most of them) will bring or transmit
the video back to the station for a producer, anchor, or
reporter to write. Photographers might shoot VOs,
VOSOTs, photo essays, or complete PKGs. On several
occasions I shot and fed video to a station via microwave
from a bureau or my truck. I have also seen reporters log,
write, and front a story live with my footage, having never
left the station. It is more common for the pair, reporter
and photographer, to leave the station together and shoot
interviews and b-roll for a package. Usually the interviews
come first, with the exception of spot news. You work as a
team.

   Photographers also run microwave and satellite trucks
and all the live gear mentioned in the Live Shots chapter.
They set shots up, establish IFB, and run the camera.

Types Of Photographers

The list to follow is short, and a photographer might fit
into different classifications depending on the day:

   Clock-Puncher
   This person is there to put in eight hours of being there
and then go home. He will figure out the minimum
required to not stand out as terrible or get fired. He exists
in other fields besides news. Think Wally from "Dilbert."
   Green and Eager-to-Please
   This photog has a great attitude because he's trying to
get a career started and has pride in his work. He lacks
experience, though, and needs guidance.
   Trained Monkey
   Does not bring his brain to work. Shows up and points

110
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

camera where directed, but does not contribute to story
process. The stereotype photographer seen in movies.

   Story Snob
   This photographer is a highly-skilled artist who takes
great pride in his craft. On a good day he can be a great
asset and do beautiful work. If he deems that day's story
below his craft, his attitude goes south.
   Career Photographer
   Tries to do a good job every day. Knows he has to get
along with everyone and makes an effort. Some days are
better than others, but he will always be prepared and take
pride in his work.
   Why was this section written with all male pronouns?
Because the field is dominated by men. Perhaps this began
back when camera equipment was heavier and perhaps
it was the work culture. Technology has shrunk cameras
and lightened tripods (the good ones are carbon-fiber), the
newsroom culture is shifting, and more women are finding
jobs as photographers.

Working With, Not Alongside
Photographers

Don't be scared by the types described above; there are
ways to work with all of them. The first thing to remember
is you are a team. As a photographer, I have worked with
reporters who treated me like hired help: They did not
help with equipment, involve me in the story process, or
ask my opinion. You can simply tell a photographer what
to do, but you are throwing away a set of eyes and another
viewpoint when you do.

   Carry the tripod. Doing so:

                                                                                                111
Brian Champagne

       · Shows you are working as a team
       · Frees the photographer to carry a light kit if you

          are headed indoors
       · Allows the team to move faster
       · On spot news, allows the photographer to just

          shoot with the camera if things are crazy. If you
          can set it up, you can get it ready while he gets the
          camera going.

I cannot stress this enough: If you don't even offer to carry
equipment, you may be considered pompous and treated
as such.

   The goal is synergy as a team. On your way to the story,
discuss it with the photographer. Ask what they think
about it, and any ideas they have for creative interviews
or standups. Some suggestions might not work, and
typically, you've studied the topic more than they have,
but try to incorporate some of their ideas. I've suggested a
few ideas that reporters doubted, which is fair, but a few of
my ideas ended up on their resume reels.

   At the shoot, allow the photographer significant input
on where you put people when you interview them. The
less engaged or experienced your photographer, the more
you can give suggestions; still, you should not boss them
around: If you want the ice cream scooper interviewed
while he scoops, but you think the photographer might
want them up against a wall of the ice cream parlor, say
something like, "I thought we could talk to him while he's
working. Can you come up with an artsy shot for that?"
Now you have given them a challenge, a chance to use
their creativity and come up with their own idea. Had you
said, "I want to interview him while he's working; shoot

112
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

this on a wide shot" you would have been a dictator ("I
want") shutting down creativity ("shoot this").

   When it comes to shooting b-roll, tell the photographer
what you'd like to write about and let him use his noggin
to figure out how to best show that with video. If there is
a particular shot or two you want, go ahead and ask, but
don't get carried away.

   Standups
   Standups are your chance to try multiple takes and new
ideas to show how creative you are. When I shoot
reporters' standups, I ask them what they want to say,
then I try to make it as visual as I can. If needed, I will
ask them to alter their scripts to fit the visuals better. The
two of us can get very creative with standups, but only if
we work together, not as reporter dictating commands to
photographer. I can get my camera rolling and composed
in fewer than 10 seconds, or I can take longer and make
you look better--your choice.
   If you need multiple takes to get your words right, don't
worry about it; we're used to it. In a top-20 market I once
shot 20 takes for a reporter. A coworker of mine shot 30
for the same guy. Anything fewer than 30 is no biggie to us
photographers. If you're taking more than 30 you should
probably practice more on your own.
   Teases
   Often Promotions or a producer will ask for on-camera
teases. Might as well involve your photographer in this as
well. Work with him on the visual element and how well
the tease works. I drove my bureau reporters (same person
every day) when I asked them what their tease was. Often
I would say, "That's a summary, not a tease," and we could
then work out something better together. I left my camera
on the ground until we worked out a better version. It

                                                                                                113
Brian Champagne

drove some of `em crazy, but we came up with some good
teases together.

   When the news director hears a good tease, she credits
the reporter, not the photographer. That's OK with us, but
you should thank us when we help synergize.

   After the Shoot
   Now that the interviews, b-roll, stand-up, and teases are
shot, it's time to start piecing your story together. Ask the
photographer what his best shot is for an opening (even
better, do this during the b-roll shoot). Ask about good
closing shots, too. Photographers will shoot better if they
know their video is being counted on for specific needs.
Ask if there are any sequences or NATS you should be
aware of. Really log the video. Look at the shots. Too
often, great shots are not written to, and thus not used in
editing, because the reporter did not see them. Between
asking the photographer and looking for yourself, this
shouldn't happen.
   Editing
   Review your script with the editor, whether it be the
photographer who shot with you or an editor.
Communicate what the shots and sequences were
intended to be when you were writing, while following
Rule #1. As a writer, I am often surprised by what editors
come up with that was not what I was writing to. As with
a photographer, do not dictate and shut down the creative
side of the editor's brain.
   Feedback
   Tell your photographer and/or editor what really helped
today. Phrase negative feedback as positively as possible: "I
really liked your sequence of the police blocking the street;
I was hoping we could've spent more time on the racers
passing by but I didn't have enough shots of them." As you

114
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

share feedback before or after, use language like, "I want
us to win an Emmy," and not, "I want to win us an Emmy,"
or even worse, "I want to win an Emmy." If you ask any
special favors, like an air check dubbed off, pay them with
a treat. Money is not appropriate, but gummy bears in an
edit bay are priceless.

   Averting Technical Problems
   Do not insult photographers by asking them directly if
they're missing something. There are better approaches
for these people you're building a working relationship
with. It's better with today's color viewfinders, but still
some photographers forget to white balance their cameras.
This can happen among the experienced and rookie in
small and large markets. Instead of asking, "Did you white
balance?" which is an insult, ask, "What temp did you
get?" You can even make a game of it, seeing who can
guess the Kelvin temperature of the light closest.If the
photographer you're assigned has a problem with low or
high audio levels, don't ask if it's distorting, ask what dB it
is. If you're concerned about lighting, ask if you can help
set a light up; you are offering a solution, not pointing out
a problem. Does the photographer skip his tripod on spot
news? Tell him you're worried the police might make you
stay far back on this one, and offer to carry it.

Conclusion

Most photographers will try to do a good job. The more
you work together, the more you'll know how they shoot,
and they'll know how you write. All of the suggested
questions in this chapter will pare down as you develop
chemistry and trust. I have been part of some great teams
where we knew what the other was thinking.

                                                                                                115
Brian Champagne

   Technically, the reporter also works as the field
producer and determines the direction of the story.
You're the boss. Work with photographers instead of
trying to boss them around and you'll do a better job in
everything, including Rule #1.

116
                                13.

                           Radio

                                          by Brianna Bodily

                                                KSL News Radio

Writing Radio News

R adio news is perhaps the most accessible of the
       mediums. Available online, in the car and on
smartphones, anyone with a signal can access news reports
without interrupting their workflow to read or watch the
information. This also makes radio one of the first places
audiences turn to in the event of breaking news.

   Because this medium only uses one sense, reporters
often rely on description to paint a picture at the scene of
the story. One of the most famous examples of this was in
1837 when Herbert Morrison reported on the crash of the
Hindenburg:

   "It's practically standing still now they've dropped ropes
out of the nose of the ship...and they've been taken a hold
of down on the field by a number of men. It's starting to

                                                                                                117
Brian Champagne

rain again. It's... the rain had slacked up a little bit. The
back motors of the ship are just holding it just enough
to keep it from...It's burst into flames! Get this, Charlie!
Get this, Charlie! It's fire! And it's crashing! It's crashing,
terrible! Oh, my! Get out of the way, please! It's burning
and bursting into flames and the... and it's falling on the
mooring mast. And all the folks agree that this is terrible;
this is the worst of the worst catastrophes in the world.
Oh it's... [garbled] its flames... Crashing, oh! Four- or five-
hundred feet into the sky and it... it's a terrific crash, ladies
and gentlemen. It's smoke, and it's in flames now; and the
frame is crashing to the ground, not quite to the mooring
mast. Oh, the humanity! And all the passengers screaming
around here. I told you; it - I can't even talk to people,
their friends are on there! Ah! It's... it... it's a... ah! I... I
can't talk, ladies and gentlemen. Honest: it's just laying
there, mass of smoking wreckage. Ah! And everybody can
hardly breathe and talk and the screaming. I... I... I'm sorry.
Honest: I... I can hardly breathe. I... I'm going to step
inside, where I cannot see it. Charlie, that's terrible. Ah,
ah... I can't." - Transcribed from Morrison's report on May
6, 1937.

   Pictures and video aren't necessary when good
description can bring images to the mind and a journalist's
voice can convey the urgency, passion, and importance of
a story.

Writing for Radio's Demographic

The first rule in writing for radio is to write
conversationally.

   Radio's biggest market is consistently morning and
afternoon "drive time", typically between five and nine

118
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

A.M. and three and seven P.M., when most of the city is
headed to work and back again. These drivers don't have
the luxury of re-reading or rewinding when they miss a
sentence. They have one chance to hear the story and
understand it. That is why radio journalists keep their
stories simple and succinct.

   A common rule of thumb for writing in radio is to keep
diction and phrasing at an eighth grade level. If a middle
school or junior high student can't follow the story the
first time around, a typical drive time audience may have a
difficult time following the story while they are distracted
by the road and other passengers. Another trick reporters
use is to read out loud as they write. If it doesn't flow while
they are writing, it won't flow while they are reading it live
on air.

   The second rule in radio writing is to paint a picture.
   A tense mood during a vote at the Capitol, crying family
members at a court trial, glass littered across the street at
a car accident- they are all important pieces in stories that
can draw audiences into the scene itself. Imagination can
fill in the gaps if writing will only give it a nudge. Because
radio does not have any visual aids, like pictures or video,
description is key in bringing a story to life. Good radio
reporting gives the audience the information they need
to know. Great radio reporting makes the audience feel
like they are part of the story and connects them to that
information.
   The third rule in radio writing is to understand your
audience.
   Radio isn't as intimate as a newspaper or web story. It
often isn't late at night when the kids are asleep. Radio
is there when someone turns on the car. When an alarm
goes off at six in the morning. It's there when bus drivers

                                                                                                119
Brian Champagne

take kids to school and when parents run errands.
Sensitivity is important when delivering news that will
often be heard by ears from nine months old to ninety.
Radio reporters work to bring their audience to the scene
without going into unnecessary and gruesome details.
Every station and every news director has a different rule
about where that line sits, based on the station's
demographic. For example, stations in New York City,
New York may be more liberal with their descriptions than
the local radio news station in Cedar City, Utah.

   The fourth rule in radio writing is to write in active
voice and present tense.

   Print and web reporters finish their work and let their
audience find it over several hours. Radio reporters bring
their story to the audience live. At the time of delivery
there is always a way to start your story with what is
happening right now. Radio stories start with the freshest
detail.

   Example: Instead of starting a story about a car accident
with "A passenger vehicle t-boned a semi on state street
this afternoon, injuring one man," start with "One man is
in critical condition after police say he lost control on state
street and slammed into a passing semi". Active voice and
present tense bring a story to life, even hours after it broke.

Commercial Radio vs. Public Radio

Radio news can vary greatly between state lines and
market size, but the biggest differences are between
commercial and public radio.

   Commercial radio is faster-paced and shallower than
public radio. Stories are short and producers will typically
fit as many as they can into a newscast. This means that

120
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

audiences that listen to commercial radio will get more
news in less time. They are exposed to a wider variety of
stories, from spot news to features, and the stories often
range from local to national. It is also funded by paid ads.
These ads will interrupt news programming on a
scheduled basis, similar to what you see in television news.
Newscasts are high energy and often marked by sounders,
fast delivery, and precise producing. Commercial radio is
often used for a general look at the news of today, but
often lacks the depth of public radio. Large network
examples include ABC, NBC, and CNN.

   Public radio is slower paced and dives deeper than
commercial radio. Fifteen minutes spent listening to a
public radio station will bring a fraction of the news
coverage, but each story will have more substance. Often
public radio will skip spot news and sports news, instead
focusing on features and political stories. Bed music and
slow delivery are classic benchmark of public radio.
Audiences that rely on public radio will have a narrower
exposure to news, but a deeper understanding of the few
stories they hear. Public stations rely on federal funding
and private donations, and do not play typical ads. The US
only has two major national networks: NPR and PRI.

Roles Within Radio

General Manager: The head honcho in each news station.
The general manager is in charge of all staff at the station
and responsible for keeping track of the success of the
station.

   News director: This person is in charge of the news
department and the entire news staff. The news director
has final say on story assignments and keeps track of the

                                                                                                121
Brian Champagne

success of the overall news product. Often the news
director is only trumped by the General Manager, or in
a small-market station a programming manager may have
authority over them.

   Producer: Producers assign reporter stories, determine
the direction of each show, and organize the show for
smooth delivery by the host. They often write significant
portions of each show, and copy check stories filed by
reporters. Producers also help coordinate on-scene story
delivery from reporters in the field. Assistant producers
will help write readers and actualities to beef up the story
content. They also help coordinate with reporters in the
field.

   Host: The host is the equivalent of an anchor in
television news. They are the figureheads of the station
and front long newscasts like the drive time news shows.
Hosts are often asked to work on special projects for the
station, come up with segment ideas for each show, and
make appearances at charity events to promote the station.
With the rise of social media Twitter handles and
Facebook pages are becoming a requirement for hosts
across the nation.

   Anchor: An anchor hosts smaller newscasts. Anchors
often take over delivering the news in less popular time
slots: evenings, midday and weekends. Anchors often play
the role of host and reporter as well.

   Reporter: Reporters gather and produce news stories.
They spend more time out in the field than any other
position in radio news. In commercial radio, reporters are
expected to turn several stories during their shift and
often are required to turn more than one version of each
story (see Terminology). Reporters are expected to gather
and implement natural sound from the scene, and use

122
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

hardware to go live from the scene during breaking news.
In public radio reporters may turn fewer stories, but are
expected to turn out highly produced stories full of
natural sound. Reporters are also often required to keep
a strong presence on social media, and are often asked to
write a web version of their story for the station's website
and app.

   Board Operator: Board operators are similar to
technical directors, but on a simpler scale. They are
responsible for bringing up the right pots to turn a mic
live, fire off sounders, and start advertisements or public
service announcements for the newscast. Board operators
are expected to keep a strict eye on the VU meter to make
sure that everything stays around -9 decibels. These are
the people that push the buttons to keep each show on air.

   Radio news crews often have less staff than TV stations
in the same market. Reporters are expected to juggle more
stories and turn more content. A national network station
will have several reporters on staff in the local city and
state, but they will also employ reporters to cover news in
high traffic states and countries. For example, ABC news
keeps a reporter in Rome near the Vatican to cover
Catholic news and one in Israel to cover Middle Eastern
updates. They also employ reporters to cover white house
news full-time, and travel with the President of the United
States to countries all over the world. Large-market
stations will often employ several reporters, producers and
board operators. Small-market stations require employees
to wear multiple hats. A news director may also be the
entire reporting staff and the only newscast host for the
entire station.

                                                                                                123
Brian Champagne

Reporter News "Beats"

Television shows and movies often portray journalists
with a beat. That means the journalist specializes in one
topic: anything from healthcare to politics. Beat reporters
are common in print, but broadcast can vary. KSL
Newsradio in Salt Lake City is considered a large market,
but doesn't have the reporter staffing to assign beats.
Instead each reporter is expected to know enough about
current events they can jump on a new story and deliver
it expertly. Smaller stations are often the same. National
networks, like ABC, will assign reporters beats but they
are very broad. ABC might have a reporter cover all of
California news, while another is assigned to cover only
major weather disasters across the nation.

Terminology

Live hit: This is when a reporter or host has a live on-air
report.

   Natural sound: Background sound gathered from the
scene of a story. This can include active audio like a car
door slamming, or passive audio like the sound of a crowd
murmuring. This does not include audio from an
interview. Natural sound is gathered at each story to help
paint the scene and draw the audience into the story.

   Sound bite: A sound bite is a short segment of sound
taken from an interview. In commercial news sound bites
often only last seven to ten seconds. In public radio they
can last as long as thirty or forty-five seconds if the audio
is compelling.

   Outcue: The way a reporter ends their story. A standard
outcue (SOC) ends with the reporter's name and the
stations name. An example of this would be: Marc Giaque,

124
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

KSL Newsradio. It both identifies the reporter and signals
the host that the story is over.

   Lead: A sentence or two the host uses to introduce a
new story.

   Tag: A sentence or two the host uses to wrap up the
story before moving on to a new one.

   Wrap: Similar to a television reporter's package. This
is a fully produced story from a reporter. It starts with a
lead for the host to read and then goes to a recorded story
voiced by the reporter. This story will include sound bites
and natural sound from the scene and end with an outcue.
In commercial radio Wraps are often short- somewhere
between thirty-five seconds for national networks and
forty-five seconds with large stations. In public radio they
can be several minutes long, depending on the station.
Because of the short time frame, reporters will often use
several sound bites that are closer to two or three seconds
long, instead of one sound bite that is seven or eight
seconds long.

   Here is a script Marc Giaque wrote for KSL News Radio
(102.7 FM/1160 AM) in Salt Lake City, Utah. Notice his
present tense lead, how short and simple the writing is,
and how he introduces all of his sound bites to help the
story flow:

   Lead: SALT LAKE POLICE ARE LOOKING FOR
SUSPECTS AND ANSWERS BEHIND A SERIES OF
VIOLENT ATTACKS OVERNIGHT. KSL NEWS
RADIO'S MARC GIAUQUE HAS MORE.

   Wrap: IT ALL HAPPENED LAST NIGHT WITHIN
AN HOUR... TWO ROBBERIES... AND A
SHOOTING.. ALL IN SALT LAKE CITY, ALL
INVOLVING A SHOTGUN. DETECTIVE ROBERT
UNGRITCH SAYS IT STARTED WITH THE

                                                                                                125
Brian Champagne

ROBBERY OF A CONVENIENCE STORE ON THE
EAST SIDE. (SOUND BITE: THEN A SHORT TIME
LATER, A PERSON WALKED INTO ANOTHER
CONVENIENCE STORE ON REDWOOD ROAD,
WITH SHOTGUN PELLET WOUNDS TO THE
ARM). WHEN A PERSON AT A NEARBY
RESTAURANT HEARD THAT SHOT, HE WALKED
OUT AND WAS WOUNDED BY MORE PELLETS. A
SHORT TIME LATER, AN ATTEMPTED ROBBERY
AT ANOTHER STORE. (SOUND BITE: OUT OF
CONTROL) POLICE SAY THERE'S BEEN AN
UPTICK IN ROBBERIES LATELY. THEY'RE NOT
SURE HOW IF THEY'RE RELATED. THEY'RE
HOPING TO GET MORE CLUES FROM WITNESSES
AND VICTIMS TODAY. SOC.

   Debrief: This similar to a television station's VO-SOT-
VO, but with a reporter as the SOT. A Debrief will start
with an anchor lead that is about five seconds long. The
anchor will toss to a reporter who will give a short account
of the story and will not give an outcue. The reporter does
not use any sound bites in a debrief. The anchor then ends
the story with a tag. A debrief is typically about thirty
seconds or less in commercial radio.

   For comparison, here's a debrief from Giaque on the
same crime story as shown above. Notice how he keeps the
story short, simple and easy to understand.

   Lead: SALT LAKE CITY POLICE ARE WORKING
TO LEARN IF A PAIR OF ROBBERIES OVERNIGHT...
ARE RELATED TO SHOOTINGS THAT LEFT TWO
PEOPLE WITH MINOR INJURIES. KSL NEWS
RADIO'S MARC GIAUQUE HAS MORE.

   Reporter: IT STARTED WITH A ROBBERY AT A
CONVENIENCE STORE NEAR 5TH EAST AND 17TH

126
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

SOUTH, THE SUSPECTS WERE SAID TO HAVE
HAD A SHOTGUN. A SHORT TIME LATER, AND
ON THE OTHER SIDE OF TOWN, SOMEONE
WALKED INTO ANOTHER CONVENIENCE STORE
WITH SHOTGUN PELLET WOUNDS TO THE ARM
WHILE AT ABOUT THE SAME TIME, A WORKER
AT THE RESTAURANT NEXT DOOR WHO HEARD
A GUNSHOT, WALKED OUTSIDE AND WAS HIT
ALSO HIT BY PELLETS. LATER AND TO THE
SOUTH, AN ATTEMPTED ROBBERY AT ANOTHER
STORE, INVOLVING TWO PEOPLE, A HANDGUN
AND AGAIN A SHOT-GUN.

   Tag: POLICE ARE WORKING TO LEARN IF THE
CRIMES ARE CONNECTED.

   Voicer: This very similar to a debrief but the reporter
will tag out of their own story with a standard outcue.
Once again the reporter will not use any sound bites in
the story. Voicers are often thirty-five seconds or less in
commercial radio.

   Actuality: This is exactly like a television station's VO-
SOT-VO. It starts with a host lead, moves to a sound bite,
then ends with a tag from the host. Actualities, or ACTS,
are often about 25 seconds long in national networks and
up to 30 seconds long in large networks. Here is an
example from Marc Giaque, on the same crime story as
above. Notice what details he chose to emit to fit the time
requirement. This is often a struggle for all broadcast
reporters. There is often more to the story than time will
allow.

   Lead: SALT LAKE CITY POLICE ARE WORKING
TO DETERMINE IF TWO ROBBERIES ARE
RELATED TO A BIZARRE SHOOTING
OVERNIGHT. TWO PEOPLE WERE HIT WITH

                                                                                                127
Brian Champagne

SHOTGUN PELLETS NEAR A CONVENIENCE
STORE ON REDWOOD ROAD. IT HAPPENED
AFTER A ROBBERY AT ANOTHER STORE... AND
BEFORE ANOTHER *ATTEMPTED* ROBBERY IN A
DIFFERENT PART OF TOWN.

   Sound Bite: WE'RE STILL TRYING TO
DETERMINE WHETHER OR NOT THE INCIDENTS
HAVE ANY CONNECTION TO EACH OTHER OR
ARE CORRELATED.

   Tag: DETECTIVE ROBERT UNGRICHT SAYS
POLICE HAVE NOTICED AN UP-TICK IN THE
NUMBER OF ROBBERIES IN THE AREA LATELY.

   Reader: This is the shortest of all the radio stories. It
is a script read by the host- no sound from the reporter.
Typically a reader (RDR) will last between ten and twenty
seconds at the most in a commercial radio station. They
are used when sound isn't available, a story isn't big
enough to justify the time spent collecting the sound, or
when a producer needs to mix up a newscast that is too
heavy with one type of story.

   In depth: This is a radio reporter's chance to produce
an excellent story. Typically reporters, at both commercial
and public radio stations, are allotted more time in the
newscast for in depth stories. In commercial radio that
typically amounts to a couple of minutes. In public radio
that could mean fifteen minutes or more. In-depths often
have several sources, are rich in natural sound, and delve
deep into a public interest story, investigative story, or
feature story. Similar to a wrap, these start with a host lead
in and end with the reporter delivering a standard outcue
(SOC). Here is an example from Brianna Bodily at KSL
News Radio in SLC, Utah. Notice how the natural sound

128
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

is weaved into the story and supports both the script and
the soundbites.

   Lead: (HOST ONE)
   A HIGHER NUMBER OF BLACK BEARS ARE
ROAMING THE UTAH MOUNTAINS AND THAT
HAS WILDLIFE WORKERS BUSY.
   (HOST TWO)
   UTAH'S WARM SPRING CHASED BEARS OUT
OF THEIR DENS EARLIER THAN
USUAL...LEADING TO MORE WORK FOR
BIOLOGISTS THIS SUMMER, BUT THEY'RE
GETTING SOME HELP FROM TECHNOLOGY. K-S-
L NEWSRADIO'S BRIANNA BODILY TOOK
SEVERAL HIKES OVER FIVE MONTHS TO TRACK
OUR STATE'S LARGEST PREDATORS.
   Indepth: DEEP INTO THE MOUNTAINS IN
SPANISH FORK CANYON (NATURAL SOUND OF
SNOW CRUNCHING) WE TRUDGED THROUGH
SNOW, SLICK MUD, (NAT SOUND POP- WATCH
OUT FOR THAT BRANCH) AND THICK BRUSH.
   SEVERAL IN THE GROUP WERE OUT OF
BREATH...GRASPING BRANCHES FOR SUPPORT
AS WE CLIMBED HILL AFTER HILL. AND ALL THE
WHILE...WE WERE LED BY THIS BEEPING.
   (NATURAL SOUND OF THE BEEPING)
   IT'S COMING FROM AN ANTENNAE THAT
HELPS BIOLOGISTS ZERO IN A COLLAR
ALREADY ATTACHED TO A BEAR'S NECK.
   (Sound bite: A LOT OF TRYING TO NARROW IN
AND DETERMINE WHERE THE LOUDEST SOUND
IS COMING FROM)
   RILEY PECK...THE REGIONAL WILDLIFE
PROGRAM MANAGER WITH THE DIVISION OF

                                                                                                129
Brian Champagne

WILDLIFE RESOURCES HAS BEEN ON SO MANY

BEAR DENNINGS...HE'S LOST COUNT. HE SAYS

THIS KIND OF TRUDGING IS NOT UNUSUAL

WHEN YOU ARE TRYING TO FIND A WINTER

DEN.

(Sound Bite: THEY DON'T DEN IN EASY

LOCATIONS.)

FOUR MILES LATER...PECK FINALLY CALLED

OUR MARCH TO A HALT. THE BEAR WAS OUT OF

THE DEN AND MOVING...

(Sound Bite: IT'S FRUSTRATING...WE HIKED ALL

DAY AND DIDN'T SEE ANYTHING.)

BUT IT'S NOT NECESSARILY UNUSUAL.

BIOLOGISTS...ESPECIALLY        ALONG  THE

WASATCH FRONT...HAVE TO BALANCE ACCESS

TO THE DEN...WITH HOW WARM IT'S GETTING.

TOO MUCH SNOW-YOU CAN'T GET TO THE

BEAR...BUT TOO WARM...AND SHE'LL WAKE UP

AND LEAVE BEFORE YOU CAN FIND HER. ON A

SECOND OUTING WITH BIOLOGISTS...THIS TIME

UP ROCK CANYON IN PROVO...WE HAD A

SIMILAR PROBLEM. HIKING UP AND DOWN THE

CANYON WALLS...TRYING TO ZERO IN THE

RADIO COLLAR.

(Sound bite: EVERY TIME YOU GO INTO A

CANYON THE SIGNAL WILL BOUNCE.)

THIS IS ONE OF THE REASONS THEY WANT TO

SWAP COLLARS ON AS MANY BEARS AS

POSSIBLE. BIOLOGIST DALE LIECHTY SAYS

RADIO COLLARS ARE LIMITED...AND RELY ON

THAT BOUNCING SIGNAL.

(Sound bite: THIS IS AN ART.)

130
                    WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

ON THE OTHER HAND, GPS COLLARS CAN

ALMOST PINPOINT THE BEAR'S LOCATION.

(Sound bite: SO WE'LL KNOW EXACTLY WHERE

SHE IS NEXT YEAR.)

THIS BEAR WAS ALSO MOVING. SO A FEW

MONTHS LATER, LIECHTY SET A TRAP... AND WE

RETURNED TO ROCK CANYON. THIS

TIME...WITH A BEAR WAITING FOR US.

(Sound bite- WOW, SHE IS BEAUTIFUL (NATURAL

SOUND OF HER BREATHING AND GROWLING))

SOME DISTRACTED THE BEAR (Sound bite:

LOOK HERE. LOOK HERE) WHILE ONE MAN

INJECTED A CONCOCTION OF KNOCKOUT

DRUGS WITH A LONG JAB STICK. (NATURAL

SOUND- GOT HER)

WITHIN MINUTES SHE WAS ASLEEP...AND THE

DWR HAD THE BEAR OUT OF THE TRAP TO

REPLACE HER COLLAR. (NATURAL SOUND POP

FROM COLLAR REPLACEMENT) IT'S SOUNDS

LIKE A COMPLICATED...AND FICKLE

PROCESS...BUT PECK TELLS ME THE INFO THEY

COLLECT...LIKE WEIGHT, DNA, AND

LOCATION...IS INVALUABLE..AND EITHER

IMPOSSIBLE OR TOO EXPENSIVE TO COLLECT

ANY OTHER WAY.

(Sound bite: THEY ARE SECRETIVE. THEY DON'T

WANT YOU TO SEE THEM. DO A GOOD JOB OF

HIDING.)

ONE OF THE BIGGEST USES OF THAT DATA...IS

POPULATION. IN FACT LAST YEAR'S COUNT PUT

UTAH'S BEARS AT ABOUT 6 PERCENT HIGHER

THAN THE YEAR BEFORE.

AFTER     THEY'RE      DONE         TAKING

                                      131
Brian Champagne

MEASUREMENTS, THE REVERSAL DRUG GETS
THE BEAR UP AND MOVING AGAIN IN A MATTER
OF MINUTES.

   (NAT SOUND- THERE SHE GOES)
   SOC.
   Sounder: This a produced sound bite that plays
underneath a news segment. Commercial radio will often
use them during their newscasts to make specific segments
stand out. For example, when the host moves to a weather
segment they will play the sounder first so that listeners
unconsciously make the realization they should tune in
because weather cast is about to start. The same method
is used for political news, national news, traffic news,
breaking news and other segments.
   Bed Music: Long segments of sound to play under
segments that need more energy. These are often
repetitive melodies that are fairly bland so they won't
distract from the story or segment. Often used in talk
shows and on public radio.

The Changing Face of Radio

"Radio you can see" is an idea quickly spreading in the
radio world. Stations are installing cameras in their
studios so audiences can connect with news and talk show
hosts while they perform. Skype and Facetime make it
possible for radio reporters to deliver news on the scene
while on camera. Social media apps like Facebook and
Twitter have made live video available so reporters can
connect with audiences on scene even when they aren't
on air. Live tweeting brings audiences right into the
courtroom, even when video and live broadcasts aren't
allowed.

132
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   While the basics of radio new reporting remain the
same, it is slowly changing from an audio-only format to a
medium for multimedia journalists.

   (KSL News Radio's live streaming web camera. This
gives the audience a chance to watch radio crews deliver
the content and connect with them visually)
Conclusion
The digital world is bringing reporters closer to their
audiences than ever. It's a sometimes overwhelming
challenge for both groups. Reporters and hosts are
constantly required to learn and master the latest trends
in social media, while audiences struggle to find to the
balance of too much information vs. not enough. Radio
has proven over the last hundred years that it is a medium
that can and will adapt as the world changes. This will
likely mean the role of its operators and talent changes as
well.

                                                                                                133
                                14.

                          Sports

I t seems like half of the people who watch sports
      regularly, dream of being a sportscaster some day.
Unfortunately, the odds of them making it to the big time
are about the same as a kid hoping to make the big leagues
in his or her given sport. There are jobs in sports casting
but the market is as competitive as the sports it covers.

   That being said, it could be done. The ESPN layoffs of
2017 showed the budgets are not endless. But local sports
reporters and anchors continue to do their jobs day after
day bringing their viewers the highlights and profiles of
their local and national sports teams.

   Sports departments are usually in their own corner of
the newsroom. Sports anchors coordinate with producers,
especially for time allotments, and the assignment desk for
photographers, but basically do their own thing. Sports
reporters may have to shoot their own video, even in
markets where reporters don't. Large markets may have
dedicated sports photographers but they're getting harder
to come by.

                                                                                                135
Brian Champagne

Sports Writing Rules

Sports' style is different from news. Sports reporters get
more latitude and often can ad-lib and use sentence
fragments more. But they must follow Rule #1, even more
than news: It is tough to imagine video of a batter running
the bases as the sportscaster tells you he has just hit a
home run; you must show that batter hitting the ball and
the ball clearing the fence. Early in my career I was
shooting the Minor League series for my station's
hometown team. The series was tied. Our team was down
in the ninth inning with runners on base. The batter
swung hard and the ball that would win the series was
headed over the fence. I lost it as it sailed away. Our sports
anchor showed me a lot less frustration than he must've
felt inside. He was stuck describing the play to viewers.

   Sports reporting must still tell a story with a beginning,
middle and ending. When you shoot a feature of the rising
star on the basketball team, find a starting point, introduce
conflict -- if they haven't overcome something than no
point being there -- and then tell how they have
overcome. Perhaps the conflict comes at the end when the
athlete heads off to the competition. Tip: If you want to do
a story about how great an athlete is, don't ask them about
their talents and skills, ask their teammates.

   The rest of your writing tips come from experienced
sports anchors:

   From Wes Ruff, KTVX Sports Director since 2002:

   As far as television sports writing is concerned, I believe
   that it is more conversational than regular news writing. It's
   almost like having a conversation with a friend and you're
   telling him about a game you watched. You obviously need

136
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   to get the who, what, where, when and why into the script,
   but you can do so in a manner that is more like you're just
   talking to a buddy.

      And because sports time is usually short in a newscast,
   the writing needs to be tight and concise. Don't use 10 words
   when six will do. That's probably why the typical
   sportscaster sometimes leaves out words. For instance, its
   not uncommon to hear "Big game tonight at the arena" as
   opposed to a more grammatically correct version "There
   was a big game tonight at the arena." I'm not encouraging
   that, I'm just pointing out that is more the norm than the
   exception.

      As a rule, sports writing includes more adverbs and
   adjectives than news writing. You're trying to get the viewer
   excited about a game or the highlights. If you're not excited
   about it, why would the viewer be excited? So phrases like
   "big game," "incredible comeback," "amazing effort," are
   more prevalent in sports writing than news writing. Tell the
   story, get the facts straight and make sure the viewer can feel
   the excitement you felt from watching the game in person.

From Jeremiah Jensen, sports anchor and reporter at KSL since
2005:

   Less is more when it comes to writing copy in sports
   broadcasting. We have a limited amount of time to
   communicate to our audience. It's important not to get too
   wordy or too descriptive. Make your writing conversational.
   Make it something your audience will understand and relate
   to. Talk to your audience the way you would talk to friends
   or family. Make it conversational.

      Another problem some TV sports anchors fall into is
   doing play by play over highlights. We forget that our

                                                                                                137
Brian Champagne

   audience can see the video highlights we are showing. They
   don't need us to describe what they are seeing. This isn't
   radio or print. What the audience does want from us is to
   tell them something about what we are seeing that they can't
   see. That can be an important stat, a fact about an athlete
   or explaining what kind of play the team is running. We
   can give the viewer so much more value in our sportscasts
   by digging deeper and delivering information or a point of
   view that the viewer may not see or know. That can be the
   difference in having viewers come back again and again to
   watch your sportscasts, or look elsewhere.

Jim Crandell, Sports Director at KTXL since 1992:

   I am probably not the best person to ask about writing,
   considering I write almost nothing. I put my story slugs in
   the rundown/prompter but that's usually about it. I may
   have a few notes in the prompter, especially stats, but I ad-
   lib my shows. That said...

      Don't try too hard to be clever or funny. If something
   comes naturally and it feels comfortable, go with it.
   However, if you have to sit at a keyboard trying to think of
   something catchy, your final product will most likely seem
   forced, or worse, trite. Along that line, don't use the first
   thing you think of, especially if it's play on words, a pun, etc.
   If it's the first thing that came to you, almost everyone else,
   including other sports reporters, probably thought the same
   thing. Give your viewers a good, solid, factually correct,
   well-reported story with some energy. That is what they
   expect. They can get plenty of comedy after the news from
   Jimmy Fallon.

      That philosophy applies to writing PKGs, VOs and
   anchoring sports segments. I sometimes feel ESPN's two

138
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

   anchor sports segments are not so much about information
   and highlights as they are about the two personalities at the
   desk. The shows degenerate into "I'm funnier than you are.
   Listen to this." My number one suggestion for anchoring is
   to write as little as possible. Talk to your viewers like one
   sports lover to another, and you don't need copy for that.
   You will need to work with the director so he knows your
   cues to roll video, etc., but if you can ad-lib most of your
   show, you will make an impression.

Access

Professional sports teams, even though they're named
after your town and play in stadiums taxpayers help pay
for, are private businesses. Most are happy to allow
accredited news media in for games (and feed them!) and
some practices, but that could be cut off at any time.

   Public universities can limit your access to practice and
even some games. Private universities can limit any access
they wish. Access was better before the Internet, and web
reporters and tweeters, but some privileged-access
conversations and plays were published. Access gets
limited a little more every time someone does this.

   A player can choose whether he talks to you or not.
When you're sent into a losing locker room, have some
tact in how you ask your questions. If the athlete knows
you are fair and respectful, you shouldn't have problems
getting future interviews.

                                                                                                139
                                15.

           Motivation and
                          Ethics

W orking in television news is hard. The pay is not
       much, the hours can be demanding and inflexible
and you present your work in front of thousands of critics
a day who think they can do your job better than you do.
Ask a professional athlete what that's like.

   So why do it? Because it's awesome. You get a front-
row seat to history. The assignment desk never wraps up a
phone call, slams down the receiver and screams, "there's
nothing happening downtown! Get down there now!" As
a rule, you only go where the action is.

   You don't read about people with interesting stories,
you meet them and tell their stories yourself. Those stories
can change other peoples' lives.

   You can make a difference by shining the light of truth
into some very dark corners. What do you know about
human trafficking or political corruption that you did not
learn from a journalist?

   You can share stories of inspiration and let your viewers

                                                                                                141
Brian Champagne

feel good about the world. I did a photo essay on a postal
worker who donated a kidney to a coworker he barely
knew. Television let us meet both people and see what
they're like for ourselves.

   Television can bring a level of emotion that can't be
matched. I reported on the funeral of a police K-9 that was
shot and killed in the line of duty. I wasn't sure what to
make of it on my drive there, but things changed once the
ceremony started. Officers take their K-9s home, and I saw
and recorded a family grieving for a beloved companion
they welcomed into their home. I interviewed an officer
with his own K-9 who related with the loss so much that
he was choked up. The dogs from neighboring agencies
lined up as the casket went past, and I asked an officer if his
dog knew the deceased, and he said it did. I kept my own
emotions out of the story, it is hard to focus a camera when
your eyes are tearing up, but was able to convey the event
to viewers with natural sound and soundbites.

   In World War II, the U.S. government rounded up
Japanese Americans from the West Coast and sent them
to internment camps. One of those camps, Topaz, was in
an isolated area of Utah. I was sent to cover the opening
of a museum there. Former internees, now 80-90 years old,
were there to share their stories. These first-hand accounts
were the first I had ever heard, and I heard them in person.
I asked the questions. When I got back to edit, I chose
what sound bites I could to convey their feelings, and put
the rest on an 18-minute video. The station's website now
has a link to the extended interviews.

   What about those vehicle crashes? When you can read
the line, "the rider wasn't wearing a helmet" or "the driver
wasn't wearing a seatbelt" in a fatal crash story hopefully

142
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

someone watching will be nudged to take basic
precautions.

   When you report a house fire, the cause and the use/
absence of smoke detectors could warn viewers not to
make the same mistakes. Usually, a few well-publicized
deaths lead people to action, and you can be the one
publicizing. Often this type of story can be very sad, like
interviewing the mother of a child who died from Sudden
Infant Death Syndrome. The mother has probably agreed
to the interview to spare some future mother the same
grief. Although you are one interviewing her, having her
relive the experience and its pain, you are giving her loss
some value.

   You can also point out fun things people wouldn't
otherwise know about. I've shot hundreds of these,
including locally-made chocolate, a vintage bomber
offering rides, festivals, get-togethers and recently, a
magician's Kickstarter project for Halloween giveaway
magic tricks instead of candy.

   For a couple years, I did live shots for my station's
Saturday morning newscast. Since it was a Saturday, I
tried to show people their options for the day: a museum
opening, a parade, a fair, a race and even a rummage sale
like no other. Yes, people saw the rummage sale on TV and
came to shop.

Ethics

Sometimes there are tough decisions to make on the job:
Do we show an innocent victim's face? Do we knock on
the door of a grieving family? Do we allow the sales
department of our station to influence our news coverage?
Legally you can do all of these, but that's another course;

                                                                                                143
Brian Champagne

these are ethical questions, and for these, we will refer
to the Society of Professional Journalists' Code of Ethics.
Here are four basic tenets, taken straight from the SPJ
website:

   For most situations, you can find one of the tenets that
covers it. You won't have a quandary a day or even one
a week. Thankfully, it is rare to have to ask for ethical or
legal advice. If you stick to the SPJ Code you can sleep
at night even if someone on some side of an issue isn't
happy with your decision. SPJ.org has more ethical and
legal resources for journalists. It is worth checking out and
worth joining.

144
                                16.

             The Job Market

T here is nothing more exciting than getting your first
       job in broadcast journalism. Actually, there are
probably a number of things more exciting, but it's up
there. The way you get started depends on the position
you want. The different roles within a newsroom,
reporter, producer and photographer, among others, each
have different paths, requirements and responsibilities,
but the different positions each share a few things in
common.

Television Markets

The United States' local news areas are split into
classifications called Direct Market Areas (DMA) or Area
of Direct Influence (ADI). The DMA outlines the area in
which a station's broadcasted television signal can reach.
Cable has blurred these lines a bit, and national outlets'
DMA envelops the entire country (or at least the country
that can receive the broadcast).

   Radio and TV do not share the same signal boundaries

                                                                                                145
Brian Champagne

but overlap. For example, the state of Utah's television
DMA includes the entire state and border areas of
surrounding states, all the way to Elko in Nevada. Radio
markets in Utah are separate for the Southern, Central,
Northern, and Salt Lake City areas.

   The more people in your ADI who see your signal, the
more your station can charge for its advertising space, and
the more money everyone makes. Markets are ranked in
size, based upon the number of television homes within
the market. Typically, the higher the market, the more
money you can earn. However, there are plenty of
exceptions due to differing costs of living and station
philosophies, but the market size can act as an estimated
earnings guide for you.

   Currently, the largest market in the United States is
New York, with Los Angeles at number two and Chicago,
three. The rankings go all the way down to Glendive,
Montana at 210.

Getting Started

The best and most common career advice is to start in
a small market. I began in the Bakersfield, California
market, ranked 141 at the time. It has since moved up to
126 because of growth in population. In a smaller market,
you can make your early-career mistakes with lighter
consequences, then move on, leaving them behind you.

   Do not be afraid to move. You can live in interesting
parts of the country for a few years before you settle in on
one place. I have worked in Bakersfield (141), Santa Barbara
County (111), and Sacramento (19) in California; then the
Utah County area of Utah (35). They called my office the

146
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

Utah County Bureau, but we traveled all the way from
Lehi to Mesquite, Nevada for stories.

   Successful photographer Emily Landeen has lived in
Charleston, South Carolina, Anchorage, Alaska, and
Seattle, Washington. She is the outdoors-type, so she was
often at the beach in South Carolina; she stayed up for the
Northern Lights in Alaska, and is now hiking the Pacific
Northwest. Find her on Facebook to see some beautiful
nature shots with accompanying text admiring the
scenery. Who knows if or where she'll settle down, but
she's having a great time living in diverse places. <Is this
necessary?>

   If you are married or committed to another person,
moving is not as simple. I met my wife in my second market
(Santa Barbara), and kids came along at the third job
(Sacramento). When we moved to Utah, the oldest was in
third grade, which is typically not a tough transitional time
for a kid. The roughest move on the family was when I left
full-time TV news to move to Northern Utah and teach.

   Starting in bigger markets is a rare exception. Plan on a
couple of years in a smaller market, instead. You will learn
much and make friends you will have the rest of your life,
unless you're a jerk or something.

Stay on Track

If you want to be a reporter, as this is the path to take
if you want to become an anchor, take reporter jobs as
they come. Start in a smaller market and work your way
up with reporter jobs. Don't take a desk job and then bug
management to let you report. In every instance I know
where wanna-be reporters took other jobs to get them in
the door at a larger station, it would have been a faster path

                                                                                                147
Brian Champagne

to reporting there if they took a reporter job in a smaller
market first. Paying your dues is worth it. You'll be doing
what you want, and you won't drive your co-workers and
management crazy because you're doing a job you don't
like.

Internships

Getting a foot in the door might require offering your
services for free. Many successful careers have started with
or as an internship. You might also get into the newsroom
routine and discover it's not for you.

   Some universities place students in internships with
network outlets in New York. It must be prestigious and
exciting to be in New York, but the likelihood of you
doing a job similar to what you did on your internship is
slim. The likelihood of building networked connections is
limited because those people are already sitting on top and
aren't likely to move. The likelihood of skills you learned
on the internship impressing a potential future employer
is also slim. The likelihood of you getting a job offer from
that network at the end of your internship is slimmest of
all.

   I know of several students whose internships ended
with job offers. This gets more common as the market
gets smaller. In smaller markets, you are more likely to be
trusted to do more jobs and get real experience.

   Emily Landeen interned at Salt Lake City NBC affiliate,
KSL. Her gung-ho attitude got her up to speed with her
shooting basics early in the internship. She earned the
trust of her supervisors. They gave her a smaller camera
and let her shoot stories on her own that eventually aired
on live TV. The posting for her first job in Charleston,

148
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

South Carolina, asked for one year of shooting
experience, but she was hired straight out of school thanks
to the experience she picked up at KSL.

   If you do not receive a job offer, you have at least gotten
experience and established a network through your
internship. Reporter Katherine May interned in Idaho
Falls, Idaho, where she impressed the person working at
the assignment desk. Later, that person was in Boise,
Idaho, where Katherine applied for and got a job.

   The trick is to make the right impression. Treat your
internship as a 150-hour job interview. Dress like you
would for a job interview every day. They may tell you
casual dress is OK, BUT DRESS FULLY
PROFESSIONAL EVERY DAY. They may tell you you
can leave early; it's a trick, NEVER LEAVE EARLY. They
may tell you there is nothing to do for a while, ASK
WHAT YOU CAN DO OR LEARN. You may have
another job or class competing with the internship, in
which case, set up hours they know they can rely on you
to be there. Co-workers may complain about the hours,
one of their co-workers or an assigned story, NEVER
COMPLAIN ABOUT ANYTHING. Whatever you are
asked to do that is legal and ethical, SMILE and do it
cheerfully. Ask questions when and where appropriate,
but know that sometimes reporters, producers, and the
assignment desk staff may be too busy for you. Try to get a
sense of when things slow down and ask then.

   THIS INTERNSHIP IS A 150-HOUR JOB
INTERVIEW. Do more than the minimum, ALWAYS. I
am very conservative with my use of all caps, so please take
those capitalized guidelines seriously.

                                                                                                149
Brian Champagne

Applying for Jobs

As mentioned earlier, the application process is different
for specific jobs. Here is a list of jobs and the common
application methods:

   Photographers - Submit three or four of your best stories
via web link, usually YouTube. Use a common resume and
have a cover letter that says why you want to work in that
market and at that station. When I hired photographers,
I looked for a link to our area, preferably family nearby.
Title your reel, "NAME Photographer Demo Reel" to
make it searchable. List any awards on your resume, and if
they're a really big deal, put them in your cover letter.

   I know of several students who were contacted by
stations unexpectedly based on their online reels. Keep
the clip updated with your best stories and keep your old
embarrassing stuff or family videos under a different
username and/or channel. Skip the rock and roll
montages unless you're looking for a job making rock and
roll montages. Start your reel with your contact
information (just email is OK since this is online) for a
couple of seconds.

   Reporters - Follow the same guidelines for
photographers, but add a montage of your creative stand-
ups and/or live shots at the beginning. The first few
seconds are critical, so show some creative work. This is
not the time for thumbsucker standups. You can include
any anchoring at the end of the reel or in another online
clip. Title your reel, "NAME TV Reporter Demo Reel."

   Producers - Submit a show you've produced with the
commercial breaks removed. When a reporter package or
long live shot begins, show just the first and last few
seconds. You may also highly abbreviate weather and

150
                                             WRITING FOR ELECTRONIC MEDIA

sports since producers usually have little involvement in
them. Title your online reel, "NAME News Producer
Demo Reel." If you have never produced a show on your
own, you may be asked for writing samples. Follow the
same resume and cover letter guidelines for
photographers.

   Sports Reporters - Same guidelines as reporters, including
keeping it creative. A graduate of mine used a viewer-
discretion-advised-style graphic in his sports highlights
during a student-news sportscast, and it caught the
attention of the management and he got the job. Title your
reel, "NAME TV Sports Demo Reel."

   Assignment Desk - This job requires an ability to
multitask, teamwork, phones and police scanners. KTVX
News Director George Severson said he likes, "resumes
that could include examples of social media and online/
digital writing examples ... like a portfolio."

   Promotions - Provide a reel and samples. Title your
online reel, "NAME TV News Promotions Demo Reel"
and follow the common guidelines above.

   Weather - It's a given that your resume will have all of
your certifications and degrees. Title your unique reel,
"NAME Weather Reel." Provide a mix of anchoring
weather segments and reporting samples.

Follow Their Rules

Most postings will tell you how to apply for the job. If
it says no phone calls, do not call. Many applications are
routed through a human resources department. Don't
worry about this. If the station is advertising a job, they
want to fill it, and they will look at the submissions. If
you have a connection at the station, of course you can

                                                                                                151
Brian Champagne

use it. Drop names in your cover letter, but make sure
those people will speak highly of you. Some managers may
call the day you submit, others not. When in California I
applied at two stations at the same time. The first station
called me to ask for another tape with samples of my work,
which I shipped and they then arranged to fly me out for
an interview. They made me an offer, which I accepted. I
told them I could report in three weeks. After working at
that station a week or so, the second station called me to
tell me they liked my tape.

152
       About the Authors

The main author is Brian Champagne of Utah State
University. He started his career 1988 at KGET (NBC) in
Bakersfield, California. He then worked at KEYT (ABC)
in the Santa Barbara station's Santa Maria Bureau. After
building up a photographer's resume under renowned
photographer Herb Tuyay, he went on to KTXL (Fox) in
Sacramento. He worked with some great reporters there,
and started his on-camera work reporting on the
Automotive Beat. He also promoted to Chief
Photographer, supervising a staff of nine. After ten years
in Sacramento he was hired to staff the KUTV (CBS)
Utah County Bureau in the Salt Lake City market. He
took some time out from news to work on a college sports
show and do corporate video and commercials before
going back to KUTV and resuming his Automotive
reporting once a week.

   Now full-time at USU, he does fill-in shifts at Salt Lake
City affiliates, shoots news video for affiliates and
networks, and produces a weekly automotive news
segment for KSTU (Fox).

   The Producing Chapter is written by Kiera Farrimond.
Kiera works as executive producer at KSL (NBC) in Salt

                                                                                                153
Brian Champagne

Lake City, but has also worked at KUTV and KPIX (CBS)
in San Francisco.

   The Radio Chapter is written by Brianna Bodily.
Brianna works at KSL Newsradio in Salt Lake City, but
has also worked for Utah Public Radio.

   Kiera and Brianna get shorter bios because hey, one
chapter. Rest assured they know what they're talking
about.

154
