BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT GUIDE
BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT GUIDE

                                                            LEE A. SWANSON
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan
Copyright:2017 by Lee A. Swanson.

                                      Version 8.0
                                          2017

                                   Lee A. Swanson

Business Plan Development Guide by Lee A. Swanson is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

      Business Plan Development Guide ................................................................................................ i
      Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................................... ii
      Introduction .................................................................................................................................... iii
Main Body ............................................................................................................................................... 4
      Chapter 1 - Developing a Business Plan ..................................................................................... 5
      Chapter 2 - Essential Initial Research ....................................................................................... 17
      Chapter 3 - Business Model ........................................................................................................ 26
      Chapter 4 - Initial Business Plan Draft ...................................................................................... 31
      Chapter 5 - Making the Business Plan Realistic ...................................................................... 51
      Chapter 6 - Making the Plan Appeal to Stakeholders and Desirable to the Entrepreneur

             ................................................................................................................................................... 55
      Chapter 7 - Finishing the Business Plan ................................................................................... 64
      Chapter 8 - Business Plan Pitches ............................................................................................. 67
      References ..................................................................................................................................... 69
      Appendix A - Business Plan Development Checklist and Project Planner .......................... 70
      Appendix B - Fashion Importers Inc. Business Plan ............................................................... 77
      Business Plan Excel Template .................................................................................................. 136

Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  1
BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT GUIDE

Lee A. Swanson
8th Edition
Publishing Date 2017

i                                Business Plan Development Guide
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am thankful for the feedback provided by my MBA and undergraduate students as they used previous
versions of this book. Its current form reflects their suggestions and advice.
Thanks also to Grant Wilson for his help in converting this book from its print form into this open access
format.

Business Plan Development Guide  ii
INTRODUCTION

This textbook and its accompanying spreadsheet templates were designed with and for students
wanting a practical and easy-to-follow guide for developing a business plan. It follows a unique format
that both explains what to do and demonstrates how to do it.

iii  Business Plan Development Guide
MAIN BODY

Business Plan Development Guide  4
CHAPTER 1 - DEVELOPING A BUSINESS PLAN

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

           Describe the purposes for business planning.
           Describe common business planning principles.
           Explain common business plan development guidelines and tools.
           List and explain the elements of the business plan development process
           Explain the purposes of each of the elements of the business plan development process
           Explain how applying the business plan development process can aid in developing a business
           plan that will meet entrepreneurs' goals

OVERVIEW

This chapter describes the purposes for business planning, business planning principles, the general
concepts and tools related to business planning, and the process for developing a business plan.

PURPOSES FOR DEVELOPING BUSINESS PLANS

Business plans are developed for both internal and external purposes. Internally, entrepreneurs develop
business plans to help put the pieces of their business together. The most common external purpose for
a business plan is to raise capital.

                                                          INTERNAL PURPOSES

   The business plan is the road map for the development of the business, it:
           Defines the vision for the company
           Establishes the company's strategy
           Describes how the strategy will be implemented
           Provides a framework for analysis of key issues
           Provides a plan for the development of the business
           Is a measurement and control tool
           Helps the entrepreneur to be realistic and to put theories to the test

                                                    EXTERNAL PURPOSES

   The business plan is often the main method of describing a company to external audiences such
   as potential sources for financing and key personnel being recruited

5                                       Business Plan Development Guide
        It should assist outside parties to understand the current status of the company, its opportunities,
        and its needs for resources such as capital and personnel
        It provides the most complete source of information for valuation of the business

BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT PRINCIPLES

Hindle and Mainprize (2006) suggested that business plan writers must strive to (1) effectively
communicate their expectations about the nature of an uncertain future, and (2) to project credibility.
The liabilities of newness make communicating the expected future of new ventures much more difficult
than for existing businesses. Consequently, business plan writers should adhere to five specific
communication principles.

The first communication principle indicates that business plans must be written to meet the
expectations of targeted readers in terms of what they need to know to support the proposed business.
Business plans should also lay out the milestones that investors or other targeted readers need to know.
The remaining communication principles suggest that business plan writers clearly outline the
opportunity, the context within the proposed venture will operate (internal and external environment),
and the business model (Hindle & Mainprize, 2006).

There are also five business plan credibility principles that writers should consider. Business plan
writers should build and establish their credibility by highlighting important and relevant information
about the venture team. Writers need to elaborate on the plans they outline in their document so that
targeted readers have the information they need to assess the plan's credibility. The scenario
integration principle suggests that, to build and establish credibility, a business plan must show that the
entrepreneur has made realistic assumptions and has effectively anticipated what the future holds for
their proposed venture. Business plan writers need to provide comprehensive and realistic financial
links between all relevant components of the plan. Finally, to establish credibility, a business plan must
outline the deal, or the value that targeted readers should expect to derive from their involvement with
the venture (Hindle & Mainprize, 2006).

GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR DEVELOPING BUSINESS PLANS

Many businesses must have a business plan to achieve their goals. The following are some basic
guidelines for business plan development.

        A standard format is applied to help the reader understand that the entrepreneur has thought
        everything through, and that the returns justify the risk
        Bind the document so readers can easily go through it without it falling apart

                                               AS YOU WRITE YOUR BUSINESS PLAN

1. If appropriate, include nice, catchy, professional graphics on your title page to make it appealing to
targeted readers; but don't go overboard.

2. Bind your document so readers can easily go through it without it falling apart. You might use a
three-ring binder, coil binding, or a similar method. Make sure the binding method you use does not
obscure the information next to where it is bound.

3. Make certain all of your pages are ordered and numbered correctly.

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                            6
4. The usual business plan convention is to number all major and subsections within your plan using a
format as follows

1. First main heading

   1.1First subheading under the first main heading

   1.1.1. First sub-subheading under the first subheading

2. Second main heading

   2.1 First subheading under the second main heading

Use the styles and references features in Word to automatically number and format your section titles
and to generate your table of contents. Be sure that the last thing you do before printing your document
is update your automatic numbering and automatically generated tables. If you fail to do this your
numbering may be incorrect.

5. Prior to submitting your plan, be 100% certain each of the following requirements are met.

   Everything must be completely integrated. The written part must say exactly the same thing as
   the financial part.
   All financial statements must be completely linked and valid. Make sure all of your balance sheets
   balance.
   Everything must be correct. There should be NO spelling, grammar, sentence structure,
   referencing, or calculation errors.
   Ensure your document is well organized and formatted. The layout you choose should make the
   document easy to read and comprehend. All of your diagrams, charts, statements, and other
   additions should be easy to find and be located in the parts of the plan best suited to them.
   In some cases it can strengthen your business plan to show some information in both text and
   table or figure formats. You should avoid unnecessary repetition, however, as it is usually
   unnecessary - and even damaging - to state the same thing more than once.
   Include all the necessary information to enable readers to understand everything in your
   document.
   Be clear what terms you use in your plan. For example, the following statement in a business plan
   would leave a reader completely confused.

           "There is a shortage of 100,000 units with competitors currently producing 25,000. We can
           help fill this huge gap in demand with our capacity to produce 5,000 units."
           This statement might mean there is a total shortage of 100,000 units, but competitors are
           filling this gap by producing 25,000 per year; in which case there will only be a shortage for
           four years. However, it could mean something completely different. It might mean there is
           an annual shortage of 100,000 units with only 25,000 being produced each year, in which
           case the total shortage is very high and is growing each year.
   You must always provide the complete perspective by indicating the appropriate time frame,
   currency, size, or other measurement.
   Be certain that if you use a percentage figure, you indicate to what it refers - otherwise the
   number is meaningless to a reader.
   If your plan includes an international element, indicate in which currency, or currencies the costs,
   revenues, prices, or other values are quoted. This can be solved by indicating up-front in the

7                                                          Business Plan Development Guide
        document in which currency all values will be quoted. Another option is to indicate each time
        which currency is being used, and sometimes you might want to indicate the value in more than
        one currency. Of course, you will need to assess the exchange rate risk to which you will be
        exposed and describe this in your document.

6. Ensure credibility is both established and maintained (Hindle & Mainprize, 2006).

        If a statement is included that presents something as a fact when this fact is not generally known,
        always indicate the source. Unsupported statements damage credibility.
        Be sure to be specific. A business plan is simply not of value if it uses vague references to high
        demand, carefully set prices, and other weak phrasing. It must show hard numbers (properly
        referenced, of course), actual prices, and real data acquired through proper research. This is the
        only way to ensure your plan is considered credible.
        Your strategies must be integrated. For example, your pricing strategy must complement and
        mesh perfectly with your product/service strategy, distribution strategy, and promotions strategy.
        For example, you probably shouldn't promote your product as a premium product if you plan to
        charge lower than market prices for it.

7. Before finalizing your business plan, re-read each section to evaluate whether it will appeal to your
targeted readers.

USEFUL RESOURCES FOR BUSINESS PLANNING

        Canada Business Network
        http://www.canadabusiness.ca/eng/
        Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada: Financial Performance Data
        http://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/pp-pp.nsf/eng/Home
        BizPal site for accessing licensing and other needs
        http://www.bizpal.ca/
        Canada Revenue Agency site for CRA asset classifications
        http://www.cra-arc.gc.ca/tx/bsnss/tpcs/slprtnr/rprtng/cptl/dprcbl-eng.html
        Canadian Company Capabilities database to use to find suppliers and buyers
        http://www.ic.gc.ca/eic/site/ccc-rec.nsf/eng/home
        For finding possible Canadian Government contracts:
        http://www.merx.com/
        The Conference Board of Canada
        http://www.conferenceboard.ca/
        Bank of Canada
        http://www.bankofcanada.ca/
        Bank Sites
        http://www.td.com/
        http://www.rbc.com/
        http://www.scotiabank.com/
        http://www.bmo.com/
        http://www.cibc.com/
        Business Loan Calculator
        http://www.rbcroyalbank.com/cgi-bin/business/loan_calc/loans.cgi
        Use the business area within our library site

Business Plan Development Guide  8
        http://library.usask.ca/
        Read existing business plans
        Come to my office to browse through past plans
        http://www.edwards.usask.ca/faculty/marv%20painter/businessplans/
        Other possibilities include business plan software and business plan templates (both widely
        available online and also at some banks), but be cautious because these are often designed for
        people without business backgrounds and are sometimes too basic for what you need.

BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT TOOLS

                                                         THE RATCHET EFFECT

A ratchet is a tool that most of us are familiar with. It is useful because it helps its user accomplish
something with each effort expended while guarding against losing past advancements.

Use the ratchet effect to help you develop an excellent business plan.

The ratchet effect means that with each word, sentence, paragraph, heading, chart, figure, and table
you include in your final business plan, the ratchet should move ahead a notch because you achieve two
important things.

        First, only needed and relevant information is included.
        Second, your additions build credibility in a relevant way.

Apply the ratchet effect by making sure that each and every sentence and paragraph conveys needed
and relevant information that adds to your credibility and that of your plan. Use the following
principles:

        Rarely - and only if it truly needs to be said again - repeat something that has already been said
        in your plan.
        Avoid using killer phrases, like "there is no competition for our product" or "our product will sell
        itself, so we will not need to advertise it". Any savvy reader of your plan will understand that
        these kinds of statements are naive and demonstrate a lack of understanding about how the
        market and other real-life factors actually work.
        Avoid contradicting yourself. Make sure that what is said in the written part of your plan
        completely synchs with what is said in the other written parts of your plan and in the financial
        sections of your plan. Likewise, make certain that what you include in the financial parts of your
        plan is completely in synch with what is said the written part.

                                                        THE STRENGTH METER

9  Business Plan Development Guide
Use the ratchet effect to continually increase the reading on an imaginary strength meter that you use
to envision how - when you continually go back and revise parts of our plan - your revisions to your
evolving business plan continually strengthen it.

                                                         THE MAGIC FORMULA

Apply the following magic formula throughout your write your plan.

(a)Consideration X affects my business because ...

(b)... consideration X is subject to this trend into the future ...

(c)... which means that we have decided to do this ... (or) will implement this strategy ... in response to
how the expected trends for consideration X will affect my business

Here is an example of how you can use the magic formula to develop part of the pricing strategy in the
marketing plan part of your business plan.

We expect that our expenses to run our business will rise with the rate of inflation, which means that
we must plan to increase the prices on our products to establish and maintain our profitability. The
Bank of Canada (201x) has projected that the general inflation rate in <the city in which my business
will operate> will be 3.0% in 201x, 3.5% in 201y, and 4.0% in 201z. In our projected financial
statements, therefore, we have inflated both our expenses and our prices by those rates in those years.

                                                                  FRAMING

Pay special attention to framing when you develop your business plan. When you frame the stories you
tell in your plan correctly the ratchet effect will happen and the strength meter will rise. One example
of effective framing is when you, as the writer of the plan and the entrepreneur, clearly indicate how
your education, expertise, relevant experiences, and network of contacts will more than make up for
any lack of direct experience you have in running this particular kind of business. An example of
ineffective framing is when you indicate that you lack experience with this type of business, or when
you fail to specify how and why your levels of experience will affect the development of the business.

Business Plan Development Guide  10
    CONTEXT

You must provide the right context when you provide descriptions of situations, strategies, and other
components of your plan. Business plan readers should never be left to guess as to why you indicate in a
business plan that you will do something.

                                                           BARRIER BREAKING

          In business planning there are always barriers. Often times when an an issue arises, we get
hung up on solving it immediately. Barrier breaking is the notion of "planting a flag" and moving on
when an issue has the potential to sideline the project for a length of time. In many cases when we look
back on issues, they have solved themselves. If not, we will return to these issues at a later time when
we are hopefully more informed and have insight into solutions.

a) Never get hung up on something that doesn't need immediate problem solving

b) "Plant a flag" and move on

c) Re-address the issue at a later time if it is not already solved

PROCESS FOR DEVELOPING BUSINESS PLANS

The business plan development process described next has been extensively tested with
entrepreneurship students and has proven to provide the guidance entrepreneurs need to develop a
business plan appropriate for their needs; a high power business plan.

There are six stages involved with developing a high power business plan. These stages can be
compared to a process for hosting a dinner for a few friends. A host hoping to make a good impression
with their anticipated guests might - Essential Initial Research stage - analyze the situation at multiple
levels to collect data on new alternatives for healthy ingredients, what ingredients have the best prices
and are most readily available at certain times of year, the new trends in party appetizers, what food
allergies the expected guests might have, possible party themes to consider, and so on.

The Business Model stage is where the host might construct a menu of items to include with the meal
along with a list of decorations to order, music to play, and costume themes to suggest to the guests.
The mix of these kinds of elements chosen by the host will play a role in the success of the party.

The Initial Business Plan Draft stage is where the host rolls up his or her sleeves and begins to assemble
make some of the food items, put up some of the decorations, send invitations, and generally get
everything started for the party.

11           Business Plan Development Guide
During the Initial Business PlanDraft stage the host will begin to realize that some plans are not feasible
and that changes are needed. The required changes might be substantial, like the need to postpone the
entire party and ultimately start over in a few months, and others might be less drastic, like the need to
change the menu when an invited guest indicates that they can't eat food containing gluten. Making the
Business Plan Realistic stage is where these changes are incorporated into the plan to make it realistic
and feasible.

Making A Plan Desirable to Stakeholders and the Entrepreneur stage involves further changes to the
party plan to make it more appealing to both the invited guests and to make it a fun experience for the
host. For example, the host might learn that some of the single guests would like to bring dates and
others might need to be able to bring their children to be able to attend. The host might be able to
accommodate those desires or needs in ways that will also make the party more fun for them - maybe
by accepting some guests' offers to bring food or games, or maybe even a babysitter to entertain and
look after the children.

The final stage - Finishing the Business Plan - involves the host putting all of the final touches in place
for the party in preparation for the arrival of the guests.

Business Plan Development Guide  12
13  Business Plan Development Guide
                                 Figure 1 - Business Plan Development Process

ESSENTIAL INITIAL RESEARCH

A business plan writer should analyze the environment in which they anticipate operating at each of the
levels of analysis: Societal, Industry, Market, and Firm (see pages 21 to 30). This stage of planning is
called the Essential Initial Research, and it is a necessary first step to better understand the trends that
will affect their business and the decisions they must make to lay the groundwork for, and to improve
their potential for success.

In some cases much of the Essential Initial Research should be included in the developing business plan
as its own separate section to help build the case for readers that there is a market need for the
business being considered and that it stands a good chance of being successful.

In other cases, a business plan will be stronger when the components of the Essential Initial Research
are distributed throughout the business plan as a way to provide support for the plans and strategies
outlined in the business plan. For example, a part of the Industry or Market part of the Essential Initial
Research might outline the pricing strategies used by identified competitors and might be best placed
in the Pricing Strategy part of the business plan to support the decision made to employ a particular
pricing strategy.

BUSINESS MODEL

Inherent in any business plan is a description of the Business Model chosen by the entrepreneur as the
one that they feel will best ensure success. Based upon their Essential Initial Research of the setting in
which they anticipate starting their business (their analysis from stage one) an entrepreneur should
determine how each element of their business model - including their revenue streams, cost structure,
customer segments, value propositions, key activities, key partners and so on - might fit together to
improve the potential success of their business venture (see Chapter 3 - Business Models).

For some types of ventures, at this stage an entrepreneur might launch a lean startup (see page 37) and
grow their business by continually pivoting, or constantly adjusting their business model in response to
the real-time signals they get from the markets' reactions to their business operations. In many cases,
however, an entrepreneur will require a business plan. In those cases their initial Business Model will
provide the basis for that plan.

Of course, throughout this and all of the stages in this process, the entrepreneur should seek to
continually gather information and adjust the plans in response to the new knowledge they gather. As
shown in Figure 1 by its enclosure in the Progressive Research box, the business plan developer might
need conduct further research before finishing the Business Model and moving on to the Initial
Business Plan Draft.

INITIAL BUSINESS PLAN DRAFT

The Business Plan Draft is about taking the knowledge and ideas developed during the first two stages
and organizing them into a business plan format. An approach preferred by many is to create a full draft
of the business plan with all of the sections, including the front part with the business description,
vision, mission, values, value proposition statement, preliminary set of goals, and possibly even a table
of contents and lists of tables and figures all set up using the software features enabling their automatic

Business Plan Development Guide                                                14
generation. It is also useful for most to write all of the operations, human resources, marketing, and
financial plans as part of the first draft so that all of these parts can be appropriately and necessarily
integrated. The business plan will tell the story of a planned business startup in two ways by using
primarily words along with some charts and graphs in the operations, human resources, and marketing
plans and in the second way through the financial plan. Both ways must tell the same story.

The feedback loop shown in Figure 1 demonstrates that the business developer may need to review the
Business Model. Additionally, as shown by its enclosure in the Progressive Research box, the business
plan developer might need conduct further research before finishing the Initial Business Plan Draft and
moving on to the Making Business Plan Realistic stage.

MAKING BUSINESS PLAN REALISTIC

The first draft of a business plan will almost never be realistic. This is because as the entrepreneur
writes the plan, it will necessarily change as new information is gathered. Another factor that usually
renders the first draft unrealistic is the difficulty in making certain that the written part - in the front
part of the plan along with the operations, human resources, and marketing plans - tells the exact same
story as does the financial part as represented in the financial plan. This stage of work involves making
the necessary adjustments to the plan to make it as realistic as possible.

Making Business Plan Realistic has two possible feedback loops, one going back to the Initial Business
Plan Draft in case the initial business plan needs to be significantly changed before it is possible to
adjust it so that it is realistic. The second feedback loop circles back to the Business Model stage in case
the business developer need to rethink the business model. As shown in Figure 1 by its enclosure in the
Progressive Research box, the business plan developer might need conduct further research before
finishing the Making Business Plan Realistic and moving on to the Making Plan Appeal to Stakeholders
stage.

MAKING PLAN APPEAL TO STAKEHOLDERS AND DESIRABLE TO THE ENTREPRENEUR

A business plan can be realistic without also appealing to potential investors and other external
stakeholders, like employees, suppliers, and needed business partners. It might also be realistic (and
possibly appealing to stakeholders) without also being desirable to the entrepreneur. During this stage
the entrepreneur will keep the business plan realistic as they adjust plans to appeal to potential
investors and others, and to themselves as the business owner.

If, for example, investors will be required to finance the business start, some adjustments might need to
be relatively extensive to appeal to potential investor needs for an exit strategy from your business, to
accommodate the rate of return they expect from their investments, and to convince them that the
entrepreneur can accomplish all that is promised in the plan. In this case, and in others, the
entrepreneur will also need to get what they want out of the business to make it worthwhile for them to
start and run it. So, this stage of adjustments to the developing business plan might be fairly extensive,
and they must be informed by a superior knowledge of what targeted investors need from a business
proposal before they will invest. They also need to be informed by a clear set of goals that will make the
venture worthwhile for the entrepreneur to pursue.

The caution with this stage is to balance the need to make realistic plans with the desire to meet the
entrepreneur's goals while avoiding becoming discouraged enough to drop the idea of pursuing the
business idea. If an entrepreneur is convinced that the proposed venture will satisfy a valid market

15  Business Plan Development Guide
need, there is often a way to assemble the financing required to start and operate the business while
also meeting the entrepreneur's most important goals. To do so, however, might require significant
changes to the business model.

One of the feedback loops shown in Figure 1 indicates that the business plan writer might need to
adjust the draft business plan while ensuring that it is still realistic before it can be made appealing to
the targeted stakeholders and desirable to the entrepreneur. The second feedback loop indicates that it
might be necessary to go all the way back to the Business Model stage to establish the framework and
plans needed to develop a realistic, appealing, and desirable business plan. Additionally, this stage's
enclosure in the Progressive Research box suggests that the business plan developer might need
conduct further research.

FINISHING THE BUSINESS PLAN

The final stage involves putting all of the important finishing touches on the business plan so that it will
present well to potential investors or others for whom it is written. This involves making sure that the
math and links between the written and financial parts are accurate. It involves ensuring that all the
needed corrections are made to the spelling, grammar, and formatting. The final set of goals should be
written to appeal to the target readers and to reflect what the business plan says. An executive
summary should be written and included as a final step.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter described the internal and external purposes for business planning. It also explained how
business plans must effectively communicate while establishing and building credibility for both the
entrepreneur and the venture. The general guidelines for business planning were covered as were some
important business planning tools. The chapter concluded with descriptions of the stages of the
business development process for effective business planning.

Business Plan Development Guide  16
CHAPTER 2 - ESSENTIAL INITIAL RESEARCH

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Apply analytical skills to assess how the nature of entrepreneurial environment can influence
          entrepreneurial outcomes.
          Apply the right tools to do impactful analyses at each of the societal, industry, market, and
          firm levels to evaluate entrepreneurial and other business opportunities.

OVERVIEW

This chapter introduces the distinct levels of analyses that must be considered while stressing the
importance of applying the appropriate tools to conduct the analyses at each level.

    Figure 2 - Essential Initial Research

17                                         Business Plan Development Guide
SUPPORT INFORMATION

It is important to conduct Essential Initial Research. All information and items in the plan should be
backed with facts from valid primary or secondary sources. Alternatively, some entrepreneurs can make
valid claims based on experience and expertise. As such, their background and experiences should be
delineated in order to provide support for claims made in the business plan.

Evidence-based claims makes the business plan stronger.

LEVELS OF ANALYSES

When evaluating entrepreneurial opportunities - sometimes called idea screening - an effective process
involves assessing the various venture ideas being considered by applying different levels and types of
analyses. Entrepreneurs starting ventures and running existing businesses should also regularly analyse
their operating environments at the societal, industry, market, and firm-levels. The right tools, though,
must be applied at each level of analysis (see Figure 3). It is critical to complete an Essential Initial
Research at all four levels (societal, industry, market, and firm). The initial scan should be high-level,
designed to assist in making key decisions (i.e. determining if there is a viable market opportunity for
the venture). Secondary scans should be continuously conducted in order to support each part of the
business plan (i.e. operations, marketing, finance). However, information should only be included if it is
research-based, relevant, and adds value to the business plan. The results from such research (i.e. the
Bank of Canada indicates that interest rates will be increasing in the next two years) should support
business strategies within the plan (i.e. debt financing may be less favourable than equity financing).
Often times, obtaining support data (i.e. construction quotes) is not immediate so plant a flag and move
forward. Valid useful resources may include information from Statistics Canada, Bank of Canada, IBIS
World Report, etc.

Finding support data is not always immediate, plant a flag and return to the subject at a later
time.

                                 SOCIETAL LEVEL

At a societal-level it is important to understand each of the political, economic, social, technological,
environmental, and legal (PESTEL) factors - and, more specifically, the trends affecting those factors -
that will have an impact on a venture based on a particular idea. Some venture ideas might be
screened-out and others might be worth pursuing at a particular time because of the trends occurring
with those PESTEL factors. Avoid the use of technical jargon that may distract readers (i.e. rivalry
among firms) and use simpler language (i.e. competitive environment).

                                                             INDUSTRY LEVEL

Apply Porter's (1985) Five Forces Model, or a similar tool designed to assess industry level factors. This
analysis will focus more specifically on the sector of the economy in which you intend to operate. Again,
the right analysis tool must be used for the assessment to be effective. Again, avoid technical jargon

Business Plan Development Guide                          18
(i.e. threat of new entrants) and use simpler wording (i.e. difficulty of entering the market) or flip to an
analysis of the threat (i.e. strategies to establish and maintain market share).

                                                              MARKET LEVEL

At the market-level, you need to use a tool to generate information about the part of the industry in
which your business will compete. This tool might be in the form of a set of questions designed to
uncover information that you need to know to help develop plans to improve the success of your
proposed venture.

                                                                FIRM LEVEL

At a firm-level both the internal organizational trends and the external market profile trends should
both be analyzed. There are several tools for conducting an internal organizational analysis, and you
should normally apply several of them.

ANALYZING THE TRENDS AT EACH LEVEL

19  Business Plan Development Guide
                                                             Figure 3 - Different Levels of Analysis

ANALYZE SOCIETAL LEVEL TRENDS

Use an appropriate tool like the PESTEL model to assess both the current situation and the likely
changes as they may affect you.

        Political factors (federal & provincial & municipal government policy, nature of political
        decisions, potential political changes, infrastructure plans, etc.)
        Economic factors (interest rates, inflation rates, exchange rates, tax rates, GDP growth,
        health of the economy, etc.)

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                       20
                Social factors (population characteristics like age distribution and education levels, changes
                in demand for types of products and services, etc.)
                Technological factors (new processes, new products, infrastructure, etc.)
                Environmental factors (effects of climate / weather, water availability, smog and pollution
                issues, etc.)
                Legal factors (labour laws, minimum wage rates, liability issues, etc.)
        Assess the impact these trends have upon the venture:
                Do the trends uncover opportunities and threats?
                Can opportunities be capitalized on?
                Can problems be mitigated?
                Can the venture be sustained?

ANALYZE INDUSTRY LEVEL TRENDS

        Use an appropriate tool like the Five Forces Model (Porter, 1985) to analyze the industry in which
        you expect to operate.

                Horizontal relationships: Threat of substitutes, Rivalry among existing competitors, Threat
                of new entrants
                Vertical Relationships: Bargaining power of buyers, Bargaining power of suppliers

ANALYZE MARKET LEVEL TRENDS

        Use an appropriate method like a market profile analysis to assess the position within the industry
        in which you expect to operate.

                Determine the answers to questions like the following:
                        How attractive is the market?
                        In what way are competitors expected to respond if you enter the market?
                        What is the current size of the market and how large is it expected to be?
                        What are the current and projected growth rates?
                        At what stage of the development cycle is the market?
                        What level of profits can be expected in the market?
                        What proportion of the market can be captured? What will be the cost to capture this
                        proportion and what is the cost to capture the proportion required for business
                        sustainability?

Prior to a new business start-up, the customers the new business wishes to attract either already
purchase the product or service from a competitor to the new business - or they do not yet purchase the
product or service at all. A new venture's customers, therefore, must come from one of two sources.
They must a) be attracted away from existing (direct) competitors or b) be convinced to make different
choices about where they spend their money so they purchase the new venture's product or service
instead of spending their money in other ways (with indirect competitors). This means an entrepreneur
must decide from which source they will attract their customers, and how they will do so. They must
understand the competitive environment.

According to Porter (1996), strategy is about doing different things than competitors or doing similar
things but in different ways. In order to develop an effective strategy an entrepreneur must understand
the competition.

21  Business Plan Development Guide
To understanding the competitive environment, entrepreneurs must do the following:

        determine who their current direct and indirect competitors are and who the future competitors
        will be,
        understand the similarities and differences in quality, price, competitive advantages, and other
        factors their proposed business and the existing competitors,
        establish whether they can offer different products or services - or the same products or services
        in different ways - to attract enough customers to meet their goals, and
        anticipate how the competitors will react in response to the new venture's entry into the market.

ANALYZE FIRM-LEVEL TRENDS (ORGANIZATIONAL ANALYSIS)

There are several tools available for firm-level analysis, and usually several of them should be applied
because they serve different purposes.

Use an appropriate tool like a SWOT analysis / TOWS Matrix to formulate and evaluate potential
strategies to leverage organizational strengths, overcome/minimize weaknesses, take advantage
of opportunities, and overcome/minimize threats. You will also need to do a financial analysis and
take into account the founder fit and the competencies a venture should possess.

        SWOT analysis - identify organizational strengths and weaknesses and external
        opportunities and threats
        TOWS matrix - develop strategies to:

                leverage strengths to take advantage of opportunities
                leverage strengths to overcome threats
                mitigate weaknesses by taking advantage of opportunities
                mitigate weaknesses while minimizing the potential threats or the potential outcomes
                from threats

For analyzing a firm's strategy, apply a VRIO Framework analysis.

While conceptualizing the resource based view (RBV) of the firm, Barney (1997) and Barney and
Hesterly (2006) identified the following four considerations regarding resources and their ability
to help a firm gain a competitive advantage. Together, the following four questions make up the
VRIO Framework, which can be used as an analysis tool to assess a firm's capacity and to
determine what competencies a venture should have. Determine whether competences are:
valuable, rare, inimitable, and exploitable.

        Value: Is a particular resource (financial, physical, technological, organizational, human,
        reputational, innovative) valuable to a firm because it helps it take advantage of
        opportunities or eliminate threats?
        Rarity: Is a particular resource rare in that it is controlled by or available to relatively few
        others?
        Imitability: Is a particular resource difficult to imitate so that those who have it can retain
        cost advantages over those who might try to obtain or duplicate it?
        Organization: Are the resources available to a firm useful to it because it is organized and
        ready to exploit them?

Assess the financial attractiveness of the venture

Analysis of similar firms in industry

Business Plan Development Guide                                                     22
            Comparative ratio and financial analysis see (Vesper pp. 145-148) can help determine
            industry norm returns, turnover ratios, working capital, operating efficiency, and other
            measures of firm success
    Projected market share
            Analyze the key industry players' relative market share, and make judgments about how the
            proposed venture would fare within the industry
            Use information from market profile analysis and key industry player analysis
    Margin analysis
            Involves projecting expected margins from venture
            Useful information might come from financial analysis, market profile analysis, and NAICS
            (North American Industry Classification System) codes (six digit codes used to identify an
            industry - first five digits are standardized in Canada, the United States, and Mexico - is
            gradually replacing the four digit SIC [Standard Industrial Classification] codes)
    Break-even analysis
            Involves using information from margin analysis to determine break even volume and break
            even sales in dollars
            Is there sufficient volume to sustain the venture?
    Pro-forma analysis
            Forecasting income and assets required to generate profits
    Sensitivity analysis
            What will be the likely impact if some assumed variable values change?
    Return on investment (ROI) projections
            Projecting the ROI from undertaking the venture
            What is the opportunity cost of undertaking the venture?
    Founder fit is an important consideration for entrepreneurs screening venture opportunities.
    While there are plenty of examples of entrepreneurs successfully starting all types of businesses,
    "technical capability can be an important if not all-important factor in pursuing ventures success"
    (Vesper, 1996, p. 149). Factors such as the experience, training, credentials, reputation, and
    social capital an entrepreneur has can play an important role in their success or failure in starting
    a new venture. Even when an entrepreneur can recruit expert help through business partners or
    employees, it might be important that he or she also possess technical skills required in that
    particular kind of business.
    A common and useful way to help screen venture options is to seek input from experts, peers,
    mentors, business associates, and perhaps other stakeholders like potential customers and direct
    family members.

        Completing a TOWS matrix develops strategies from the SWOT analysis and strengthens
        your business plan.

        Reference your technical skills, as this is a major factor in a venture's success.

                                                              LEAN STARTUP

Ries (2011) defines a lean start-up as "a human institution designed to create a new product or service
under conditions of extreme uncertainty" (p. 27), and the lean startup approach involves releasing a

23  Business Plan Development Guide
minimal viable product to customers with the expectation that this early prototype will change and
evolve frequently and quickly in response to customer feedback. This is meant to be a relatively easy
and inexpensive way to develop a product or service by relying on customer feedback to guide the
pivots in new directions that will ultimately - and relatively quickly - lead to a product or service that
will have the appeal required for business success. It is only then that the actual business can truly
emerge. As such, entrepreneurs that apply the lean start-up approach - because their business idea
allows for it - actually forgo developing a business plan, at least until they might need one later to get
financing, in favour of building their business by introducing a minimum viable product to help
"entrepreneurs start the process of learning as quickly as possible" (Ries, 2011, p. 93). This is followed
by ever improving versions of their products or services. However, all entrepreneurs must directly
consult with their potential target purchasers and end users to assess if and how the market might
respond to their proposed venture. The Essential Initial Research and Progressive Research should
include purposeful and meaningful interactions with the entrepreneur and target purchasers and end
users.

Ries's (2011) five lean startup principles start with the idea that entrepreneurs are everywhere and that
anyone working in an environment where they seek to create new products or services "under
conditions of extreme uncertainty" (27) can use the lean startup approach. Second, a startup is more
than the product or service, it is an institution that must be managed in a new way that promotes
growth through innovation. Third, startups are about learning "how to build a sustainable business"
(pp. 8-9) by validating product or service design through frequent prototyping that allows
entrepreneurs to test the concepts. Forth, startups must follow this process, or feedback loop: create
products and services; then measure how the market reacts to them; and learn from that to determine
whether to pivot or to persevere with an outcome the market accepts. Finally, Ries (2011) suggested
that entrepreneurial outcomes and innovation initiatives need to be measured through innovative
accounting.

Business Plan Development Guide  24
                 Figure 4 - Business Model and Lean Start-Up Books

CHAPTER SUMMARY

By applying the right tools to analyze the operating environment at each of the societal, industry,
market, and firm-levels, entrepreneurs screen venture ideas, plan new venture development, and
potentially detect factors that might affect their business operations. It also explained the lean startup
concept. See Figure 4 for other resources on business models and the lean startup.

25                                                                  Business Plan Development Guide
CHAPTER 3 - BUSINESS MODEL

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Describe what a business model is.
          Analyse existing and proposed businesses to determine what business models they are
          applying and what business models they plan to apply.
          Develop and analyze alternative business models for new entrepreneurial ventures.

OVERVIEW

In this chapter the concept of the business model is introduced. One concept of the business model in
particular, the Business Model Canvas, is explored as a way to conceptualize and categorize elements of
a business model.

                                 Figure 5 - Business Model

WHAT ARE BUSINESS MODELS?

Magretta (2002) described business models as "stories that explain how enterprises work" (p. 87) and

Business Plan Development Guide                             26
Osterwalder, Pigneur, and Clark (2010) claimed that they reveal "the rationale of how an organization
creates, delivers, and captures value" (p. 14). Chatterjee (2013) said that "A business is about selling
what you make for a profit. A business model is a configuration (activity systems) of what the business
does (activities) and what it invests in (resources) based on the logic that drives the profits for a specific
business" (p. 97).

Osterwalder et al. (2010) said that a start-up is something quite different than an ongoing venture. A
start-up should not be viewed as a smaller version of a company because it requires very different skills
to start-up a company than it does to operate one. A start-up that is still a start-up after some time -
maybe after a couple of years for some kinds of start-ups - is actually a failed enterprise since it hasn't
converted into an ongoing venture. Entrepreneurs that develop a business model for their ventures that
deliver value to the targeted customers and to the entrepreneur and the venture stand a better chance
of converting their start-up into an ongoing venture.

THE BUSINESS MODEL CANVAS

The business model canvas is made up of nine parts that, together, end up describing the business
model (see Figure 6).

                                                               Figure 6 - Business Model Canvas

The following elements of the Business Model Canvas were taken, with permission, from

27  Business Plan Development Guide
http://www.businessmodelgeneration.com.

Key partners
        Who are our key partners?
        Who are our key suppliers?
        Which key resources are we acquiring from partners?
        Which key activities do partners perform?
        Motivations for partnerships: optimization and economy; reduction of risk and uncertainty;
        acquisition of particular resources and activities.

Key activities
        What key activities do our value propositions require?
        Our distribution channels?
        Customer relationships?
        Revenue streams?
        Categories: production; problem solving; platform/network.

Key resources
        What key resources do our value propositions require?
        Our distribution channels?
        Customer relationships?
        Revenue streams?
        Types of resources: physical; intellectual (brand patents, copyrights, data); human; financial

Value propositions
        What value do we deliver to the customer?
        Which one of our customer's problems are we helping to solve?
        What bundles of products and services are we offering to each customer segment?
        Which customer needs are we satisfying?
        Characteristics: newness; performance; customization; "getting the job done"; design;
        brand/status; price; cost reduction; risk reduction; accessibility; convenience/usability.

Customer relationships
        What type of relationship does each of our customer segments expect us to establish and
        maintain with them?
        Which ones have we established?
        How are they integrated with the rest of our business model?
        How costly are they?
        Examples: personal assistance; dedicated personal assistance; self-service; automated
        services; communities; co-creation.

Customer segments
        For whom are we creating value?
        Who are our most important customers?
        Mass market; niche market; segmented; diversified; multi-sided platform.

Channels
        Through which channels do our customer segments want to be reached?
        How are we reaching them now?
        How are our channels integrated?
        Which ones work best?
        Which ones are most cost-efficient?
        How are we integrating them with customer routines?
        Channel phases: (1) awareness (How do we raise awareness about our company's products

Business Plan Development Guide          28
                and services?); (2) evaluation (How do we help customers evaluate our organization's value
                proposition?); (3) purchase (How do we allow customers to purchase specific products and
                services?); (4) delivery (How do we deliver a value proposition to customers?); (5) after
                sales (How do we provide post-purchase customer support?).
        Revenue streams
                For what value are our customers really willing to pay?
                For what do they currently pay?
                How are they currently paying?
                How would they prefer to pay?
                How much does each revenue stream contribute to overall revenues?
                Types: asset sale; usage fee; subscription fees; lending/renting/leasing; licensing; brokerage
                fees; advertising.
                Fixed pricing: list price; product feature dependent; customer segment dependent; volume
                dependent.
                Dynamic pricing: negotiation (bargaining); yield management; real-time-market.
        Cost structure
                What are the most important costs inherent in our business model?
                Which key resources are most expensive?
                Which key activities are most expensive?
                Is your business more: cost driven (leanest cost structure, low price value proposition,
                maximum automation, extensive outsourcing); value driven (focused on value creation,
                premium value proposition).
                Sample characteristics: fixed costs (salaries, rents, utilities); variable costs; economies of
                scale; economies of scope.

The idea is to keep adding descriptions, or plans to the nine components to create the initial business
model and then to actually do the start-up activities and replace the initial assumptions in each of the
nine parts with newer and better information or plans, and to let the business model evolve. This model
is partly based on the idea that the owner should be the one interacting with potential customers so he
or she fully understands what these potential customers want These interactions should not only be
done by hired sales people, at least until the business model has evolved into one that works, and this
evolution can only happen when the venture owner is completely engaged with the potential customers
and the other business operations (Osterwalder et al., 2010).

A business plan shouldn't be created until the above has been done because you need to know what
your business model is before you can really create a business plan (Osterwalder et al., 2010). This
seems to imply that the Business Model Canvas is best suited to technology-based and other types of
companies that can be basically started and operated in some way that can later be converted into an
ongoing venture. By starting operations and making adjustments as you go along, you are actually doing
a form of market research that can be compiled into a full business plan when one is needed.

According to Osterwalder, et al. (2010) the things we typically teach people in business school are
geared to helping people survive in larger, ongoing businesses. What is taught - including
organizational structures, reporting lines, managing sales teams, advertising, and similar topics - is not
designed to help students understand how a start-up works and how to deal with the volatile nature of
new ventures. The Business Model Canvas idea is meant to help us understand start-ups.

The Business Model Canvas tool is intended to be applied when business operations can be started on a

29  Business Plan Development Guide
small scale and adjustments can continually be made until the evolving business model ends up working
in real life. This is in contrast to the more traditional approach of pre-planning everything and then
going through the set-up and start-up processes and ending up with a business venture that opens for
business one day without having proven at all that the business model it is founded upon will even work.
These traditional start-ups sometimes flounder along as the owners find that their plans are not quite
working out and they try to make adjustments on the fly. It can be difficult to make adjustments at this
time because the processes are already set up. For example, sales teams might be in the field trying to
make sales and blaming the product developers for the difficulty they are having, and the product
developers might be blaming the sales teams for not being able to sell the product properly. The real
issue might be that the company simply isn't meeting customers' needs and they don't have any good
mechanism for detecting and understanding and fixing this problem.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter described business models and used the example of the Business Model Canvas as a tool
that entrepreneurs can use to develop and define their own business models.

Business Plan Development Guide  30
CHAPTER 4 - INITIAL BUSINESS PLAN DRAFT

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Develop a comprehensive business plan draft.

OVERVIEW

This chapter describes an approach to writing your draft business plan. It also outlines the elements of
a comprehensive business plan so that they can be used as a template for starting your business plan.

                          Figure 7 - Initial Business Plan Draft

EFFECTIVE BUSINESS PLANS

Effective business plans:

        Provide statements that are backed by evidence or data
        Include context and references with every table, figure, or illustration
        Include tables and financial information that is relevant, clear, concise, and exclude unnecessary

31                                                                Business Plan Development Guide
material
Present timelines for distinct purposes
Exclude generic sections but have clear and customized to the particular business or its
environment

    Evidence-based claims strengthen your business plan.

Providing context for tables and figures is critical.

WRITING THE DRAFT BUSINESS PLAN

Although there are various ways to approach the task of writing a draft business plan, one effective
approach is to do the following:

        Use the following sections of this chapter to prepare an outline for your business plan. You should
        do the headings feature in Word so that you can later automatically generate a table of contents.

                This will provide you with a template into which to insert the information needed for your
                plan.
        Insert the relevant parts of the written work produced during Essential Initial Research into your
        new business plan template. You can do this in one of two ways.
        First, you can copy and paste the results of your essential initial research into the sections of your
        business plan template where you believe that they can be used to support or justify the
        strategies and other decisions you will later describe in those sections. Of course, you can later
        move those parts of your environmental scan as needed as you develop your plan. In general, this
        strategy results in a stronger business plan.
        Second, you can insert the results from your societal-level and industry-level analyses in an
        Operating Environment section as listed in the outline below. As described below, the market-
        level analysis will probably always fit best within the Marketing Plan and the firm-level analysis
        might fit across all of the plans within the business plan.
                Completing this step will give you the satisfaction of seeing some of your work so far taking
                shape in the form of a business plan.
                Also, inserting the results from your environmental scan into the relevant sections of your
                plan should later provide you with the stimulus and support you will need to develop solid,
                realistic, evidence-based strategies and decisions for those sections.
        Incorporate your business model into your new business plan template. As there is no section in a
        business plan in which you specifically describe your business model, you will need to incorporate
        your business model elements into appropriate sections of your plan.
        Fill in as much relevant information as you can under as many of the headings on your business
        plan template as possible.
                You will normally include both (1) information that you got from particular sources and (2)
                information that has not come from any source, but that is based on an assumption you
                made (and that you might intend to replace later with more accurate information from valid
                sources). Follow the following practices:
        Every time that you insert something into your business plan template that you got from a source,
        clearly indicate from where you got that information. For example, if you list the office equipment

Business Plan Development Guide                                                           32
    and furniture that you need along with their exact costs as taken from suppliers' catalogue,
    clearly indicate from which catalogues you got the information. Similarly, if you spoke to an
    industry expert who recommended that you manufacture your product in a particular way, if you
    can (if you got the person's permission to do so) clearly indicate who you spoke to and what their
    credentials are.

            When you do this, you help establish your credibility as a business plan writer, and your
            business plan's credibility. It also might save you time later when you discover that you
            need to add a similar item along with its cost to your list.
            Note: Do not reinvent the wheel by "inventing" your own method to reference your sources,
            and do not use multiple methods. Use one (and only one) proper and well established
            referencing method, like APA. This will improve the degree of professionalism of your plan.
    Every time that you insert something into your plan that did not come from a source, a best
    practice is to highlight that part of your plan, possibly by using a distinct font color. The objective
    will be to ultimately replace all of those assumptions with source-backed information. When you
    do so, change the font to its regular color so you can quickly and easily see what still needs to be
    sourced.
            Note that if you are an expert source on something - maybe you are a construction expert
            that business plan readers will trust to do estimates on building costs - you should establish
            your credentials and clearly indicate when some of the information in your plan is based on
            your own expert knowledge.
            When you flag your assumptions in this way, you can quickly and easily see what
            information needs to be replaced with sourced information before you finalize your business
            plan.
    Use the appropriate schedule in the spreadsheet templates to record estimated sales revenue for
    each month. You must base these sales projections on well-reasoned criteria and set them up in
    your spreadsheets using formulas so that if you need to change a criterion later, you can change a
    number in one cell or a limited number of cells rather than have to change all of them.
            Projecting realistic sales can be difficult, but setting up a method for doing so early gives
            business plan writers a significant start toward completing their business plan. A well-
            developed sales model that takes advantages of the powers of electronic spreadsheets gives
            business plan writers the opportunity to relatively quickly easily make necessary changes to
            their assumptions and overall estimates when needed.
    Use the spreadsheet templates by filling in all of the numbers you have in the various schedules.
    As you are doing in the written part of your plan, use a distinct font to flag numbers that are
    based on assumptions. When you have actual numbers, be certain that it is clear to a reader what
    source you used to get those numbers.
            When you use the schedules provided on the spreadsheet templates, and any others that
            you add, you will be well on your way to developing the financial component of your
            business plan.

        Providing references strengthens the credibility of claims and makes the business plan
        stronger.

        If you don't have a source to a claim, plant a flag and move forward, returning later to insert
        the source.

33  Business Plan Development Guide
GENERAL BUSINESS PLAN FORMAT

                                                       LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

A letter of transmittal is similar to the cover letter of a resume. The letter of transmittal should be
tailored to the reader, clearly identifying the customized ask of the potential investor or lender. It
should be short and succinct, delineating the ask (i.e. funding, specialized recruiting, purchase product
or service, obtain advice, etc.) within a few paragraphs. It should not summarize the business plan, as
that is the job of the executive summary.

                                            TITLE PAGE

Include nice, catchy, professional, appropriate graphics to make it appealing for targeted readers
                                                         EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Can be longer than normal executive summaries ... up to 3 pages
Write after remainder of plan is complete
Include information relevant to targeted readers as this is the place where they are most likely to
form their first impressions of the business idea and decide whether they wish to read the rest of
the plan

                                                 TABLE OF CONTENTS

                                            LIST OF TABLES

Be certain that each and every table, figure, and appendix included in the plan is referenced within the
text of the plan so the relevance of each of these elements is clear.

                                                             LIST OF FIGURES

                                            INTRODUCTION

        Indicate the purpose for the plan
        Make appealing to targeted readers

BUSINESS IDEA

        May include description of history behind the idea and the evolution of the business concept if
        relevant

VALUE PROPOSITION

        Explain how your business idea solves a problem for your expected customers or otherwise should
        make them want to purchase your product or service instead of a competitor's

VISION

Generally outlines what the owner intends for the venture to be

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                          34
        A good one will inspire all members of the organization
        It should help stakeholders aspire to achieve greater things through the venture because of the
        general direction provided through the vision statement
        After articulating a good vision, the business plan writer should consider what achieving the
        vision looks like. Many business plan writers write their vision and leave it at that. The problem
        with this approach is that they often then do not take the necessary steps to illustrate how the
        strategies they outline in their plan will move them toward achieving their vision. If they make
        this mistake, their strategies might indicate that they are fulfilling their current mission, but are
        not taking steps to move beyond that.
        Vision statements should be clear with context throughout the business plan. For example, if the
        goal is to be the premier business that dues xxx in Saskatchewan, does that mean you do that in
        one place and are considered the best at doing it even though you only have a small corner of the
        market, or does it mean that you have a large market share as you have many locations across the
        province.

            Vision statements should be clear with context throughout the business plan.

MISSION

        Should be very brief - a few sentences or a short paragraph
        Indicates what your organization does and why it exists - may describe the business strategy and
        philosophy

VALUES

        These are reflected in five to ten short statements indicating the important values that will guide
        everything the business will do
        They outline the personal commitments members of the organization must make, and what they
        should consider to be important
        They define how people behave and interact with each other
        The proposed venture's stated values should be reflected in all of the decisions outlined in the
        business plan, from hiring to promotions to location choices
        They should help the reader understand the type of culture and operating environment this
        business intends to develop

MAJOR GOALS

        Describe the major organizational goals
        Ensure each goal is:

                Specific, Measurable, Action oriented, Realistic, and Timely [SMART]
                Realistic, Understandable, Measureable, Believable, and Achievable [RUMBA]
        Be certain all goals perfectly align with everything in plan
        You should write, or re-write this section as the second last thing you do before finalizing your
        business plan by doing the final proof-read, polishing it up, and printing it (writing the executive
        Summary will be the final thing you should write).

35  Business Plan Development Guide
            Having goals that are SMART and RUMBA strengthens the business plan.

                                                      OPERATING ENVIRONMENT

TREND ANALYSIS

        Include an analysis of how the current and expected trends in the political, economic, social,
        technological, environmental, and legal (PESTEL) factors will impact the development of this
        business
        Consider whether this is the right place for this analysis
        It may be better positioned in, for example, the Financial Plan section to provide context to the
        analysis of the critical success factors, or in the Marketing plan to help the reader understand the
        basis for the sales projections

          Providing strategies to capitalize on trends is a winning formula.

INDUSTRY ANALYSIS

Include an analysis of the industry in which this business will operate
A common approach is to apply the Five Forces Model (Porter, 1985)
Consider whether this is the right place for this analysis
It may be better placed in, for example, the Marketing Plan to enhance the competitor analysis, or
in the Financial plan to provide context to the industry standard ratios in the Investment Analysis
section

Of course, your trend analysis will also include a market-level analysis (using a set of questions, like
those listed in Chapter 2) and a firm-level analysis (using tools like a SWOT analysis / TOWS matrix,
various forms of financial analyses, a founder fit analysis, and so on), but those analyses are usually best
placed in other sections of your plan to support the strategies and decisions you present there. The
market-level analysis will inevitably fit in the Marketing Plan section, but the firm-level analysis might
be spread across some or all of the Operating Plan, Human Resources Plan, Marketing Plan, and
Financial Plan sections.

                                                           OPERATIONS PLAN

Key questions answered by operating plans:
        What are your facility plans?
                Where will your facility be located?
                        Expressed as a set physical location
                        Expressed as a set of requirements and characteristics
                How large will your facility be and why must it be this size?
                How much will it cost to buy or lease your facility?
                What utility, parking, and other costs must you pay for this facility?
                What expansion plans must be factored into the facility requirements?
                What transportation and storage issues must be addressed by facility decisions?

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                  36
                        What zoning and other legal issues must you deal with?
                        What will be the layout for your facility and how will this best accommodate customer
                        and employee requirements?
                What constraints are you operating under that will restrict your capacity to produce and sell
                your product?
                        Given these constraints, what is your operating capacity (in terms of production,
                        sales, etc.)?
                What is the work flow plan for your operation?
                What work will your company do and what work will you outsource?

OPERATIONS TIMELINE

        When will you make the preparations, such as registering the business name and purchasing
        equipment, to start the venture?
        When will you begin operations and make your first sales?
        When will other milestone events occur such as moving operations to a larger facility, offering a
        new product line, hiring new key employees, and beginning to sell products internationally?
        Sometimes it is useful to include a graphical timeline showing when these milestone events have
        occurred and are expected to occur

                     Completing the operation plans further adds to the overall business plan.

BUSINESS STRUCTURE AND OTHER SET-UP ELEMENTS

        Somewhere in your business plan you must indicate what legal structure your venture will take.
        Your financial statements, risk management strategy, and other elements of your plan are
        affected by the type of legal structure you choose for your business. For example, all partnerships
        should have a clear agreement outlining the duties, expectations, and compensation of all
        partners as well as the process of dissolution. Please Note: Spreadsheet templates are formatted
        for corporations and will need to be formatted for other forms of businesses.

                Sole Proprietorship
                Partnership
                Limited Partnership
                Corporation
                Cooperative
        As part of your business set-up, you need to determine what kinds of control systems you should
        have in place, establish necessary relationships with suppliers and prior to your start-up, and
        generally deal with a list of issues like the following. Many of your decisions related to the
        following should be described somewhere in your business plan:
                Choose name
                Check zoning, equipment prices, suppliers, etc.
                Choose location
                Arrange lease terms, leasehold improvements, signage, pay deposits, etc.
                Get business license, permits, etc.
                Set up banking arrangements
                Set up legal and accounting systems (or professionals)
                Order equipment, locks and keys, furniture, etc.

37  Business Plan Development Guide
          Recruit employees, set up payroll system, benefit programs, etc.
          Train employees
          Test the products/services that will be offered
          Test the systems for supply, sales, delivery, and other functions
          Decide on graphics, logos, promotional methods, etc.
          Order business cards, letter head, etc.
          Clearly communicate suppliers, why they are preferred, and set up necessary agreements
          Buy inventory, insurance, etc.
          Revise business plan
          .... And many more things ... including, when possible, attracting purchased orders in
          advance of start-up through personal selling (by the owner, a paid sales force, independent
          representatives, or by selling through brokers wholesalers, catalog houses, retailers), a
          promotional campaign, or through other means

START-UP

What is required to start-up your business including the purchases and activities that must occur
before you make your first sale?
When identifying capital requirements for start-up a distinction should be made between fixed
capital requirements and working capital requirements

Fixed Capital Requirements

What fixed assets, including equipment and machinery, must be purchased so your venture can
conduct its business?
This section may include a start-up budget showing the machinery, equipment, furnishings,
renovations, and other capital expenditures required prior to operations commencing

        If relevant you might include information showing the financing required ... fixed capital is
        usually financed using longer-term loans

Working Capital Requirements

        What money is needed to operate the business (separately from the money needed to purchase
        fixed assets) including the money needed to purchase inventory and pay initial expenses?
        This section may include a start-up budget showing the cash required to purchase starting
        inventories, recruit employees, conduct market research, acquire licenses, hire lawyers, and other
        operating expenditures required prior to starting operations

                If relevant you might include information showing the financing required ... working capital
                is usually financed with operating loans, trade credit, credit card debt, or other forms of
                shorter-term loans

RISK MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

Include descriptions of the organization's risk exposure
        Enterprise - liability exposure for things like when someone accuses your employees or
        products you sell of injuring them.
        Financial - securing loans when needed and otherwise having the right amount of money
        when you need it

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                 38
            Operational - securing needed inventories, recruiting needed employees in tight labour
            markets, customers you counted on not purchasing product as you had anticipated, theft,
            arson, natural disasters like fires and floods, etc.
    Always include descriptions of the planned strategies for managing each of the risks identified.
    Identify potential risk exposures, their consequences, risk potential, and mitigation strategies
    (Figure 8).
            Avoid - choose to avoid doing something, outsource, etc.
            Reduce - through training, assuming specific operational strategies, etc.
            Transfer - insure against, outsource, etc.
            Assume - self insure, accept, etc.

    Figure 8 - Risk Management Strategies

    Completing a risk management plan further adds to the overall business plan.

OPERATING PROCESSES

        What operating processes will you apply?
        Depending upon the type of business for which you are creating your plan you will need to
        describe different things:

                Retail and wholesale operations
                        How will you ensure your cash is managed effectively?
                        How will you schedule your employees?
                        How will you manage your inventories?
                        If you will have a workforce, how will you manage them?
                        etc.

                Service operation
                        How will you bill out your employee time?
                        How will you schedule work on your contracts?
                        etc.

                Manufacturing operation
                        How you will manufacture your product (process flow, job shop, etc.?)
                        How will you maintain quality?
                        How will you institute and manage effective financial monitoring and control systems
                        that provide needed information in a timely manner?
                        How will you manage expansion?
                        etc.

FACILITIES

        May include planned layouts for facilities

39                                         Business Plan Development Guide
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

        May include information on Advisory Boards or Board of Directors from which the company will
        seek advice or guidance or direction
        May include an organizational chart
        Can be a nice lead-in to the Human Resources Plan

                                                      HUMAN RESOURCES PLAN

        Key questions answered by human resources plans:
                How do you describe your desired corporate culture?
                What are the key positions within your organization?
                How many employees will you have?
                What characteristics define your desired employees?
                What is your recruitment strategy? What processes will you apply to hire the employees you
                require?
                What is your leadership strategy and why have you chosen this approach?
                What performance appraisal and employee development methods will you use?
                What is your organizational structure and why is this the best way for your company to be
                organized?
                How will you pay each employee (wage, salary, commission, etc.)? How much will you pay
                each employee?
                What are your payroll costs, including benefits?
                What work will be outsourced and what work will be completed in-house?
                Have you shown and described an organizational chart?

Recruitment and Retention Strategies

        Include how many employees are required at what times
        Estimate time required to recruit needed employees
        Estimate all recruitment costs including:

                Employment advertisements
                Contracts with employment agency or search firms
                Travel and accommodations for potential employees to come for interviews
                Travel and accommodations for interviewers
                Facility, food, lost time, and other interviewing costs
                Relocation allowances for those hired including flights, moving companies, housing
                allowances, spousal employment assistance, etc.

You might include a schedule here showing the costs of initial recruitment that then flows into your
start-up expense schedules

LEADERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

        What is your leadership philosophy?
        Why is it the most appropriate leadership approach for this venture?

Training

Business Plan Development Guide  40
        What training is required because of existing rules and regulations?
        How will you ensure your employees are as capable as required?
        In which of the following areas will you provide training for your employees?

                Health and safety (legislation, WHMIS, first aid, defibulators, etc.)
                Initial workplace orientation
                Management
                Financial systems
                Sales
                Contracts
                Product features
                Other

Performance Appraisals

        How will you manage your performance appraisal systems?

Health and Safety

        There may be legal requirements that should be noted in this section (and also legal requirements
        for other issues that may be included in other parts of the plan)
        Consider pursuing accreditation such as ISO 9000, if so, evaluate the costs, benefits, and time
        frame
        Employees may require WHMIS training or other training including machinery handling

COMPENSATION

        Always completely justify your planned employee compensation methods and amounts
        Always include all components of the compensation (CPP, EI, holiday pay, etc.)
        How will you ensure both internal and external equity in your pay systems
        Describe any incentive-based pay or profit sharing systems planned
        You might include a schedule here that shows the financial implications of your compensation
        strategy and supports the cash flow and income statements shown later

KEY PERSONNEL

        May include brief biographies of the key organizational people

                     Completing the human resources plan further adds to the overall business plan.

    MARKETING PLAN

    What primary and secondary research have you done?
            You must show evidence of having done proper research, both primary and secondary. If
            you make a statement of fact, you must back it up with properly referenced supporting
            evidence. If you indicate a claim is based on your own assumptions, you must back this up
            with a description as to how you came to the conclusion.

    Somewhere in your plan have you done an effective analysis of the economic environment

41                  Business Plan Development Guide
relevant to your business?
        It is a given that you must provide some assessment of the economic situation as it relates
        to your business. For example, you might conclude that the current economic crisis will
        reduce the potential to export your product and it may make it more difficult to acquire
        credit with which to operate your business. Of course, conclusions such as these should be
        matched with your assessment as to how your business will make the necessary adjustments
        to ensure it will thrive despite these challenges, or how it will take advantage of any
        opportunities your assessment uncovers.

Somewhere in your plan have you done an effective assessment of the industry within which your
venture will operate?

        You must provide an assessment of the industry coupled with descriptions of how your
        venture will prosper in those circumstances. A common approach used to assess the
        industry is to apply Porter's (1985) five forces model.
        If you apply the five forces model be certain to do so in the way in which it was meant to be
        used to avoid significantly reducing its usefulness while also harming the viability of your
        industry analysis. This model is meant to be used to consider the entire industry - not a
        subcomponent of it (and it usually cannot be used to analyze a single organization).
        Your competitor analysis might fit within your assessment of the industry, or it might be
        best as a section within your marketing plan. Usually a fairly detailed description of your
        competitors is required, including an analysis of their strengths and weaknesses. In some
        cases your business may have direct and indirect competitors to consider. Be certain to
        maintain credibility by demonstrating that you fully understand the competitive
        environment.
        Assessments of the economic conditions and the state of the industry appear incomplete
        without accompanying appraisals outlining the strategies the organization can/should
        employ to take advantage of these economic and industry situations. So, depending upon
        how you have organized your work, it is usually important to couple your appraisal of the
        economic and industry conditions with accompanying strategies for your venture. This
        shows the reader that you not only understand the operating environment, but that you
        have figured out how best to operate your business within that situation.
Have you done an effective analysis of your venture (see Organizational Analysis section below)?

            Completing the marketing plan further adds to the overall business plan.

Primary and secondary data further add to the strength of the business plan.

Providing marketing strategies to capitalize on market information is a winning
formula.

MARKET ANALYSIS

The market analysis section usually contains customer profiles, constructed through primary and
secondary research, for each market targeted. It also contains detailed information on the major
product benefits you will deliver to the markets targeted.
describe the methodology used and the relevant results from the primary market research done
if there was little primary research completed, justify why it is acceptable to have done little of

Business Plan Development Guide                                                  42
        this kind of research and/or indicate what will be done and by when
        include a complete description of the secondary research conducted and the conclusions reached
        Who are your customers going to be?

                Be sure to define your target market in terms of identifiable entities sharing common
                characteristics. For example, it is not meaningful to indicate you are targeting Canadian
                universities. It is, however, useful to define your target market as Canadian university
                students between the ages of 18 and 25 ... or as information technology managers at
                Canadian universities ... or as student leaders at Canadian universities. Your targeted
                customer should generally be able to make or significantly influence the buying decision.
                You must usually define your target market prior to describing your marketing mix,
                including your proposed product line. Sometimes the product descriptions in business plans
                seem to be at odds with the described target market characteristics. Ensure your defined
                target market aligns completely with your marketing mix (including product/service
                description, distribution channels, promotional methods, and pricing). For example, if the
                target market is defined as Canadian university students between the ages of 18 and 25, the
                product component of the marketing mix should clearly be something that appeals to this
                target market.
                Carefully choose how you will target potential customers. Should you target them based on
                their demographic characteristics, psychographic characteristics, or geographic location?
        Do you understand how your targeted customers make their buying decisions?
                You will need to access research to answer this question. Based on what you discover, you
                will need to figure out the optimum mix of pricing, distribution, promotions, and product
                decisions to best appeal to how your targeted customers make their buying decisions.

COMPETITION

        The competition section usually fully describes the nature of your competitors. This information
        might fit instead under the market analysis section.
        Describe all your direct competitors
        Describe all your indirect competitors
        If you can, include a competitor positioning map to show where your product will be positioned
        relative to competitors' products? Insure that the x-axis and y-axis are meaningful. Often times
        competitor maps include quality and price as axes. Unless you can clearly articulate the
        distinction between high quality and low quality, it may be more valuable to have more
        meaningful axes or describe your value proposition relative to your competitors in the absence of
        a positioning map.

43  Business Plan Development Guide
                                                  Figure 6 - Competitor Positioning Map

What is your competitive advantage? What distinguishes your business from that of your
competitors in a way that will ensure your sales forecasts will be met? What is your venture's
value proposition?

        You must clearly communicate the answers to these questions in your business plan in order
        to attract the needed support for your business. One caution is that it may sound appealing
        to claim you will provide a superior service to the existing competitors, but the only
        meaningful judge of your success in this regard will be customers. Although it is possible
        some of your competitors might be complacent in their current way of doing things, it is
        very unlikely that all your competitors provide an inferior service to that which you will be
        able to provide.

Demonstrating a competitive advantage makes the business plan stronger.

A competitor positioning map provides context as to where your venture fits in the
competitive landscape.

MARKETING STRATEGY

The marketing strategy section is very important as this covers all aspects of the marketing mix

Business Plan Development Guide                                                     44
        including the promotional decisions you have made, product decisions, distribution decisions
        related to how you will deliver your product to the markets targeted, and pricing decisions.
        How do you plan to influence your targeted customers to buy from you (what is the optimum
        marketing mix, and why is this one better than the alternatives)?

Organizational Analysis

        This section might be positioned as a lead-in to your marketing strategy or it might be positioned
        elsewhere depending upon how your business plan is best structured.
        A common approach to analyzing an organization is to apply a SWOT analysis, but ALWAYS
        ensure this analysis results in more than a simple list of internal strengths and weaknesses and
        external opportunities and threats. A SWOT analysis should always prove to the reader that there
        are organizational strategies in place to address each of the weaknesses and threats identified
        and to leverage each of the strengths and opportunities identified.
        An effective way to ensure an effective outcome to your SWOT analysis is to apply a TOWS Matrix
        approach to develop strategies to take advantage of the identified strengths and opportunities
        while mitigating the weaknesses and threats. A TOWS Matrix is a tool to help with this. It
        evaluates each of the identified threats along with each of the weaknesses and then each of the
        strengths. It does the same with each of the identified opportunities. In this way strategies are
        developed by considering pairs of factors
        The TOWS Matrix is a framework with which to help you organize your thoughts into strategies.
        Most often you would not label a section of your business plan as a TOWS Matrix. This would not
        normally add value for the reader. Instead, you should describe the resultant strategies - perhaps
        while indicating how they were derived from your assessment of the strengths, weaknesses,
        opportunities, and threats. For example, you could indicate that certain strategies were developed
        by considering how internal strengths could be employed toward mitigating external threats faced
        by the business.

Product Strategy

        What is your product/service? Why will this particular product/service appeal to your targeted
        customers better than the alternatives?
        If your product or service is standardized, you will need to compete on the basis of something else
        - like a more appealing price, having a superior location, better branding, or improved service. If
        you can differentiate your product or service you might be able to compete on the basis of better
        quality, more features, appealing style, or something else. When describing your product, you
        should demonstrate that you understand this.

Pricing Strategy

        What are your pricing strategies? What makes these strategies better than the alternatives?
        If you intend to accept payment by credit card (which is probably a necessity for most companies),
        you should be aware of the fee you are charged as a percentage of the value of each transaction.
        If you don't account for this you risk overstating your actual revenues by perhaps one percent or
        more.
        What are your sales forecasts? Why are these realistic?
        Sales forecasts must be done on at least a monthly basis if you are using a projected cash flow

45  Business Plan Development Guide
        statement. These must be accompanied by explanations designed to establish their credibility for
        readers of your business plan. Remember that many readers will initially assume your planned
        time frames are too long, your revenues are overstated, and you have underestimated your
        expenses. Well crafted explanations for all of these numbers will help establish credibility.

Distribution Strategy

        What are your distribution strategies? What makes these strategies better than the alternatives?
        If you plan to use e-commerce, you should include all the costs associated with maintaining a
        website and accepting payments over the Internet.

Promotions Strategy

        As a new entrant into the market, must you attract your customers away from your competitors
        they currently buy from or will you be creating new customers for your product or service (i.e. not
        attracting customers away from your competitors)?

                If you are attracting customers away from competitors, how will these rivals respond to the
                threat you pose to them?
                If you intend to create new customers, how will you convince them to reallocate their
                dollars toward your product or service (and away from other things they want to purchase)?
        Anticipate the responses competitors will have to your entrance into the market, especially if your
        success depends upon these businesses losing customers to you. If your entry into the market will
        not be a threat to direct competitors, it is likely you must convince potential customers to spend
        their money with you rather than on what they had previously earmarked those dollars toward. In
        your business plan you must demonstrate an awareness of these issues.
        In what ways will you communicate with your targeted customers? When will you communicate
        with them? What specific messages do you plan to convey to them? How much will this
        promotions plan cost?
        You should consider mapping out your promotional expenditures according to method used and
        time frame. Consider listing the promotional methods in rows on a spreadsheet with the columns
        representing weeks or months over probably about 18 months from the time of your first
        promotional expenditure. This can end up being a schedule that feeds the costs into your
        projected cash flow statement and from there into your projected income statements.
        If you phone or visit newspapers, radio stations, or television stations seeking advertising costs,
        you must go only after you have figured out details like on which days you would like to advertise,
        at what times on those days, whether you want your print advertisements in color, and what size
        of print advertisements you want.
        Carefully consider which promotional methods you will use. While using a medium like television
        may initially sound appealing, it is very expensive unless your ad runs during the non-prime times.
        If you think this type of medium might work for you, do a serious cost-benefit analysis to be sure.
        Some promotional plans are developed around newspaper ads, promotional pamphlets, printing
        business cards, and other more obvious mediums of promotion. Be certain to, include the costs of
        advertising in telephone directories, sponsoring a little league soccer team, producing
        personalized pens and other promotional client give-always, donating items to charity auctions,
        printing and mailing client Christmas cards, and doing the many things businesses find they do
        on-the-fly. Many businesses find it to be useful to join the local chamber of commerce and
        relevant trade organizations with which to network. Some find that setting a booth up at a trade

Business Plan Development Guide  46
        fair helps launch their business.
        If you are concerned you might have missed some of these promotional expenses, or if you want
        to have a buffer in place in case you feel some of these opportunities are worthwhile when they
        arise, you should add some discretionary money to your promotional budget. A problem some
        companies get into is planning out their promotions in advance only to reallocate some of their
        newspaper advertisement money, for example, toward some of these other surprise purposes
        resulting in less newspaper advertising than had been intended.

                                                             FINANCIAL PLAN

In addition to financial statements, your financial plan should include:

        Various funding options and exit strategies for potential investors
        Business valuation (be cautious not to over value your business)
        Break-even analysis

BUSINESS VALUATION

There are a multitude of sophisticated business valuation methodologies. A rule of thumb for business
valuations is a multiple of its earnings. For example, if the chosen multiple is five and the business'
earnings before taxes are $55M, the business' valuation would be approximately $275M.

BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS

Break-Even Point = FC/(P-VC)

        FC = Fixed Costs
        P = Unit Price
        VC = Variable Cost

Example: If the business' total fixed costs are $1,000,000.00, it costs $5.00 to produce the widget, and
the business sells the widget for $7.00, the break-even point is 500,000 widgets.

        It is nearly certain you will need to make monthly cash flow projections from business inception to
        possibly 3 years out. Your projections will show the months in which the activities shown on your
        fixed capital and working capital schedules will occur. This is nearly the only way to clearly
        estimate your working capital needs and, specifically, important things like the times when you
        will need to draw on or can pay down your operating loans and the months when you will need to
        take out longer-term loans with which to purchase your fixed assets. Without a tool like this you
        will be severely handicapped when talking with bankers about your expected needs. They will
        want to know how large of a line of credit you will need and when you anticipate needing to
        borrow longer-term money. It is only through doing cash flow projections will you be able to
        answer these questions. This information is also needed to determine things like the changes to
        your required loan payments and when you can take owner draws or pay dividends.
        Your projected cash flows are also used to develop your projected income statements and balance
        sheets.

Overview

47  Business Plan Development Guide
PROFORMA CASH FLOW STATEMENTS

PROFORMA INCOME STATEMENTS

PROFORMA BALANCE SHEETS

INVESTMENT ANALYSIS

PROJECTED FINANCIAL RATIOS AND INDUSTRY STANDARD RATIOS

CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS (SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS)

                                                               REFERENCES

                                                                APPENDICES

                                    LIST OF ITEMS A BUSINESS MAY NEED TO PURCHASE

SETUP

        Business license
        Registration for name, etc.
        Domain name registration
        Initial product inventory
        Signage
        All the little things like curtains/blinds, decorations, microwave for staff room, etc.
        All the things need to run the business from day #1 (like cutlery, plates, cooking pots, table
        settings etc. for restaurants ... like towels, soap, etc. for gyms ... like equipment and so on for
        manufacturing and service places)
        Set up and testing of new facilities - new factories and offices do not operate at peak efficiency
        for some time after startup because it takes time for the new systems to kick into high gear
        Professional services needed
        Lawyer fees to make sure agreements are solid
        Graphic designer or design company needed to develop visuals
        Accounting firm needed to set up initial systems
        Insurance - maybe not a direct cost to this one to account for

OFFICE

        Accounting system software
        Computer, printer, other things needed like scanner
        Office furniture
        Initial office supplies - paper, pens, etc.
        Telephones
        Internet / wifi
        Microwave and coffee maker and similar supplies for staff room or coffee room
        Bank fees - business banking is normally not free - might also need to have business cheques

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                              48
CUSTOMER INTERACTION

        Cash register
        Loyalty cards / system

PRODUCTION/OPERATIONS

        Safety equipment (fire extinguishers, AED)
        First aid
        Security systems
        Equipment maintenance
        Janitorial - and cleaning supplies
        Bathroom supplies - toilet paper, soap, towels
        Membership costs for various associations, including Chamber of Commerce, any professional
        associations for the relevant industry, etc.
        Subscriptions for things like important trade publications, etc.
        Shelving and storage systems
        Even when not full restaurant, but operations like coffee shops - still require equipment like
        dishwasher

TRAINING

        Safety - prior to start-up and ongoing and for new employees
HIRING

        Ads, travel expenses - flights, hotels, taxi rides, meal allowances, etc. - to recruit people through
        interviews, meeting meals, set up with real estate agents, etc.

PROMOTIONS

        Website development (complex for e-commerce  some capability for email exchanges, leaving
        comments, etc. ? simple for static information delivery)
        Costs for setting up and managing social media (can take a lot of an employee's time)
        Grand opening costs

PROPERTY

        If buy then include property taxes and all utilities in cash flows and income statement and include
        building maintenance and maybe build up a reserve fund to pay for things like future roof repairs
        and needed renovations and upgrades
        If rent/lease, then include rental/least cost and whatever utilities are not included in rental/lease
        payment

RENOVATIONS

    Construction
    Plumbing
    Electrical

49                                                                    Business Plan Development Guide
        Utility hookups
        Inspections
        Shelving
        Interior signage
        Fencing, parking lot, exterior lighting, other exterior things

RISK MANAGEMENT

        Insurance (lots of types - need to choose the types needed)
        Training costs
        Things like snow removal, deicing sidewalks, etc.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter described the basic elements of a comprehensive business plan.

Business Plan Development Guide                                              50
CHAPTER 5 - MAKING THE BUSINESS PLAN REALISTIC

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Develop the second draft of the business plan by applying revision methods to improve the
          realism of the first draft.

OVERVIEW

A first draft of a business plan will inevitably be unrealistic for a host of reasons. It is likely to include
contradictions between sections of the written part. The financial and written parts will most likely not
align, even though they must tell the same story, but in different terms. The sales projections might be
unrealistic. The cash flow projections will probably be far from accurate. In general, work will be
required to convert the first draft of the business plan into a realistic second draft.

                                                       Figure 9 - Making the Business Plan Realistic

HOW TO MAKE THE PLAN REALISTIC

51                                                                                                    Business Plan Development Guide
REPLACE ASSUMPTIONS WITH FACTUAL AND EXPERT INFORMATION

A first step is to replace the assumptions you included in your business plan and flagged with the
distinct colored font (review the Writing the Draft Business Plan section starting on page 39) with
information you got from a valid source. Of course, you establish your credibility as the writer and your
business plan's credibility, always include the references to the sources you used.

                                            REVIEW AND REVISE SALES PROJECTIONS

In concert with the next section on adjusting strategies to improve the realism of projected financial
statements, business plan writers should review and revise their sales projections after they critically
assess their realism.

When reviewing, and possibly revising sales projections, business plan writers should consider both the
sales projection model they used and the assumptions they fed into the model to generate the monthly
sales figures. Additionally, it is important to compare the resulting projected sales with industry norms
and any available comparative data with similar companies.

                   ADJUST STRATEGIES TO MAKE PROJECTED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS REALISTIC

If you used the financial spreadsheet templates as they are meant to be used, you will not have typed a
single number into your projected cash flow statements, your projected income statement, and your
projected balance sheet. You should have entered all of your numbers into a set of schedules that, in
turn, automatically transfer the relevant numbers to the projected statements through formulas.

The cash flow statement estimates all of the money flowing in and out of the venture in each month. The
cash inflows include cash collected from cash sales during the month and accounts receivable
collections resulting from sales made in previous months. They also include proceeds from any assets
you sell, loan proceeds, and other cash investments made into your business.

The cash outflows occur whenever something is purchased, an expense is paid (including loan payments
and taxes), and cash is invested somewhere such that it is no longer available to be used to pay current
obligations.

The cash available at the end of each month is the previous month's cash balance plus all cash inflows
minus all cash outflows (the exception might be the first month when the initial investments - and,
possibly, initial sales - are made, and possibly some expenses are incurred or purchases made). When
you complete your first business plan draft, you will inevitably have unrealistic cash balances at the end
of some, if not all months.

You can never have a negative cash balance at the end of a month. If you are projecting negative
balances, your planned venture cannot survive unless you do things like implement strategies to
increase projected sales, seek new investments in your business, and reduce planned operating
expense.

Likewise, it is a signal of possible poor cash management strategies or overly optimistic sales
forecasting if the ending cash balance in any month is too high. Another consideration if your month
ending cash balances are high is whether you have applied realistic assumptions. After all, it is very
rare to stumble upon a business opportunity that generates high amounts of excess cash. If such an

Business Plan Development Guide                          52
opportunity existed, other entrepreneurs would have or will be poised to enter the market and reduce
the appeal of the perceived opportunity.

To eliminate negative cash balances and to manage cash so you don't have end-of-month cash balances
that are negative or are too high, do the following.

        Determine what range of end of month cash balances is realistic for your type of business. For
        example, you might decide that, for your type of business, your month end cash balances should
        always be between $8,000 and $12,000.
        Work forwards from the first month that the ending balance falls out of that range. To do that,
        decide how to best manage your cash. You have several options, including the following (but be
        certain to make all of your changes in the schedules rather than on the projected statements in
        your financial spreadsheet templates).

                If you are short of cash, you might be able to increase cash inflows. For example, you could
                implement strategies (and, of course, include these in the written part of your plan) to
                increased projected sales at close to current planned prices, maintain projected sales levels
                while increasing prices, attract new investors to inject some cash in the business, use cash
                reserves to increase available cash, or to sell an asset that is no longer needed. Of course,
                you must be aware of the possible consequences from taking those actions. For example,
                increasing prices will lead to lower sales, and if the amount of the price increase is more
                than counterbalanced by the drop in sales, you might actually reduce the amount of cash
                you generate.
                One of the ways just listed for increasing cash inflows when a new venture is short of money
                is to attract new investors to inject cash into the business. For this stage of business plan
                development, it is often best to focus on making the business plan realistic without worrying
                too much about where to secure the investments you need to start your business beyond the
                funding you are reasonably certain that you can get through personal money and from
                friends, family, and other ready sources (see the section on Starting Capital on page 76).
                Use this stage of development to help you determine the amount of money that you will
                need to secure from other sources, but adjust your plans and strategies to ensure that the
                amount of additional financing that you will need is realistic. It is in the next stage of
                business development that you will more seriously consider from what sources you can get
                the financing that you determined that you needed while in this stage of development.
                If you are short of cash, you might be able to decrease cash outflows by implementing cost
                reduction strategies or reducing or deferring purchases. Again, all of these actions have
                consequences you must be aware of. For example, if you reduce your advertising expenses,
                you might suffer a large enough decline in sales to worsen your cash short-fall situation.
                If your projections show high cash balances in some projected high-sales months, some of
                that cash can be transferred to a cash reserve, used to pay down loans, used to purchase
                needed assets or to acquire resources to benefit the business, used to prepay expenses, and
                paid to investors as dividends.
                If projections show cash balances that are higher than is realistic, you should review your
                sales projections and your projected expenses and make any necessary adjustments to make
                them more realistic.

If your projected financial spreadsheet templates are set up effectively, your schedules should feed your
numbers into your projected cash flow statement. From there, your projected cash flow statements
should automatically populate your projected income statement and balance sheet.

53  Business Plan Development Guide
            TEST THE REALISM OF PROJECTED STATEMENTS USING FINANCIAL ANALYSIS METHODS

The first steps to improving overall realism is to make your projected cash flow statement more realistic
by (1) replacing as many assumed numbers in your schedules as possible with actual numbers; (2) by
improving the realism of your planned strategies and sales and other projections, and (3) by adjusting
your strategies and plans such that all month-end cash balances are within a target range. After that,
you need to apply financial analysis methods, like ratio analysis, on the numbers in all of your financial
statements to assess the realism of your numbers against industry standards and similar companies for
which financial statements are available. That analysis should lead to further strategy adjustments to
further improve the realism of the planned financial positions for your venture during its first five years
of business.

                           SYNCHRONIZE THE WRITTEN AND FINANCIAL PARTS OF THE PLAN

Finally, you will need to rewrite parts of your operations, human resources, and marketing plans - and
possibly the written introduction to your financial plan - to reflect all of the changes you made and to
ensure that the written part of your business plan tells exactly the same story as does the financial part.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter addressed the issue of making the first draft of the business plan realistic. It suggests a
process that includes replacing as many of your assumptions as possible with factual and expert
information, all from valid sources and properly referenced to build and maintain your credibility and
that of your plan. After that, review and revise the original sales projections to make them more
realistic as informed by industry data and available numbers from companies similar to what you want
your venture to be. Revise your strategies until all of the monthly closing balances in your cash flow
statement fall within a realistic, reasonable, and predetermined target range. Perform financial analysis
techniques to test the realism of your projected financial situation. Finally, rewrite your business plan
so that the written and financial sections tell exactly the same story - one using words and the other
using numbers.

Business Plan Development Guide  54
CHAPTER 6 - MAKING THE PLAN APPEAL TO STAKEHOLDERS AND
DESIRABLE TO THE ENTREPRENEUR

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Develop the third draft of the business plan by applying revision methods to further improve
          the realism of the second draft while also making it desirable to the entrepreneur and
          appealing to targeted investors.
          Describe the funding sources for start-ups.

OVERVIEW

This chapter deals with making adjustments to the second business plan draft to retain, and hopefully
improve its realism, while also making it desirable to the entrepreneur and appealing to targeted
investors. In some cases a business plan should also be made to appeal to other targeted stakeholders,
like highly skilled employees who are needed, but who might not be easy to recruit unless they are
offered a minority ownership position or unless they the reassurance from a well-written business plan
a startup hoping to employ them has a realistic and desirable plan for moving forward.
Securing needed financing is one of the most important functions related to starting a business. This
chapter describes some of the sources of financing available to startups.

55  Business Plan Development Guide
                          Figure 10 - Making the Plan Appeal to Stakeholders and Desirable to the Entrepreneur

HOW TO MAKE THE PLAN APPEALING AND DESIRABLE

The second draft of your business plan should include realistic financial projections based on the plans
outlined in the plan. As part of that exercise, you should have projected how much money you will
require to start your business and to operate it over its first five years.

This stage of development focuses on the following tasks.

        Determine what your medium and longer term goals are for your business as they relate to what
        you want to get out of it. As you read through the following questions, consider that the answers
        you provide should guide the financing decisions you make now.

                Do you want to start your business and rapidly grow its value so you can profit by selling it
                within a short period of time to an investor?
                Do you plan to operate your business for the rest of your working life? If so, how long will
                that be, and what will you do with your business when you want to retire? Will you want to
                sell it to an investor for as high a price as you can when you retire? Will you want to pass
                control, and possibly ownership, to family members? Do you want to retain ownership and
                hire people to manage it for you after you retire? Might you want to offer ownership
                interests in your business to your employees over time so that they will be majority
                shareholders and will take control of its operations by the time you retire? What other plans
                do you have for your business when you retire?
                Do you want to, or will you need to offer ownership interests in your business in order to
                attract partners or other stakeholders whose help you will need to make it thrive?
                What other decisions should you make now to help guide the financing and other choices
                you face?

                        Entrepreneurs must make the decisions required to make their ventures desirable to
                        them. This includes choosing the right kinds of financing options.
        Based on your goals for your business and on the amount of financing you require, identify the

Business Plan Development Guide  56
    most desired sources of financing for your venture. You must consider how much control of your
    business you are willing to give up (and when you are willing to give it up), whether you expect to
    have adequate cash flow to be able to handle set obligations like loan payments, what financing
    sources will enable the growth and value accumulation you desire, and a host of other factors you
    need to consider to determine what financing methods will be best for you.

            An ideal business plan (1) is realistic in that it can be carried out, (2) clearly lays out plans
            that make the projected business outcomes desirable to the entrepreneur, and (3) is crafted
            in such a way that it is appealing to targeted investors so that they will provide the amount
            of money that is needed at the times it is needed.
    Incorporate the needed elements in your business plan to attract your targeted investors and
    make them want to invest in your company.
            It is not enough to simply identify what kinds of financing are most desirable to an
            entrepreneur. That entrepreneur's planned business must be structured in a way that
            entices targeted investors to actually invest in the business at the times the investments are
            needed. If a business plan writer is seeking a loan, they must include the loan payments in
            the cash flow statement, but they might also need to identify what assets they have to
            pledge as security for the loan. If instead they are hoping to attract an angel investor, they
            should do some research to identify potential investors who have invested in their kind of
            business. They should then acknowledge in their business plan the need for an exit strategy
            for angel investors and project how that exit strategy can materialize.
    Identify and analyze your venture's critical success factors by completing what-if analyses on your
    financial spreadsheets. Perform what-if analyses by making copies of your financial spreadsheets
    and changing some key numbers, perhaps like sales increase projections, to determine what
    happens if your projections are off. In cases where your venture is particularly vulnerable to the
    potential effects of changes to critical success factors, make needed changes to your goals,
    strategies, and plans in your business plan to reduce your vulnerability to changes to the critical
    success factors. Or, adjust your goals, strategies, and plans to prepare for any changes that might
    occur to the critical success factors.
    As you do the above, simultaneously adjust your goals, strategies, and plans in the written and
    financial projection parts of your plan until (1) you are satisfied you are prepared to deal with
    issues that will affect your critical success factors, and (2) your projected cash flow statements,
    income statements, and balance sheets are realistic, consistent with healthy industry norms, and
    meet realistic expectations and aspirations for a healthy business.
    Consider including three sets of projected financial statements in your business plan to reflect the
    following scenarios: most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic.

    Providing context is essential in making the business plan appeal to various stakeholders.

FINANCING A STARTUP

                                                           STARTING CAPITAL

Entrepreneurs almost always require starting capital to move their ideas forward to the point where
they can start their ventures. Determining the amount of money that is actually needed is tricky
because that requirement can change as plans evolve. Other challenges include actually securing the
amount desired and getting it when it is needed. If an entrepreneur is unable to secure the required

57  Business Plan Development Guide
amount or cannot get the funding when needed, they must develop new plans.

Once a venture begins to make cash sales or it starts to receive the money earned through credit sales,
it can use those resources to fund some of its activities. Until then, it must get the money it needs
through other sources.

Bootstrap financing is when entrepreneurs use their ingenuity to make their existing resources,
including money and time, stretch as far as possible - usually out of necessity until they can transform
their venture into one that outside investors will find appealing enough to invest in.

PERSONAL MONEY

Entrepreneurs will almost always have to invest their own personal money into their start-up before
others will give them any financial help. Sometimes entrepreneurs form businesses as partnerships or
as multi-owner corporations with other individual entrepreneurs who also contribute their own personal
funds to the venture.

LOVE MONEY

Love money refers to money provided by friends and family who want to support an entrepreneur, often
when they have no other ready source of funding after using as much of their own personal money as
possible to support their start-up.

GRANTS AND START-UP PRIZE MONEY

In some cases grants that do not need to be repaid might be provided by government or other agencies
in support of new venture start-ups. Sometimes entrepreneurs can enter business planning or similar
competitions in which they might win money and other benefits, like free office or retail space, or free
legal or accounting services for a set period of time.

                                                            DEBT FINANCING

From an entrepreneur's perspective, the cost of debt financing is the interest that they pay for the use
of the money that they borrow. From an investor's perspective, their reward, or return on debt
financing is the interest that they gain in addition to the return of the money that they lent to an
entrepreneur or other borrower.

To provide some protection for the investor (lender) to enable them to accept an interest rate that is
also acceptable for the entrepreneur (borrower), the borrower must often pledge collateral so that if
they do not pay back the loan along with interest as arranged, the lender has a way to get all or some of
the money they are owed. If a borrower defaults on a loan, the lender can become the owner of the
property pledged as collateral. A key objective for an entrepreneur seeking debt financing is to provide
sufficient collateral to get the loan, but to not pledge so much that they put essential property at risk.

When entrepreneurs borrow money they must paid it back subject to the terms of the loan. The loan
terms include the specific interest rate that will be charged and the time period within which the loan
needs to be repaid. There are several other terms or features of the loan that can be negotiated
between lender and borrowers. One such feature is whether the loan can be converted to equity at a
particular point in time and according to certain criteria and subject to specific terms.

Business Plan Development Guide  58
Sometimes debt financing can be in the form of trade credit, where a supplier provides product to a
business but does not require payment for a specific length of time, or perhaps even until the business
has sold the product to a customer. Another form of debt financing is customer advances. This might
involve a customer paying in advance for a product or service so that the businesses has those funds
available to use to pay its suppliers.

ADVANTAGES OF DEBT FINANCING

One advantage of debt financing is that the entrepreneur does not sacrifice ownership when they take
out a loan, and therefore lose some control of their venture.

Another advantage of debt financing is the certainty of the payments the borrower needs to make
during the term of the loan. If the borrower takes out a loan for $20,000 over a 5-year term at a fixed
interest rate of 6.2% with a monthly payment schedule designed to pay off the entire loan by the end of
its 5-year term, they know that each month they must pay $389 and that over the 5-years they will have
paid back the entire $20,000 loan amount plus a total of $3,340 in interest. With this certainty, the
business can accurately budget its payback amount for this loan over the 5-years.

Yet another advantage of debt financing is that it allows companies to trade on equity. Trading on
equity is a method to enhance the rate of return on common shareholders' equity by using debt to
financing asset purchases, or to take other measures that are expected to cost less than the earnings
generated by the action taken. For example, if a company borrows $20,000 at 6.2% interest and uses
that money to purchase a machine it will use to increase its return on equity by 20%, then it is trading
on equity. In this case the company is financially better off than it would be if it did not take out the
loan. Of course, the inherent risk involved with this strategy is lowered when income streams are
relatively stable.

DISADVANTAGES OF DEBT FINANCING

A disadvantage of borrowing money is the need to report to those from whom you borrowed the money.
This might be particularly true when lenders, often bankers, have interests or are subject to incentives
that might not fully align with those of the borrower. For example, a lender will want assurances that
they will get all of the money back that they lent, plus all of the interest owed to them during the term
of the loan. A start-up entrepreneur, however, might struggle to generate the cash flow necessary to
pay back all of the money owed according to the terms of the agreement.

Another disadvantage of borrowing is that the business's ownership of the property it pledged as
collateral for the loan is placed at risk. It is also important to note that for many new ventures, a loan is
only possible to acquire if the owner provides their personal guarantee that the money will be paid back
as determined in the loan agreement, thus putting personal property at risk.

The biggest disadvantage to debt financing for start-up entrepreneurs is that there are a limited
number of lenders who are interested and able to provide loans to businesses during their early stages.

                                                           EQUITY FINANCING

From an entrepreneur's perspective, the cost of equity financing is the loss of some control over their
venture as they must now share ownership of the business. From an investor's perspective, their reward
in exchange for purchasing an ownership interest in the business is the potential to share in the

59  Business Plan Development Guide
anticipated future success of the business by possibly receiving dividends (a portion of the profit that is
distributed to owners) and by possibly being able to sell their ownership interest to another investor (or
back to the entrepreneur) for more than the amount they purchased that ownership interest for
originally.

The protection for the investor, who might be a shareholder if the ownership interest is represented in
the form of shares in the business, is in the influence they can exert in the company's decision making
processes. This influence is normally proportionate to their share of the ownership in the overall
business. Equity investors normally seek to earn a competitive return on their investment that is in line
with the level of risk they assume by investing in the business. The riskier the investment, the higher
the return the investor expects.

The following are some potential sources of equity financing for start-up entrepreneurs.
EQUITY CROWD FUNDING

Equity crowd funding is a relatedly new way for entrepreneurs to raise capital. This involves using
online methods to promote equity interests in ventures to potential investors.

ANGEL INVESTORS

Angel investors are wealthy individuals who on their own, or often along with other angel investors in a
network - like the Saskatchewan Capital Network - invest in new ventures in exchange for an
ownership interest in the business. Sometimes angels invest in companies in exchange for convertible
debt, an investment that starts off as a loan, usually in the form of a bond, that they can exercise an
option to convert to an equity interest in the company at a particular point in time for a pre-determined
number of shares. Angel investors are generally less restricted in what kinds of investments they will
consider than are venture capitalists, who are using other people's pooled money. Like venture
capitalists, however, they normally undertake a rigorous due diligence process to determine whether to
invest in the opportunities they are considering.

VENTURE CAPITAL

Venture capital is raised when investors pool their money. The venture capital fund is then used to very
carefully invest in existing, but usually young companies that are expected to experience high growth.
The venture capital company does not expect to invest for long and it expects to generate a large
return, for example, it might expect to invest in an opportunity for a period of up to five years and then
get out of the investment with five times the money it originally invested. Of course, only some
investment opportunities will generate the returns hoped for and others will return far less than
expected.

Venture capitalists might exert some ownership control by influencing some business decisions in cases
where they believe that by doing so they can protect their investment or cause the investment to
produce greater returns, but they generally prefer to invest in companies that are going to be well run
and will not require them to be involved in decisions. Venture capitalists might also provide some
assistance, such as business advice, to the companies in which they invest.

A venture round refers to a phase of financing that institutional investors like venture capitalists
provide to entrepreneurs. The first phase (sometimes following a seed round in which entrepreneurs

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                       60
themselves provide the start-up capital and then an angel round where angel investors invest in the
company) is called Series A. Subsequent venture rounds are called Series B, Series C, and so on.

In general, because venture capitalists normally invest money contributed by investors and have an
obligation to assume a limited amount of risk, they usually do not invest in start-up companies.

DUE DILIGENCE

Investors follow due diligence processes to assess the risk and potential return associated with the
investments they are considering. As such, entrepreneurs should maintain a due diligence file or binder
that they can quickly draw upon when a desirable potential investor expresses an interest in their
venture.

A due diligence file or binder will include copies of many of the legal papers and other important
documents that a venture has accumulated and that tell the story of the enterprise. These documents
will include those related to incorporation, securities it has issued or is in the process of issuing, loans,
important contracts, intellectual property documents, tax information, financial statements, and other
important documentation.

ADVANTAGES OF EQUITY FINANCING

One important benefit to equity financing is that it does not normally give rise to a requirement for a
regular payback from cash flow. Unlike with debt financing, equity investments do not usually give rise
to a regular encumbrance that can increase the difficulty a young company might have in meeting its
regular monthly expenses.

Second, when a firm uses equity financing it does not need to pledge collateral, which means that the
company's assets are not placed at risk in the same way as they are when used for collateral.

A potential advantage with equity financing is that, depending upon the form of financing and who the
investors are, a firm might gain valued advisors. In addition, investors who exercise their ownership
rights to have a say in the operations of the company, or who otherwise provide advice and mentorship
to entrepreneurs starting ventures are usually highly motivated to help the company succeed. Investors
expect to benefit only when the companies they invest in succeed, meaning that their financing
incentives are aligned with those of the entrepreneur and other owners.

DISADVANTAGES OF EQUITY FINANCING

Equity financing is often more difficult to raise than is debt financing. Second, when they share
ownership in exchange for investment into their business, entrepreneurs give up a portion of the value
that they create. If things do not go as planned, entrepreneurs can lose control of their companies to
their investors.

POTENTIAL SOURCES OF START-UP FINANCING

    Personal sources (savings and other income) contributed by the business founders
    Extended personal sources (family, friends, employees, partners)
    Strategic Partners, including potential customers or potential suppliers who want to have access
    to a business like the one proposed (and therefore might fund part of its development). For

61  Business Plan Development Guide
example, a building owner (supplier) might help a business develop that it considers to be a
desirable tenant. Another example is when a complementary business, like a hotel, might invest in
a start-up, like a spa located next door, that might attract more business.
Business Development Bank of Canada (BDC) and other institutions that specialize in supporting
entrepreneurs

        BDC calls itself "Canada's business development bank and the only financial institution
        dedicated exclusively to entrepreneurs" (Business Development Bank of Canada, 2016b,
        Who we are, para. 1).
        Among the services provided by BDC is start-up financing for new ventures. They provide
        funding for the following:

                Working capital to supplement an existing line of credit
                Fixed assets
                Fund marketing and start-up fees
                A franchise purchase
                Consulting services

(Business Development Bank of Canada, 2016a, Start-up financing, para. 4)

Angel investors
Customers (possibly)

        They might place orders for services or products and pay for them up-front, thereby
        providing financing for the new business
        They might want your business to succeed so it can support their business. For example, a
        general contractor (future customer) might help a new plumber get started if there is a
        shortage of plumbers affecting the building industry in the contractor's community
Venture Capitalists (possibly)
        These organizations acquire pools of money to invest, so they differ from angel investors in
        that those making the decisions are not investing their own money - this means they usually
        consider investment options that have shown some success already (which isn't usually the
        case in the start-up phase)
Asset-Based Lenders (possibly)
        Lend money secured by the assets of the borrower, like plant and equipment
        Sometimes this can be done quite creatively. One example is when they might accept assets
        that will turn into money - like accounts receivable and inventories - as security to back up
        a loan.
Small Business Investment Companies
        U.S. term - developed to bridge the gap between when small businesses need money and
        the time later on when venture capitalists might provide financing to small businesses
        SBICs are privately owned companies in the United States that are licensed by the Small
        Business Administration (U.S. Government) to supply equity capital, longterm loans, and
        management assistance to qualifying small businesses
        Canadian equivalent = Community Futures Corporations
Equipment Leasing Companies
Suppliers through Trade Credit (possibly)
        Supplier provides product now without demanding immediate payment
        This supplier will provide the product to the retailer on terms so the retailer does not need
        to pay the supplier for perhaps 30 or 60 or 90 days
        This provides the retailer with the possibility of selling the product and collecting the money

Business Plan Development Guide                                            62
                from the customer before the retailer needs to pay supplier for it the product
        Factoring (possibly)

                When a business sells its accounts receivable (its invoices) to a third party (called a factor)
                at a discount in exchange for immediate money
                Differs from bank loan in 3 ways

                        The factor is interested in the value of the receivables ... a bank is interested in the
                        firm's credit worthiness
                        Factoring is not a loan ... it is the purchase of a financial asset (the receivables)
                        A bank loan involves two parties (lender and borrower) ... factoring involves three (the
                        business, the factor, and those who owe the money)

CHAPTER SUMMARY

After developing a first draft of a business plan, an entrepreneur will inevitably need to make some
major adjustments to the business model and to the plans they developed to make it realistic. After that,
the entrepreneur needs to shift their attention to maintaining and potentially further improving the
realism of the plan while focusing on making it desirable to the entrepreneur and appealing to targeted
investors. Part of this exercise is deciding upon the best type of financing that is available to the
entrepreneur (if any) to ensure that they can meet their longer term goals for their business. This
chapter described some of the sources of financing available to startups.

63  Business Plan Development Guide
CHAPTER 7 - FINISHING THE BUSINESS PLAN

                                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

          Develop the final draft of the business plan.

OVERVIEW

The previous stages of business plan development focused on (1) helping the business plan writer get
started on the plan, (2) developing a reasonably complete and comprehensive first draft of the plan by
focusing on developing the initial story without obsessing about its realism, (3) converting that into a
second draft by adding realism to the plan, and (4) developing a third draft while preserving the realism
and making needed changes designed to make the plan appealing to the entrepreneur and desirable to
targeted investors. This stage is where the business plan writer puts the finishing touches on the plan to
prepare it for use.

                                 Figure 11 - Finishing the Business Plan

FIRST THINGS LAST

Business Plan Development Guide                                           64
    FINALIZE MAJOR GOALS

As contradictory as it might sound, it is only after the business plan is almost finished that the Major
Goals section near the start of the plan should be completed. Replace the preliminary goals you have in
that section with a limited set of goals, perhaps five to ten, which perfectly describe the outcomes you
projected in certain sections of your plan. Write goals that will further improve the appeal of your plan
for targeted investors and other important potential readers.

Your major goals should be substantive and relevant. They should also be written using a format
designed to maximize their impact for targeted readers. The RUMBA formula (realistic, understandable,
measurable, believable, and achievable) provides a useful guideline for developing major goals. The
following is an example of a relevant major goal that follows that formula.

    We will secure a $56,050 short-term loan in September, 2020 to finance inventory purchases
    needed to satisfy our projected increase in Christmas sales that year.

                                          WRITE YOUR EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The last part of your business plan that you should write is the Executive Summary. Unlike most other
types of documents, the executive summary at the start of a business plan can be up to about three
pages in length.

As the executive summary might be the first section that targeted readers go through, it is very
important that it be written to appeal to them. It should provide those readers with information that will
encourage them to seriously consider taking the desired action, like investing in the venture. If they are
not interested by the contents of the executive summary, it is unlikely that they will read any of the
other parts of the plan, and they won't act - usually by investing in the business - as the business plan
writer hopes they will.

POLISH IT UP!

Thoroughly proofread the completed business plan and fix all errors before submitting it to anyone. It is
usually best practice to have other people proofread your work as they will catch errors that you will
miss.

Never underestimate the negative consequences that can occur from distributing poor quality work.

WRITE A LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL

A letter of transmittal is to a business plan what a cover letter is to a resume. A letter of transmittal
should briefly introduce the business plan accompanying it to the intended recipient.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

After all of the hard work involved with developing a high power business plan, it must be finished
properly to have the intended impact with its targeted readers. Before distributing it to targeted
investors and other recipients, a limited number of major goals should be included in the Major Goals
section near the start of the plan. Those goals should be carefully crafted to appeal to intended readers.
The final writing task is to develop an executive summary that will entice targeted readers to examine

65                        Business Plan Development Guide
the rest of the plan in detail for the purpose of deciding whether to potentially take the action - usually
to invest in the venture - desired by the business plan writer. After that, the plan should be thoroughly
proofread and revised to ensure that all errors are eliminated before the plan is used. After writing a
letter of transmittal to customize for all intended recipients and to introduce the plan, it can be put to
use.

Business Plan Development Guide  66
CHAPTER 8 - BUSINESS PLAN PITCHES

                                                      LEARNING OBJECTIVES
After completing this chapter, you will be able to:

        Deliver an effective business plan pitch.

OVERVIEW

Writing a good business plan will only get an entrepreneur so far. To achieve their goals, they must be
prepared to effectively pitch their plan to targeted investors and other potential stakeholders. These are
sometimes called elevator pitches, because an entrepreneur should be prepared to effectively deliver
one in the length of time it takes to ride up a few floors in an elevator with a potential investor. The goal
of a pitch is not to fully describe a business idea, but to be able to convince a potential investor in five
minutes or less that they should meet with the entrepreneur further to learn more about the idea
because they might want to invest in it.

THE BUSINESS PLAN PITCH

Your business plan pitch must be focused on what your targeted audience and business plan readers
need to know. Usually your pitch will be designed to capture a potential investor's interest so that he or
she will want to talk to you about investing in your venture. If that is the case, your pitch should follow a
process similar that that described next.

Avoid getting into the trap of telling the potential investors too much about how your business works.
Instead, spend your time telling them what they need to know to become interested enough to possibly
invest in your venture. That means allocating your time almost equally on each of the following
elements of your pitch script.

    Describe the market problem that your venture solves.
            The problem you solve should be for an identifiable group of people or organizations who
            recognize that they have a problem and are willing to spend their money for a solution to
            the problem.

    Describe how your venture solves the problem.
            Your solution to the problem should be better than the alternative solutions offered by your
            competitors or by those who suffer from the problem. It should also be a solution that
            cannot or will not be readily copied by existing or new competitors.

    Explain how and why you and your venture are capable of solving the problem while also
    generating a profit.

            Your chances of being considered capable of delivering what you promise are enhanced if

67                                                                         Business Plan Development Guide
                you have a strong team, relevant experience, or access to scarce or unique resources or
                networks.
        Explain why you need the financing and anything else you want from the potential investors, like
        their expertise or access to their networks.
                Your opportunities to get the financing you need improve when you can show that the
                money will increase your capacity to achieve what you promise.
        Describe why the investors should invest in your venture.
                Potential investors want to know how and when they will get their investment back and how
                much of a return they will earn on their money. You should be able provide them with an
                estimate of how much your venture is worth and will be worth in the future while telling
                them what that means for them.

            Solving a market problem is a winning formula.

            Demonstrating how the business solves a problem and makes money makes for a strong
            pitch.

            Providing context for individual investors and stakeholders is critical for their buy-in.

CHAPTER SUMMARY

This chapter outlined a simple five step business plan pitch format. When entrepreneurs have a chance
to engage with targeted investors, they usually have a limited amount of time to convince those
investors to consider their investment opportunity. The purpose of the business plan pitch is to capture
the attention and interest of targeted investors within a very short time. A successful pitch should result
in an invitation by the investor for the entrepreneur to provide more information about the business
because they might want to invest in it.

Business Plan Development Guide  68
REFERENCES

Barney, J. B. (1997). Gaining and sustaining competitive advantage. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-
Wesley.
Barney, J. B., & Hesterly, W. S. (2006). Strategic management and competitive advantage: Concepts
and cases. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson/Prentice Hall.
Business Development Bank of Canada. (2016a). Start-up financing. Retrieved from
https://www.bdc.ca/en/about/who-we-are/pages/default.aspx
Business Development Bank of Canada. (2016b). Who we are. Retrieved from
https://www.bdc.ca/en/about/who-we-are/pages/default.aspx
Chatterjee, S. (2013). Simple rules for designing business models. California Management Review,
55(2), 97-124.
Hindle, K., & Mainprize, B. (2006). A systematic approach to writing and rating entrepreneurial
business plans. The Journal of Private Equity, 9(3), 7-23.
Magretta, J. (2002). Why business models matter. Harvard Business Review, (May 2002), 86-92.
Osterwalder, A., Pigneur, Y., & Clark, T. (2010). Business model generation: A handbook for visionaries,
game changers, and challengers. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Porter, M. E. (1985). Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. New York:
Free Press.
Porter, M. E. (1996). What is strategy? Harvard Business Review, 74(6), 61-78.
Ries, E. (2011). The lean startup: How today's entrepreneurs use continuous innovation to create
radically successful businesses. New York: Crown Business.
Vesper, K. H. (1996). New venture experience (revised ed.). Seattle, WA: Vector Books.

69  Business Plan Development Guide
APPENDIX A - BUSINESS PLAN DEVELOPMENT CHECKLIST AND
PROJECT PLANNER

ESSENTIAL INITIAL RESEARCH

Societal Level

 Apply a PESTEL analysis to learn about the overall factors that might affect your business
concept

Industry Level

 Apply a Porter's (1985) Five Forces Model analysis to examine the particular industry in which
you intend to operate

Market Level

 Apply a market-level analysis by answering a set of questions about the particular market
within your chosen industry in which your business will reside

Firm Level

         Apply a SWOT analysis / TOWS Matrix to formulate and evaluate potential strategies
         Apply a VRIO framework analysis to analyze a firm's strategy
         Analyse founder fit with venture idea
         Financial attractiveness: compare estimates for proposed venture to what is known about
        similar firms in the particular industry and market in which the venture will operate
         Financial attractiveness: analyse the firm's projected margins (if possible)
         Financial attractiveness: do a break-even analysis (if possible)
         Financial attractiveness: do a pro-forma analysis (if possible - requires pro-forma financial
        statements)
         Financial attractiveness: do a sensitivity analysis (if possible)
         Financial attractiveness: do return on investment (ROI) projections (if possible)
         Financial attractiveness: determine the projected operating capacity of the venture and at how
        much of that capacity the firm will operate at certain time intervals until it reaches full capacity (if
        possible)
         Financial attractiveness: if possible and relevant, estimate the share of the market that the
        venture might capture and when it might reach various levels of market share. Note that the
        previous checklist item (projected operating capacity) is often a more relevant concern than
        market share.

THE BUSINESS MODEL

 Use the Business Model Canvas or a similar tool to describe and analyse the proposed venture's

Business Plan Development Guide                                                              70
        business model

INITIAL BUSINESS PLAN DRAFT

                                                       CREATE YOUR TEMPLATE

         Prepare a template by using the business plan outline to create headings Word from which to
        later automatically generate a table of contents

INSERT WORK FROM ESSENTIAL INITIAL RESEARCH AND THE BUSINESS MODEL INTO THE BUSINESS PLAN
                                                                    DRAFT

You must decide between two separate ways to include the results from your societal, industry, market,
and firm-level analyses in your business plan. The best choice is usually to disburse the relevant parts of
those analyses throughout the entire plan to support the decisions and strategies outlined in the plan.
An alternative choice is to include the results from all or some of the relevant parts of those analyses as
their own sections in the business plan. The reason why the first option tends to strengthen the
business plan more than the second is because it explicitly ties your analyses to the decisions influenced
by those analyses.

         Integrate the relevant and important results from your societal, industry, market, and firm-level
        analyses into your plan, either as distinct sections of the plan or embedded into the other sections
        to support the decisions and strategies outlined in the plan
         Ensure that all analyses are fully and properly referenced in the business plan to establish and
        ensure your credibility as an entrepreneur, your plan's credibility and to meet ethical
        requirements to cite the sources for the information used

During the second stage of business plan development, you developed your business model. As there is
no separate section in a business plan in which to specifically describe a business model, you need to
incorporate your business model elements into the plan wherever they fit best. It will usually be fairly
self-evident where the business model elements fit into a business plan. The important thing is to
ensure that all of the elements of your business model are reflected in your business plan.

         Include each element of your business model in the appropriate parts of your business plan

                              FILL IN ALL OF THE SECTIONS OF THE BUSINESS PLAN DRAFT

DRAFT INTRODUCTION

         Write a brief description of your business concept
         Write a brief description of the purpose for your business idea
         Write a brief history and description of the evolution of the business concept
         Write a vision
         Write a mission
         Write a values statements
         Write a first draft set of goals
         Avoid harming your plan's credibility by failing to indicate the sources for all of the information
        you include in your introduction. Whenever you make an assumption that you should later replace
        with a factual or expertly-based statement or number, flag the assumption by using a distinct

71  Business Plan Development Guide
        colour font.

DRAFT OPERATIONS PLAN

         Write an operations plan
         Ensure that all numbers included in the operations plan are a) sourced so a reader knows from
        where it came, or b) explained so they know how it was calculated, or c) flagged as being an
        estimate that will be replaced with a true number with a source
         Avoid harming your plan's credibility by failing to indicate the sources for all of the information
        you include in your operations plan. Whenever you make an assumption that you should later
        replace with a factual or expertly-based statement or number, flag the assumption by using a
        distinct colour font.

DRAFT HUMAN RESOURCES PLAN

         Write a human resources plan
         Ensure that you show how you will earn a living while starting the business
         Ensure that all numbers included in the human resources plan are a) sourced, or b) explained,
        or c) flagged as being an estimate that will be replaced with a true number with a source
         Avoid harming your plan's credibility by failing to indicate the sources for all of the information
        you include in your human resources plan. Whenever you make an assumption that you should
        later replace with a factual or expertly-based statement or number, flag the assumption by using a
        distinct colour font.

DRAFT MARKETING PLAN

         Write a marketing plan
         Ensure that all numbers included in the marketing plan are a) sourced, or b) explained, or c)
        flagged as being an estimate that will be replaced with a true number with a source.
         Avoid harming your plan's credibility by failing to indicate the sources for all of the information
        you include in your marketing plan. Whenever you make an assumption that you should later
        replace with a factual or expertly-based statement or number, flag the assumption by using a
        distinct colour font.

DRAFT FINANCIAL PLAN

         Plan how you will back up every number through one or both of the following:
         Explanations in the body of your plan, maybe along with your schedules, or
         Notes included with your financial statements
         Only insert a number for a particular item once (and flag this cell somehow - maybe by using a
        color to highlight it so you know which numbers are input directly and which appear by formula)
         Whenever a number is required more than once, ensure it is transfers forward by formula only
         Prepare all of the following schedules that you will need to feed numbers into your projected
        cash flow statements:
         Sales schedule, if you will sell more than one product
         Project schedule, if you will manage projects
         Cash from sales schedule, cash from receivables schedule, and accounts receivable schedule, if
        you will have accounts receivable

Business Plan Development Guide  72
         Cash purchase schedule, credit purchase schedule, and accounts payable schedule, if you will
        have accounts payable
         Credit card collections schedule, if you will need to calculate your costs for accepting credit
        card payments from customers (you can normally consider credit card payments as cash
        payments in your cash flow statement)
         Inventory schedules, if you will have ending inventories
         Start-up cost schedule, if you will have start-up costs
         Capital cost allowance schedule or depreciation schedule, if you will purchase and sell capital
        equipment on which you will need to calculate depreciation
         Payroll schedule, if you will have payroll expenses
         Operating loan schedule, if you will need an operating loan
         Term loan schedule, if you will need a term loan, especially if you may make extra payments
        toward it before the term expires
         Promotions schedule, if you expect to use several promotional methods
         Prepayment schedule, if you expect to prepay insurance and similar expenses
         Other schedules that are needed
         Prepare projected cash flow statements
         Input the numbers from your schedules by formula into the projected cash flow statements. You
        might also discover the need to develop a schedule after you have first tried inputting the
        numbers directly into the projected cash flow statements.
         Very few numbers in your projected financial statements should be input directly - and each
        directly inputted number should be flagged using cell shading or another means so it is easier to
        fix any errors in the statements.
         Ensure that the written part and the financial part tell exactly the same story using the exact
        same numbers and sources.
         Note that that you will almost certainly have to estimate some numbers while preparing the
        projected cash flows. Immediately upon estimating the numbers, go to the written part of your
        plan and include them there.
         Prepare your projected income statements by formula only
         Calculate your taxes owing and feed these back into your projected cash flow statement.
         Calculate your retained earnings.
         Prepare your projected balance sheets by formula only
         Correct your statements until your balance sheet balances
         Avoid harming your plan's credibility by failing to indicate the sources for all of the information
        you include in your financial plan. Whenever you make an assumption that you should later
        replace with a factual or expertly-based statement or number, flag the assumption by using a
        distinct colour font.

MAKING THE BUSINESS PLAN REALISTIC

At to this stage, your projected financial statements in your draft business plan are almost guaranteed
to be unrealistic and undesirable. Your projected cash balances and profit levels will be unrealistic,
either too high or too low. The original amounts you had planned to invest in your business or to acquire
through investors will probably be inadequate. In general, your draft plan will have many weak areas
and many holes to fill, but it should provide you with a great foundation upon which to build a realistic
and desirable business plan.

The purpose of Making the Business Plan Realistic is to make your business realistic. You do this by

73  Business Plan Development Guide
adjusting your proposed business model and your plans and strategies as presented in both the written
part of your plan and in the financial part.

 Replace as many of the assumptions (those items flagged with a distinct coloured font) as
possible with factual and expert information and numbers while always indicating the sources for
the new information and numbers.
 Review and revise the sales projections to make them more realistic by comparing the
projections to industry norms and available comparative data with similar companies. Review and
revise as necessary both the sales projections model used and the assumptions fed into the model
to generate the monthly sales figures.
 Decide what the appropriate range of end-of-month cash balances is for your type of business.
 It is not possible to have a negative cash balance at the end of a month. Eliminate any negative
end of month cash balances by taking steps to turn each of these into positive numbers, that fall
within your target range, by adjusting one or more of the following:
 Planned loan amounts (operating and/or term loan amounts)
 Planned owner investment amounts (or draws from built up investment accounts)
 Planned amounts in schedules (increase prices, increase sales amounts, decrease expenses)
 It is also inappropriate to have an excessive cash balance at the end of a month because this
would indicate poor cash management practices. Eliminate any excessive end of month cash
balances by taking steps to reduce each of these numbers, so they fall within your target range,
by doing one or more of the following:
 Use the excess money to generate more profits (expand your business, purchase an asset you
need, etc.)
 Use the excess money to pay down operating loans (and possibly term loans)
 Invest the excess money in financial investments
 Distribute some of the cash as dividends or owner draws
 Adjust planned amounts in schedules (decrease prices, decrease sales amounts, increase
expenses)
 Simultaneously adjust your goals, strategies, and plans in the written and financial projection
parts of your plan for the purpose of making your projected financial statements realistic:
 Analyze your projected financial statements and develop plans to correct the elements that are
unrealistic and undesirable. For example, if your planned start-up financing is too high to be
realistic, you might choose to down-scale some elements for start-up. For example, on the expense
side, you might plan to start with a smaller facility, fewer employees, less inventory, and different
advertising methods. On the revenue side, you might project lower sales because of your smaller
facility, fewer employees, and so on. You might also plan to finance some of your expansion
through retained earnings rather than by taking out a large initial loan or by giving up a higher
amount of ownership to an investor.
 Continually adjust the written and financial sections of your draft plan to reflect your new
goals, strategies, and plans. This will be an iterative process since everything is connected and
each change will have a ripple effect throughout your plan.
 Adjust the amounts in your schedules to reflect your planned changes (increase prices, increase
sales amounts, decrease expenses)
 Use a series of ratio analyses as you incorporate your new goals, strategies, and plans.
 Continually compare your ratios to industry average ratios.
 Continually compare your ratios to what is expected and desirable for a business like yours.
 Continually adjust the written and the financial parts of your plan until your ratios are desirable
and realistic relative to industry standards.

Business Plan Development Guide  74
MAKING THE BUSINESS PLAN APPEAL TO STAKEHOLDERS AND DESIRABLE TO THE
ENTREPRENEUR

You should now have a second full draft of your business plan. It should be much more realistic than
your first draft, but is it unlikely to be desirable to you as an owner and appealing to your potential
investors. The purpose of this stage is to retain, and possibly improve the realism of your plan while
making it desirable and appealing.

         Determine what your medium and longer term goals are for your business as they relate to
        what you want to get out of it. Based on your goals and on the amount of financing you require,
        identify the most desired sources of financing for your venture and incorporate those into your
        plan to indicate how you will meet your financing needs.
         As you fulfill the following requirements, be certain to incorporate all of the needed elements in
        your business plan to attract your targeted investors and make them want to invest in your
        company.
         As you identify and analyze your critical success factors by completing what-if analyses on your
        financial spreadsheets, continue to simultaneously adjust your goals, strategies, and plans in the
        written and financial projection parts of your plan until (1) you are satisfied you are prepared to
        deal with issues that will affect your critical success factors, and (2) your projected cash flow
        statements, income statements, and balance sheets are realistic, consistent with healthy industry
        norms, and meet realistic expectations and aspirations for a healthy business.
         Use a copy of your spreadsheets and change some key numbers to see what happens. For
        example, you might discover that you are particularly vulnerable if your sales end up being less
        than you had expected (and/or challenged if sales end up being higher than expected). Sales
        levels, then, is one critical success factor.
         Determine what the impact would be on your business if the critical success factors are
        impacted in a way you had not planned on. For example, when you examine sales as a critical
        success factor, you might discover that if sales are 3% less than you had planned (maybe because
        of an economic downturn or the emergence of a new competitor), your entire profits evaporate. It
        might also be true that you will run into cash flow or capacity problems if your sales end up being
        higher than you are planning for.
         Decide whether you need to make adjustments to your goals, strategies, and plans in your
        business plan to reduce your vulnerability to changes to the critical success factors, or whether
        you can instead adjust your goals, strategies, and plans to prepare for any changes that might
        occur to the critical success factors. For example, you might decide to change the pricing,
        distribution, and promotions strategies in your business plan so that if you would still break even
        if your sales levels were 8% less than expected. Alternatively, instead of changing your marketing
        strategy in your plan, you could describe sales levels as a critical success factor and include a
        description of how and at what point you will implement another strategy if sales levels are not as
        expected, and describe what your strategy is.
         Decide how to present your analysis of your critical success factors.
         If appropriate for your business, you can include three sets of projected financial statements in
        your business plan: most likely, optimistic, and pessimistic.

FINISHING THE BUSINESS PLAN

     Revise your goal section to make sure the goals are included that will best meet your purposes
    and will resonate with your target readers. Note that your goals will have changed dramatically

75  Business Plan Development Guide
        between when you first wrote them and how they should look once the plan is completed.
        Although not required, it can be effective to follow each goal with a note about where in the plan
        your strategies are located for achieving that goal.
         Write your executive summary.
         Complete a proof read for the purpose of ensuring the written and financial parts of the plan
        are completely consistent
         Complete a proof read for the purpose of ensuring there are no spelling, grammar, formatting,
        calculation, or other errors in your plan. If required, have a skilled proof reader complete this task
        for you or with you.
         Write a letter of transmittal to later customize for the targeted readers to whom you will give
        your plan.

PREPARE TO PITCH AND PRESENT YOUR BUSINESS PLAN

         Prepare and practice your pitch. Be clear on why you are pitching your plan and customize it to
        meet those goals.
         Prepare a presentation using a tool like PowerPoint to use if you are asked to more formally
        present your plan.
         Make sure to always have business cards with you to give to those who express an interest in
        your business and who you want to connect with later.

Business Plan Development Guide  76
APPENDIX B - FASHION IMPORTERS INC. BUSINESS PLAN

The following pages show a sample business plan, but its contents are more of a description about what
is contained in each section that actual business plan data.

77  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  78
79  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  80
81  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  82
83  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  84
85  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  86
87  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  88
89  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  90
91  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  92
93  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  94
95  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  96
97  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  98
99  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  100
101  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  102
103  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  104
105  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  106
107  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  108
109  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  110
111  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  112
113  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  114
115  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  116
117  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  118
119  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  120
121  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  122
123  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  124
125  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  126
127  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  128
129  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  130
131  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  132
133  Business Plan Development Guide
Business Plan Development Guide  134
135  Business Plan Development Guide
BUSINESS PLAN EXCEL TEMPLATE

Click the following link to access the Business Plan Excel Template. If it doesn't open, please try
another browser.
Business Plan Development Guide Spreadsheet Templates v7 April 2017

Business Plan Development Guide                                                                      136
