 Business
Computers

      365

              Version 2.0

  Marcus Lacher
Business Computers 365

               Marcus Lacher

                   Made in Minnesota, 2023

eBook and data files available on Opendora at:
https://opendora.minnstate.edu/
LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License,
except where otherwise noted.
Contents

Personal Computer Basics                1

Comparing and Contrasting

Personal Computers                      2

Identifying Computer System Components  4

Classifying Various Peripheral Devices  6

Creating Screenshots                    10

File Management                         12

Compressing & Extracting Files          16

E-mail Basics                           18

Useful Keyboard Shortcuts               21
Word Chapter 1                         22

Exploring the Word Window              23

Entering and Editing Text              24

Spelling and Grammar                   26

Selecting Text                         27

Cut, Copy & Paste                      28

Saving Files                           29

Practice 1: The Solar System - Part 1  30

Finding and Replacing Text             31

Creating Bulleted and Numbered Lists   31

Inserting Symbols                      33

Inserting and Modifying Graphics       34

Utilizing WordArt and SmartArt         37

Inserting and Modifying Hyperlinks     39

Borders and Shading                    41

Practice 2: The Solar System - Part 2  43
Word Chapter 2                            45

Font and Text Attributes                  46

Setting Paragraph Alignment and Hyphenation 47

Utilizing the Format Painter              49

Indenting Paragraphs                      50

Setting Tabs and Tab Stops                51

Practice 3: Wine Prices - Part 1          54

Creating and Formatting Tables            55

Inserting Headers and Footers             58

Setting Page Orientation and Margins      62

Creating and Inserting

Citations & Bibliographies                64

Printing and Saving Files in Alternative

File Formats                              68

Practice 4 - The Solar System - Part 3    70
Excel Chapter 1                     74

What is a Spreadsheet?              75

Entering Data                       76

Selecting Data                      78

Inserting Data                      79

Manipulating Sheets                 81

Formatting Worksheets               82

Creating Formulas to Perform Calculations 86

Copying and Pasting Formulas        88

Practice 5: Test Scores             91

Adding Basic Functions to Formulas  93

Inserting Headers and Footers       96

Adjusting the Page Layout

and Preparing to Print              99

Practice 6: Test Scores - Part 2    101
Excel Chapter 2                    103

Absolute Versus Static References  104

Understanding Complex Formulas     108

Date & Time Functions              110

Logical Functions                  111

More Math Functions                115

Practice 7: Expense Report         118

Sorting and Filtering              119

Conditional Formatting             124

Pie Charts                         129

Bar & Column Graphs                135

Line Graphs                        139

Practice 8: Weather Report         143
Access Chapter 1                     146

What is a Database?                  147

The Four Main Objects in a Database  149

Database Design                      151

Creating a Database Table            152

Primary and Foreign Keys             161

Table Relationships                  162

Entering and Editing Records         163

Creating Forms                       167

Practice 9 - Auto Sales - Part 1     173

Access Chapter 2                     175

Query Basics                         176

Types of Queries                     178

Sorting Queries                      187

Access Reports                       189

Practice 10 - Auto Sales - Part 2    194
PowerPoint Chapter 1                  197

Planning a Presentation               198

Adding and Deleting Slides            201

Adding Slide Text vs. Slide Notes     203

Creating Bulleted and Numbered Lists  204

Comparing Presentation Views          206

Utilizing Tables and Charts           207

Inserting and Modifying Graphics      208

Practice 11: The Continents           214

Creating a Photo Album                215

Inserting and Modifying Shapes        217

Utilizing WordArt                     218

Inserting SmartArt                    219

Inserting Slide and Handout Footers   222

Apply Design Themes                   224

Formatting the Slide Background       225

Replacing Text and Fonts              227

Printing a Presentation               229

Practice 12: The Planets              231
PowerPoint Chapter 2                      233

Adding Slide Transitions                  234

Apply Animations to Slide Content         237

Scalable Vector Graphics and Icons        239

Adding and Modifying Audio                242

Adding and Modifying Video                244

Inserting and Modifying Hyperlinks        246

Utilizing Templates & Slide Masters       248

Zoom, Zoom, Zoom!                         250

Employing Proofing Tools                  252

Saving Files in Alternative File Formats  254

Practice 13: The Planets - Part 2         257
Disclaimer, Acknowledgement &
Dedication

Acknowledgements: The material in this text
consists of many screenshots of Microsoft®
Office 365 using Windows 10.

The goal of this text was to create a resource for
students that was effective, concise and cost-
effective. This text will not include extra content
that does not align with course outcomes. This
conciseness is designed to be keep the material
on-point and keep printing costs low.

Disclaimer: This text was written using
Microsoft Windows 10 Professional and Office
365 Professional. Considerable effort was given
to verify the accuracy of information presented.
However, due to the continuous improvements
made to both the operating system and
individual software applications, your
experience could vary slightly from the time this
material was compiled and printed.

Dedication: I dedicate my contributions to this
text to the three most important pages in my
book of life: Annmarie, Hayden and Julia. Thank
you for your patience and love!
   Personal Computer Basics

    · Comparing and Contrasting Personal Computers
    · Identifying Computer System Components
    · Classifying Various Peripheral Devices
    · Creating Screenshots
    · File Management
    · Compressing & Extracting Files
    · E-mail Basics
    · Useful Keyboard Shortcuts

File Manager

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 1
Comparing and Contrasting
Personal Computers

Computers were originally created for military, scientific,
government and corporations - organizations with one common
characteristic - large budgets! Fortunately, since the early days of
computing, computers have simultaneously become more user-
friendly and affordable giving rise the era of personal computing.

In 1977 Steve Wozniak and Steve Jobs debuted the Apple-II
personal computer. However, it wasn't until the early 1980's that
IBM introduced their personal computer (PC), and the personal
computing era really became legitimate.

Personal Computers (PCs) are best described as small, inexpensive
computers designed for individual use. Each of the following are
examples of personal computers:

    · Desktop computers - designed to utilize a consistent source
         of electric power, these computers fit on or beneath a desk,
         and therefore are not intended to be portable. Most desktops
         contain several peripheral input and output devices intended
         to extend the computing functionality.

    · Laptop and Notebook computers - portable computers
         that utilize a battery for power, and consist of a separate
         display screen and keyboard in a single unit. Laptops have a
         hinged lid that closes the screen onto the keyboard for easy
         portability. Some screens are touch-activated displays.

    · Tablets - thin mobile computers with touchscreen displays.
         Typically, larger than smartphones, tablets are ideal for
         reading eBooks, surfing the Web, and watching videos.

    · Smartphones - pocket-sized mobile phones that combine
         voice, text, e-mail and personal computing into a single
         device that can access the Internet and run a variety of third-
         party software components, known as apps.

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 2
Modern desktop and laptop computers are generally either PCs,
usually running a Microsoft Windows version operating system, or
Apple Macintoshes, which run Apple's proprietary operating
system (OS) software. Various versions of the Linux OS also
represent a relevant share of desktop and laptop users on a PC
platform. However, according to Statista, Microsoft's Windows is
the dominant OS in terms of shares of users, with estimates of more
than 76% of all users in 2022. 1

What about a Chromebook? According to ZDNet, a Chromebook is
a portable computer running ChromeOS, a specialized operating
system designed by Google to rely more heavily on connected and
cloud-based services than traditional operating systems like
Windows or MacOS do. Chromebooks look nearly identical to most
laptops or notebook PCs, but generally include less powerful
hardware due to their reliance on those cloud-based services, instead
of locally installed software that requires more horsepower.

The most popular mobile (tablets and smartphones) operating
systems are Android (developed by Google), and iOS (developed by
Apple).

1 https://www.statista.com/statistics/218089/global-market-share-of-
windows-7/#statisticContainer

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 3
Identifying Computer System
Components

Computer systems consist of hardware and software. Hardware is
the tangible, physical components of a computer, while software is
the intangible programs that function on a computer. Basic hardware
components include a hard drive for storing data, a processor for

  This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 4
performing operations, memory for holding active data, and
a motherboard to tie the parts together. Even gaming consoles are
considered computer hardware.

Software includes computer programs, libraries and data. Software
can be categorized as application (most programs), system
(operating, utilities and device drivers) and malicious software, or
malware (undesirable programs that results in harm or disruption).

The four main components of a computer system are input devices,
output devices, processing devices and the storage devices used to
store data within the computer system. The flow of data through a
computer system begins with an input device that enters data into
the central processing unit which then sends the data to an output

Computer system processes

                           Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 5
device as information. Alternatively, data can be retrieved or sent to
a storage device from the processor.

Hardware and software work together to process data. When you
open a software program, the computer reads its data from the hard
drive or input device, runs the software on the computer's processor
and then displays the results on your output device or saves the data
to a storage device.

Classifying Various Peripheral
Devices

Hardware components that are not an integral part of the central
processing unit are often referred to as peripheral devices. Peripheral
devices connect with a computer through several I/O interfaces,
such as communications (COM), Universal Serial Bus (USB),
firewire, and serial ports. Peripherals are usually used for either
input, storage or output.

Input Devices

An input device is any device that provides input to a computer.
There are many input devices, but the two most common ones are
a keyboard and mouse. Every key you press on the keyboard and
every movement or click you make with the mouse sends a specific
input signal to the computer. Examples of commonly used input
devices include:

    · Mouse: a small object
         that you can roll along
         a hard and flat surface
         which serves as
         pointing device to

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 6
         enable the user to control the movement of the cursor on a
         screen display. Most mice have two or more buttons which
         allow the user to scroll and click objects on the screen.
    · Keyboard: desktop and laptop computers have external and
         built-in keyboards that resemble a traditional typewriter.
         Most keyboards are designed to have the QWERTY layout
         of keys which make keyboarding easy and consistent across
         various devices. Many keyboards have function keys as the
         top row that perform special shortcut functions.
    · Touchscreen: the primary input device for tablets and
         smartphone, this technology combines the functionality of a
         mouse and a keyboard by allowing a finger or stylus to make
         gestures or select on-screen menus and keys.
    · Microphone and Camera: used to record and capture sound
         and images, and to communicate with others using audio and
         video conferencing software. Most portable computers have
         these devices built-in, but external devices are typically a
         higher quality.

Many input devices operate without cords. Wireless mice and
keyboards require receivers to collect the electronic signals
transmitted by the input devices. Bluetooth devices use short-range
radio waves to communicate between paired devices and computers.
Other, input devices include scanners, bar code readers, joy sticks,
light pens, trackballs, magnetic ink character recognition (MICR)
and optical character recognition (OCR) software.

Warning! Excessive use of a computer can lead to repetitive motion
injuries such as carpal tunnel syndrome, and other computer-
related health problems, including computer addiction. Take
frequent breaks, stretch properly, and utilize ergonomically
designed input devices to reduce the threat of these injuries. Limit
your time online and connect face-to-face too!

                                          Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 7
Output Devices

An output device is any hardware peripheral that disseminates
processed data. The processed data, stored in the memory of the
computer is sent to the output device, which then converts it into an
understandable form. Examples of commonly used output devices
include:

    · Monitors: older monitors typically contain a cathode ray
         tube, which result in a heavy display, which is also an
         inefficient use of power and your desktop footprint
         compared to flat screen monitors. A flat panel display uses
         an LCD (Liquid Crystal Display), although some use plasma
         technology. Screen size is measured diagonally across the
         screen, in inches. The entire screen area may not be usable
         for image display. The resolution of the monitor is the
         maximum number of pixels it can display horizontally and
         vertically (such as 800 x 600, or 1024 x 768, or 1600 x 1200).
         Most monitors can display several resolutions below its
         maximum setting. Pixels (short for picture elements) are the
         small dots that make the image displayed on the screen.
         A video card is necessary for generating complex computer
         graphics on a monitor.

Multi-function printer

                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 8
    Printers: want a "hard" copy of a document versus a "soft"
    copy of a file? A printed output is referred to as a hard copy
    versus an electronic or soft copy of a file. Printers come in
    various formats. Popular for home computing is ink
    jet printers. These printers form the image on the page by
    spraying tiny droplets of ink from the print head. The printer
    needs several colors of ink (cyan, yellow, magenta, and
    black) to make color images. Some photo-quality ink jet
    printers have more colors of ink. Unfortunately, ink
    cartridges are expensive to replace, so the cheap initial cost
    of ink jet printers is offset by frequent printing usage.
    Conversely, laser printers utilize toner to burn tiny plastic
    particles of pigment onto paper. While the initial cost of laser
    printers can be expensive, they produce a higher quality
    output and are less expensive and faster than ink jet printers
    in the long run. Other printers include dot-matrix which use
    impact and inked ribbon on continuous feed paper. These are
    (were) popular for multi-layer forms. Lastly, multi-function
    printers are popular for home office/small office computing
    because they combine printing, faxing, copying and
    scanning in a single device.
· Speakers: Audio output requires a sound card and internal
    or external speakers or headphones.

                  Flash Drive

· Storage devices: While primary storage is the internal
    CPU's RAM, secondary storage consists of external
    hardware such as CDs, DVDs, flash drives and external hard
    drives. Obsolete secondary storage examples include floppy
                                     Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 9
         disks, magnetic tape, punch cards and zip drives. A popular
         alternative to physical secondary storage is cloud
         storage which stores data on remote servers accessed from
         the Internet, or "cloud", which is maintained by a cloud
         storage service provider built on virtualization techniques.

                                             Wearable computer device

    · Hybrid peripherals: Wearable computer devices, such as
         augmented reality goggles, smartwatches and fitness
         trackers can all be lumped into this auxiliary device
         category.

Creating Screenshots

One of the first steps to securing assistance with computer-related
issues requires sharing the error or screen output with a teacher or
technical support staff. Often, these support resources are not
available to view the screen in-person. Therefore, capturing the
screen output is a vital skill to help resolve computer issues.
Screenshots, also known as screen captures, screen grabs, or print
screens, are the technical terminology assigned to this piece of data.
A screenshot is a digital image of what appears on a computer or
television screen. Producing a screenshot can be a confusing task,
which should be broken down into two parts. The first part is the
capturing of the screen image, while the second part is the process
of pasting the capture into a storable file. There are numerous
methods of capturing a screenshot, and they vary from one computer

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 10
device to another due to operating system versions and keyboard
differences.

                                                                    Snipping Tool

The most consistent method for Windows users to create
screenshots is by utilizing the Windows Snipping Tool. As of late
2018, the new tool is called Snip & Sketch. Most images in this
documentation have been generated with the help of these tools. To
open the Snip & Sketch tool, select the Start button, type "snip" in
the search box on the taskbar, and then select the

                                                                    Snip & Sketch

Snip & Sketch app from the list of results. In addition to capturing
a full-screen snip, the Snip & Sketch Tool provides the convenience
of capturing a more specific "snip" of data by using the mouse to
draw a rectangular or free-form block of specific data to be captured.
This allows for more focused data to be collected versus an entire
screen of potentially competing images. Once the drawing is
selected, the screenshot should automatically open in a new
window. You can modify the screenshot by cropping, highlighting

                                         Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 11
annotating or drawing on the image. This image can then be pasted
into a new program (similar to how the above image was added to
this document) or saved as a separate file to be stored on a permanent
or cloud storage device. The Snip & Sketch tool also be set to a timer
to take a screenshot in three or ten seconds. To take a screenshot
with Snip & Sketch, just press PrtScn. Screenshots will be quite
useful for providing feedback or asking questions to/from
students/teachers, particularly in distance education environments.

File Management

One of the many attributes of being a successful college student is
evidence of time management, communication, and organization
skills. Managing the files on a computer is essential to excel at all
of these skills. Almost all courses require a computer to access and
communicate information. The inability to locate a file on a
computer or course management system (like Brightspace D2L or
Blackboard) could result in a late or missing assignment, missed
conversations with an instructor or classmate, and/or tremendous
stress. The primary solution to enhanced computer organization
skills is through increased knowledge of Windows' File Explorer
tool (formerly known as Windows Explorer).

File Explorer displays the hierarchical structure of files, folders,
and drives on your computer. All data, including applications,
program files, etc. is stored on the computer's disk (also known as
disk drive). The primary internal hard drive is known as the C: drive.
The contents of a disk are organized into individual files within
individual folders. The Document folder is a general storage
location for files created in programs like Microsoft Office, whereas
photos downloaded from the Internet or a camera are typically
stored in the Pictures folder. The Quick Access section displays
frequently used folders and files, whereas the This PC view displays
information regarding the computer's storage capacity, and attached
storage devices, including optical media.

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 12
To access the computer's files, click Start > File Explorer or select
the File Explorer icon located in the taskbar. Upon launching File
Explorer in Windows 10, the Quick access window will open.
Previously known as "Favorites" in previous versions of Windows;
this is where users will see their most frequently accessed folders
and files that have been created.

File Explorer

The File Explorer window can be broken into the following sections:

    1. File Explorer ribbon. This is similar to the ribbon you will
         find in most Microsoft Office applications. The ribbon
         contains buttons for common tasks to perform on your files
         and folders, such as copying, pasting, moving and renaming
         files and folders. A recommended feature is the View menu
         which allows you to view your files via icons, tiles, a list or
         the underappreciated Details view.

    2. Navigation Pane. Vertically scroll through this pane to
         access commonly used drives and folders. You can also
         access your Downloaded files, Documents, and external
         storage devices, as well as other libraries, such as pictures
         and music.

    3. Frequent folders. This displays the folders you've worked
         with recently to allow for quick access.
                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 13
    4. Recent files section. Similar to the Frequent folders section,
         this area displays the files and documents that you've
         recently opened.

The Search box is an underappreciated tool to help find files that
can't be found in their presumed location. Use the asterisk (*)
wildcard character to expand the search results. i.e. Plane* will find
files with the words plane or planet, and more. The File Explorer
contains an array of tools which can help manage files and stay
organized!

Creating a custom hierarchical structure of folders for each semester
and each course is considered a best practice for organizing college
data. For example, create a folder with the name of the current
semester, i.e. 2018 Fall. Within this folder, create subfolders for
each course, i.e. BUS1100. Descriptive folders and file names also
diminish confusion when trying to find files on a computer disk.

Folder Hierarchy

File Explorer is the primary tool for copying, moving, renaming and
searching for files and folders. The View tab provides display and
sorting options for files and folders. Viewing files using the Details
layout allows for quick sorting by simply clicking a column header
to toggle between ascending and descending order. The sort order in
the above illustration is sorted by Name in ascending order. Clicking
the File name extensions checkbox helps identify the source
program for each file, particularly if the Type column is not
displayed. Perhaps the most useful column is Size, which can be
helpful to determine if a file is too large for distribution via e-mail
or portable storage methods.

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 14
                                                                            Shortcut menu

One of the most common operations for users is copying files,
which creates a replica of an original file. To copy a file, select the
file you want to copy and click Copy under the Home tab. Moving
a file necessitates substituting the Copy button with the Cut button.
Moving a file saves hard drive space by not creating a duplicate file.
To add a new folder, right click and choose New > Folder from the
Shortcut menu. Conversely, to delete a file or folder, right-click the
object and choose Delete from the shortcut menu. Warning! -
Deleted files are not permanently removed from the computer. Most
computers send deleted files to the Recycle Bin, which still needs
to be emptied before the file is removed from the computer.

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 15
Compressing & Extracting Files

Even though modern hard drives allow for excessive amounts of
data storage, moving files from one device to another often
necessitates reduced file sizes for efficient transfer of a files via the
internet or between physical devices. Computer users utilize file
compression to reduce the file size of one, or more often, multiple
files. Although there is no exact measurement of the actual reduced
size of the compressed file, file compression often reduces a file's
size by 50 to 90 percent. This makes the process of uploading and
downloading data files for a computer course much more efficient!
There are numerous techniques for compressing files. In fact, there
are numerous synonyms for compressing that are often
interchangeably used, such as compacting and perhaps the most
popular, "zipping". The process of zipping a file refers to putting it
into an archive format such as "ZIP." One of the reasons "zip" is the
term used is that one of the most popular archive formats has the file
extension "ZIP."

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 16
Windows makes the compression/extraction process easy. To zip
(compress) files:

  1. Locate the file or files in File Manager.
  2. Select the files (use the Ctrl key to select multiple files), right-

     click and choose Send to, and then choose Compressed (zipped)
     folder.
A new zipped folder with the same name is created in the same
location. To rename it, press and hold (or right-click) the folder,
select Rename, and then type the new name.

A compressed or zipped folder

Once the compression process is complete, the next step is to
transfer the file to the recipient (usually via the web or e-mail), and
then the process of decompression begins. Decompression is more
commonly referred to unzipping or extracting. To unzip (extract)
files from a zipped folder:

  1. Locate the file in File Manager.
  2. Right-click the file and choose Extract All. A new window will

     appear asking where the extracted files should be placed. Click
     the Browse button to identify an intentional destination for the
     files. Then choose the Extract button at the bottom of the
     window.

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 17
E-mail Basics

  This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

For many college faculty, getting students to properly use their
college e-mail is a frustrating experience. It typically has less to do
with understanding how e-mail works, but more about how certain
generations function. While to many, e-mail might seem like an
outdated technology, it is still very commonly utilized, particularly
in larger organizations. Successful college students read and
respond to their e-mail!
The main purpose of e-mail is to send fast messages directly to the
recipient's inbox whether they're on the other side of the world or
the other side of the office. E-mails are often used in internal
communication among co-workers, and externally among
customers and suppliers. Some important reasons for utilizing e-
mail versus other forms of messaging:

    1. E-mail creates a paper trail for correspondence. Having
         something in writing is much more credible than hearsay.

    2. E-mail is cheap. E-mail addresses can be acquired from
         organization domains or from free Internet providers. No
                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 18
         special devices, data plans or contracts are required. Sending
         and receiving e-mail is much cheaper and faster than
         traditional mail delivery.
    3. E-mail is accessible. Web-based e-mail, or webmail, can be
         accessed from anywhere there is an internet connection.
There are many similarities across different e-mail programs, so
once you learn one, it should be easy to learn others. However, some
common issues that often confuse e-mail novices are e-mail address
syntaxes and e-mail netiquette.

The first part of an e-mail address is the username. The username
is specific to the person you're sending messages. The "@" symbol
separates the username and the domain name. The last part of the e-
mail address syntax is the domain name. This name points to the
computer or system of computers that manage and host their e-
mails. These are called e-mail servers.
The domain of your college or university will not end with the .com
suffix. Instead, your school e-mail address should have a .edu suffix.
There are other suffixes for the government, the military and non-
profits. What is your school e-mail address?

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 19
The illustration below identifies some common e-mail features
including the Compose pane, the Subject, and the Message pane.

  This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-NC

Proper use of each of these features will help ensure proper e-mail
netiquette. The Compose pane identifies who should receive the e-
mail. In addition to the To: field, a Cc and Bcc field can be utilized
to express different levels of attention for different recipients.
Multiple recipient addresses can be added to each field. The Subject
field is often overlooked. While not required, a descriptive Subject
line is very valuable for recipients to determine the urgency of
opening the message. Last, but not least, the Message pane is the
main purpose of the e-mail. This where you type your message.
Threaded conversations will often be displayed when recipients
reply to your e-mail. Don't forget to add a proper e-mail signature!

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 20
Useful Keyboard Shortcuts

    · Windows key + E - open a new instance of File Explorer
         from anywhere in Windows.

    · Alt + P - show or hide the Preview pane.
    · Alt + Shift + P - show or hide the Details pane.
    · Alt + left arrow key - go back one folder in your history.
    · Alt + up arrow key - go up one folder in the folder tree.
    · Ctrl + N - open a new File Explorer window.
    · Ctrl + E - activate the Search bar.
    · Ctrl + Shift + N - create a new folder in the current folder.
    · Ctrl + mouse wheel up or down - increase or decrease the

         size of icons and thumbnails.
    · Ctrl + Alt + Del - starts Windows Security, which lets you

         lock the computer, switch to a different user, log off, start
         Task Manager, or shut down/reboot the computer. Also
         referred to as the Three-finger salute, as users who invoke
         this command are often in a frustrated state that requires
         some computer maintenance.

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                        Personal Computer Basics | P a g e | 21
 Microsoft Word Chapter 1:
   Developing Documents

· Exploring the Word Window
· Entering and editing text

         o o Paragraph and line spacing
         o o Automatic features
· Spelling and grammar checking
· Selecting text
· Cut, copy and paste
· Finding and replacing text
· Creating bulleted and numbered lists
· Inserting symbols
· Inserting and modifying graphics
· Utilizing WordArt and SmartArt
· Inserting and modifying hyperlinks

                                                       Word Chap 1 Page | 22
Exploring the Word Window

Get to know the elements of the Microsoft Word window!

Microsoft Word illustrated

    · The Quick Access toolbar contains one-click buttons for
         saving, undoing, redoing, and print previewing a document.
         You can easily modify this toolbar to add your most
         frequently used commands. Just click the down-arrow on the
         right edge to customize this toolbar!

    · The title bar displays the name of current document, and the
         program. A new document will default with a temporary file
         name, such as Document1 until you save the file with a
         different name. The Minimize, Maximize and Exit buttons
         appear on the right edge of the title bar.

    · The Tell Me tool is a new way to get assistance with specific
         tasks in Word. When the user starts typing, Word suggests
         commands that are related to your keyword(s). The tool is
         context sensitive and integrated into your current document
         versus opening a separate window. Therefore, if you

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 23
         type insert picture into the field, and click the resulting
         command, Word will open the Insert Picture dialog window
         without explaining the navigation instructions.
    · The Ribbon interface is a set of toolbars at the top of the
         window in Office programs designed to help you quickly
         find the commands that you need to complete a task. The
         ribbon displays a combination of icons and tabs.
         Commands are grouped under multiple tabs. Some
         commands are so extensive that they need additional
         windows to display their entire functionality. The dialog box
         launcher icon will open these windows. Contextual tabs will
         appear only when the user needs them, such as when a
         picture is selected, or a table is inserted.
    · The Zoom slider appears in the lower-right corner of the
         window. Click and drag the slider left, towards the minus
         symbol (-), to shrink the magnification. The magnification
         level is the percentage which appears to the right of the zoom
         slider. Click and drag the slider to the right, or towards the
         plus sign (+), to increase the magnification level.
         Alternatively, click the (+) or (-) symbols next to the Zoom
         slider to increase or decrease the magnification. Changing
         the Zoom percentage only affects the appearance on screen.

Entering and Editing Text

Microsoft Word is a word processor software application used to
create, modify, and share documents. When Word is started, the user
has the option of modifying a pre-developed template or creating a
blank document. Users begin by entering data at the existing
insertion point identified by the I-beam pointer (cursor). As the user
types text into the document, Word will word-wrap the data when
encountering the right margin and continue the text on the following
line. The user only needs to press [Enter] when it is desired to start
a new paragraph or insert a blank line.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 24
Line spacing is the space between each line in a paragraph. By

default, the line spacing within a paragraph in Word is 1.15 lines,

and the end of a paragraph is followed by a blank line. While the

default spacing may be appropriate for some documents, other

situations might require different

settings. For example, this paragraph

is using 1.5 line spacing, which can

be adjusted by clicking the option

encircled above in the Paragraph                     Line Spacing

group from the Home tab. Other popular line spacing

options are double and triple-spacing.

Line spacing is a popular option to adjust for various documents.
However, paragraph spacing is less well-known. Adjusting the
spacing before and after paragraphs creates necessary white space
to make the document more readable. Go to Page Layout and under
Spacing, click the up or down
arrows to adjust the distance before
or after the paragraph. Spacing is
measured in points. You can also
type a number directly. This document is Paragraph spacing
currently using 8pt of paragraph spacing After each paragraph.

While entering text, users encounter many automatic features as
they type, which include:

Auto Type features

                                        Word Chap 1 Page | 25
Spelling and Grammar

In addition to the automatic spelling and grammar functionality, a

user can manually

check their document,

and utilize extra

functionality. To

manually check the

document for spelling

and  grammatical

errors, the user can use

the commands found

under the Review tab.

The keyboard shortcut

to invoke this
command is the [F7] key. In addition to the Spelling & Grammar

Spelling & Grammar check, the user can also

utilize the Thesaurus and Word Count features to improve

readability and accuracy. The thesaurus offers a collection of

synonyms that can replace

words that are used too often. It

is a great tool for solving                  Status bar

crossword puzzles! The Word Count is also

automatically updated on the status bar.

                                          Word Chap 1 Page | 26
Selecting Text

Aside from entering text, selecting
text is probably the most common
task for most Word users.
However, highlighting text is NOT
the same as selecting text. Alas, one
must select text before one can
highlight it!

                                        This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA

Almost every task
begins by selecting something. Perhaps that's why there are so many
ways to select text? The following list is not comprehensive.

Selecting Text

                Word Chap 1 Page | 27
Cut, Copy & Paste

Editing a document often requires moving and duplicating text from
one location to another. The process of
moving text is commonly referred to
as cut and paste. When data (text, files,
graphics, etc.) is cut, it is removed from
the document and placed into temporary
memory via the Clipboard. The Cut
process can be performed via the scissors
icon on the ribbon, using the right-click
shortcut menu or using the keyboard equivalent [Ctrl] + X. To paste
the recently cut data, position the cursor in the desired location, and
then choose Paste from the ribbon, shortcut menu, Paste Options
screen tip, or the [Ctrl] + V keyboard shortcut.

               The Copy process can be performed

               to create duplicate data via the Copy

               icon on the ribbon, using the right-

               click shortcut menu or using the

Paste Options  keyboard equivalent [Ctrl] + C. The
               paste process is the same no matter if

the prior process is the Cut or Copy option. The paste process offers

the paste options menu to allow the user to Keep the Source

formatting, Merge the formatting from the source into current

document, Keep the Text Only, or paste a picture of the selected

data, instead of text. Data can be copied or moved within a

document, between multiple documents or between multiple

programs. This is a great example of how Microsoft Office is a suite

of software applications that use common features to integrate data

from one software application to another.

                                           Word Chap 1 Page | 28
Saving Files

Once a document has been created, it should be saved as a file for
future retrieval. The process of saving a Word document requires
two essential elements: giving the document a filename and defining
the location where the file will be stored. The save process can be
initiated by clicking the Save icon on the Quick Access toolbar,
choosing Save or Save As from the File menu or using the keyboard
equivalents, [Ctrl + S] for Save or [F12] for Save As. The filename
should be a unique, yet identifiable description of the file's contents.
The filename extension (.docx) is automatically added to filenames
in Word. Once saved, the title bar will update with the new file
name. The location of the file should also be given careful
consideration. The user will likely choose between saving the file to
the hard drive of the computer they are using or using cloud-storage
to make the file more easily accessible from multiple devices. The
Save command < will overwrite the existing file, while the Save As
command will allow the user to change the filename or file location.

  This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 29
Practice 1: The Solar System - Part 1

   1. Open the data file The Solar System.docx from the course

         data files.
    2. Correct the spelling errors by using the Spelling & Grammar

         tool from the Review tab. (Word should find four errors that
         need fixing)
    3. Select the two paragraphs of text at the top of page 2
         starting with The Asteroid Belt and concluding with ice and
         metal.
    4. Choose the Cut command using the shortcut menu (right-
         click).
    5. Move the cursor to the blank paragraph before the
         paragraph starting with the text: The Outer Planets.
    6. Paste the data using the keyboard equivalent. [Ctrl] + V

Use the [F12] keyboard equivalent to save the file with a new name
(add the digit 1 after System) to your computer's hard drive.

Save As dialog

                Word Chap 1 Page | 30
Finding and Replacing Text

A document can be automatically searched for a specific character,
word or phrase. Choosing the Find command on the Home tab will
open the Navigation pane where search text can be entered. Matches
will be displayed in the pane and highlighted in the document.

Similarly, the Find and Replace feature allows users to make mass
edits to a document. For example, a user might want to substitute
the words teacher with trainer throughout a long document. Using
the Replace command found in the Editing group of the Home tab,
a user can choose to find and review or replace each occurrence
individually or replace all occurrences in one step.

The Advanced Find features are similar to the Find and Replace
Search Options. To make the search more specific, Word allows
users to define criteria, such as Match case or Find whole words
only. These options will narrow the scope of returned results. For
example, with the Match case check box selected, the text Mark will
not be found if the word mark is entered as the search criteria.
Conversely, the use of Wildcard characters will increase the search
results. An asterisk character will allow any characters to be
substituted. Therefore, check* will find checks, checked or
checking.

Creating Bulleted and
Numbered Lists

Formatting a list with bullets or numbers can help to organize the
logic of a document. In a bulleted list, each item is a separate
paragraph formatted with a hanging indent, a bullet (Y), and a tab.
The bullet character can be formatted to represent other symbols,
such as check marks, squares or other symbols from the bullet
library or custom-defined new bullets. Formatting a list with bullets

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 31
adds emphasis, but not priority. Each bulleted item is considered of
equal importance, such as a grocery list. Conversely, a numbered
list shows a priority or sequence. A typical recipe helps illustrate
this difference:

                                                             Bullets & Numbering ribbon

                                                               Bullets and Numbered Lists

The ingredients and supplies are listed using bullets, because there
is no distinction in their priority. However, the instructions utilize a
numbered list, because the sequence is crucial to the process.

To create a bulleted or numbered list, first select the paragraphs of
text, and the select the appropriate option from the Home tab on the
ribbon. Click the Increase Indent or Decrease Indent commands
from the Home tab to format the list appropriately. To remove the
bullets or numbering, place your cursor in the list and re-click the
Bullets or Numbering command.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 32
Inserting Symbols

Unique characters that don't exist on your computer keyboard can
be inserted into your document by selecting the  Symbol option
from the Insert ribbon. Special characters such as the degree (º) or
trademark (TM) symbols can easily be inserted from the Symbol
dialog window. Other popular symbols include graphics, shapes,
and foreign language characters, such as the (é) used in the word
résumé, which is a different word than resume.

Symbol dialog

In the Symbol dialog window, different sets of symbols will appear
when different Fonts or Subsets are selected from their respective
list arrows. The Webdings or Wingdings fonts offer a variety of
graphics that can be inserted into paragraphs or as bullet shapes.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 33
Inserting and Modifying
Graphics

It is said that a picture is worth a thousand words. This could be
because graphic images make a document more interesting. You can
insert photos from your computer or the web, edit them, compress
them, resize and re-position them. Word
offers a variety of graphics (from the
Illustrations group of the Insert ribbon) that
can be inserted into documents to add pizzazz
to an otherwise dry document.

A word-processing application differs from a
text editor in part due to its ability to perform
basic graphic design functionality. As shown
in this textbook, the author has inserted
graphic screenshots via the Pictures button on the Insert tab. The
Insert Pictures only differ by where the source files reside. The
This Device option will allow you to insert local pictures that reside
on your local device. The Stock Images option provides Microsoft
365 subscribers access to thousands of royalty-free images, icons,
and more. Conversely, Online Pictures allows the user to insert
images from the Internet using Microsoft's Bing search engine or
OneDrive, provided you have a OneDrive account set up.

When inserting graphics obtained from the Internet, keep in mind
that using someone else's work without their permission is not only
wrong but also may be illegal. US Copyright laws control how a
copyrighted work can be used. Consider either using public domain
images, which are free to use, or images distributed under a Creative
Common license, which generally are free, as long as you provide
attribution to the owner. The default search results in the Online
Pictures option are Creative Commons licensed files.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 34
Most of the images inserted via the Pictures and Online Pictures

features are likely to be photos. Nonetheless, other common

                  graphics include clip art, scanned artwork,

                  icons, and shapes. Clip art differs from

                  photos when the images consist of simple

                  illustrations. This results in flexible file

                  formats and small file sizes, which

                  explained the appeal to early desktop

                  publishers. However, increased computing

                  resources have marginalized the benefits of

Clip art example  clip art, and the rich quality of photos have

                  diminished their demand. The once popular clip

art option is hidden behind the Online Pictures feature. The keyword

that is entered into the search box will, by default, retrieve photos,

clip art, and other images. However, the filter option,

which appears once the original results appear, can further restrict
the results by image types, specific sizes. layouts or colors.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 35
A complete array of built-in shapes can be inserted to complement
existing graphics. Popular shapes include lines, rectangles and flow
chart symbols.
Once a shape is
selected, the user
needs to draw it
on a blank area of
the document.
Once inserted,
the shape, like
any other graphic
object, can be
resized and re-
positioned. To move the image, hover the mouse over the image
until the pointer is the four arrows, then click and drag the image to
your desired position. To resize a graphic, select the image and drag
a corner sizing handle to resize it proportionately. The top/bottom
or side handles allow the user to resize the graphic
disproportionately. The rotate icon allows the user to rotate the
object up to ± 360º.

Once the graphic is selected, a new contextual tab called the Picture
Tools tab will appear on the ribbon. This tab will allow the user to
make a plethora of corrections and adjustments to the graphic.
Picture styles, effects, layouts, and the image size are common edits
to the defaulting graphic. To resize an image disproportionately,
click the launcher icon in the bottom right corner of the Size group
to open the Layout dialog window. Now unmark the Lock Aspect
Ratio checkbox.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 36
Text Wrap  Perhaps the most common feature
           used in document layout
           considerations is the Wrap
           Text feature. By default, when
           pictures are inserted into a document,
           their layout is set to In Line with Text.
           This leaves a lot of unnecessary white
           space to the right of the image. To
           wrap text around a picture, select the
           picture, and then select a wrapping
           option (as shown in the image to the
           left of this paragraph). Popular
           options include Tight or Square.

Utilizing WordArt and SmartArt

Another desktop publishing tool that adds pizzazz to a drab
document is the use of WordArt or SmartArt. WordArt is a drawing
object with special effects that change the appearance of text by

                                 formatting special shapes, patterns and
                                 orientations. WordArt can be used to
                                 add color, outlines and 3-D effects to
                                 regular text. Common usage is titles for
                                 papers, posters or other marketing
                                 materials. Click the WordArt button in
                                 the Text group of the Insert tab. After
                                 selecting an initial WordArt style, a
                                 placeholder box will appear and await
                                 your input of text. Once inserted, a
                                 contextual tab offers numerous options
                                 to change the effects of the WordArt

           Word Chap 1 Page | 37
object. Additional formatting options available include change the
text fill, outline or text effects of the WordArt object. The Text
Effects offer some exciting ways to rotate and transform the text.
The best way to learn about these features is to experiment with
them!

SmartArt are diagrams that illustrate concepts and show
relationships between elements. Think of SmartArt as pre-made
drawing canvases that you can insert into your document and then
customize as you see fit. There are a variety of styles to choose from,
which you can use to illustrate many different types of ideas. Simply
pick an arrangement, such as a list, process, cycle, etc. Insert the
SmartArt via the Illustrations group on the Insert tab, which opens
the SmartArt dialog window.
After choosing a layout, a SmartArt placeholder will appear. In a
SmartArt graphic, elements are represented by shapes. Each shape
can have text applied, be resized and re-positioned. You can even
add, delete, promote and demote shapes via the text pane or the
contextual tab.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 38
A SmartArt graphic can be formatted and edited using options on
the contextual SmartArt Tools Design and Format tabs. The Design
tab allows the user to pick from numerous layouts, styles and colors.
The Format tab provides choices for shape styles and WordArt
options. SmartArt can be utilized throughout the Microsoft Office
suite of applications. Again, the best way to learn about these
options is to experiment!

SmartArt pyramid

Inserting and Modifying
Hyperlinks

A hyperlink, often referred to simply as a link, is text or a graphic
that, once clicked, "jumps" to a different location in the file or to a
different software program. Software programs include e-mail
applications, web pages or an external file, often created in
Microsoft Office programs like Excel or PowerPoint. There are a
few ways to insert a link into your document. Depending on how
you want the link to appear, you can use Word's automatic link

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 39
formatting or convert the text or graphic into a link. The fastest way
to create a link in a document is to press ENTER or the SPACEBAR
after you type the address of an existing webpage, such as
www.minnesota.edu. Word automatically converts the address into
a link. The same result occurs if the user were to enter an e-mail
address, such as marcus.lacher@minnesota.edu. Hyperlinks have
two parts: the address (URL) of the web page and the display text.
In the two previous examples, the URL matches the display text,
however it is possible to create a link to any word, combination of
words, or an object, such as a picture or shape.

Insert Hyperlink

To create a link on a specific word or object to a web page, start by
selecting the word(s) or object, and then click the Link button in the
Links group of the Insert tab to open the Insert Hyperlink window.
In the illustration below, a link is being defined to go to Microsoft's
website for the Word program. The text "Word" appears as the Text
to display so that once the link is created, this text will appear with
the hyperlink attributes, which are typically blue and underlined.
The Address field contains the URL to the specific web page
destination that will open in the current device's default browser
application. The Insert Hyperlink window fields will change
significantly if the Link to: open on the left side is changed from

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 40
Existing File or Web Page to another option. To follow a hyperlink
in Word, hold the Ctrl key and click the linked text or object.

Borders and Shading

Borders add interest and emphasis to your document. Borders make
attractive frames for text, pictures, tables, or entire pages. You can
customize borders to complement your document by experimenting
with Word's built-in styles. To add a border to text, select the text.
On the Home tab, click the small down arrow next to
the Borders button, and choose an option OR choose the Borders
and Shading option to open the Borders and Shading dialog window.

Make sure the Apply to box is set to Text, which adds a border
around lines of text, or Paragraph, which creates a border that

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 41
outlines the paragraph. Also make sure that a choice, like Box, is
selected under the Setting option.
Shading is the color or artistic design you use as background for a
paragraph. By shading words or paragraphs in Word, you can create
visual interest in a document. The Highlight command offers a
more limited color selection, which you can use when you review or
edit a document to highlight specific text. The shading fill, style, and
color can be defined from the Shading tab of the Borders and
Shading window. To apply shading to a part of a document, select
the data, then click the arrow next to Shading, and under Theme
Colors, click the color you want to shade your selection.

Shading palette

Borders can also be added to pictures. Just select the picture, then
choose a pre-formatted border from the Picture Styles gallery off
the Picture Tools Format tab.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 42
To remove the paragraph borders and/or shading, choose the None
option in the Borders and Shading window. In the Shading tab
choose the No Color item in the Fill section, then choose the Clear
style in the Patterns section.

Practice 2: The Solar System - Part 2

   1. Open the recently edited data file The Solar

         System1.docx from your data files.
    2. Find and Replace all occurrences of the word "mainly" with

         the word "primarily". (Word should find three results that
         need changing)
    3. Select the four paragraphs of text starting with Mercury and
         concluding with Mars. Create a bulleted list. Repeat these
         steps using the paragraphs starting with Jupiter through
         Neptune.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 43
    4. In the paragraph following The Sun, replace 9000 degrees
         with 9000° using the symbol. (Character code 00B0) Repeat
         this step in the Venus paragraph by replacing 465 degrees

         with 465°.
    5. Insert an Online Picture of the sun in the blank paragraph

         above The Inner Planets. Resize the photo to be 1" x 2".
         (Don't forget to unmark the Lock Aspect Ratio checkbox in
         the Layout window)
    6. Apply the Square Wrap Text format to the picture, and
         position the image to the right margin.
    7. Apply WordArt to the text "The Solar System" using the
         Orange, Accent 2 fill. Apply the Top and Bottom Wrap Text
         format to the WordArt.
    8. Apply a hyperlink to the text Mars to a web page using the
         URL: http://nineplanets.org/mars
    9. Use the [F12] keyboard equivalent to save the file with a
         new name (add the digit 2 after System) to your computer's
         hard drive.

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                            Word Chap 1 Page | 44
Microsoft Word Chapter 2:
   Formatting Documents

· Font and text attributes
· Setting paragraph alignment and hyphenation
· Utilizing the Format Painter
· Indenting paragraphs
· Setting tabs and tab stops
· Creating and formatting tables
· Inserting headers and footers
· Setting page orientation and margins
· Creating and inserting citations and bibliographies
· Printing and saving files in alternative file formats

                                                       Word Chap 2 Page | 45
Font and Text Attributes

The way text appears on the screen, or a page is referred to as its
format. Formatting text can enhance the appearance of a document,
create visual impact, and help illustrate a document's structure.
Font, size, and style define a character's format. A font is a
complete set of characters with the same typeface or design. Dozens
of fonts are available in the Font drop down list. Users can easily
format text with fonts, colors, styles, and other formats by selecting

                                                 the text and clicking
                                                 various commands in the
                                                 Font or Paragraph group
                                                 on the Home tab. The Mini
toolbar, appears faintly above text when you first select it, and
includes the most commonly used formatting commands. The table
below describes the functions of each button on the mini toolbar.

Here are a couple of best practices when utilizing fonts. First, avoid
using too many fonts in the same document. More than two or three
fonts in the same document becomes distracting. Secondly,
legibility and readability should be primary considerations. This
should factor in the reader's characteristics, and the purpose of the
document. For example, while the default size for a font is 11pt, a
larger size font (i.e. 14pt) might be more appropriate for an older
aged reader. A pt (or point) is the equal to 1/72 of an inch. Headings
and titles deserve larger font sizes. However, it is also good practice
to limit the quantity of font sizes used in a single document. Lastly,
consider using common fonts for professional and business
documents. Calibri, Arial, Verdana and Times New Roman are
ranked highly by Monster.com as preferable fonts for résumés,
whereas Comic Sans is not recommended. Note that Calibri is only
available on Windows operating systems, whereas Arial, Verdana
and Times New Roman are some of the cross-platform available
fonts.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 46
Formatting buttons

Setting Paragraph Alignment
and Hyphenation

Paragraph alignment determines how the edges of each paragraph
aligns with the left and right margins. Alignment settings apply to
all text within a paragraph. Remember that a paragraph is created
each time the user presses the Enter key. To display the hidden
characters, including paragraph marks, press the symbol in the
Paragraph group of the Home tab. Press the button again to hide the
formatting marks.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 47
    · Left-aligned text is the default paragraph format. The left
         edge of the paragraph is flush, and the right edge is jagged.
         This option is typical for letters and reports.

    · Centered text is equally distant from the left and right
         margins. Common uses are titles and headings.

    · Right-aligned text is flush with the right edge, and the left
         edge is jagged. Typical uses are dates or headers and footers.

    · Justified-aligned text spreads the text evenly between the left
         and right margins, leaving both edges flush, unless the final
         line has limited characters. This option is common for
         newspaper columns and textbooks.

Paragraph alignments
Hyphenation can improve the overall readability of certain
documents. Hyphenation is the process of adding hyphens to words

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 48
at the beginning
of lines so the
hyphenated part
will fit at the
end of the
previous line.
The hyphens
are inserted
between
syllables in a word. Word can automatically hyphenate your
document for you, or you can use the hyphenation tool to manually
hyphenate your document. Users can customize their hyphenation
settings via the Hyphenation Options dialog window. Use caution
when manually inserting hyphens, because the hyphen will always
remain even if editing moves the word to the middle of a line, and
results in the word no longer needing hyphenating.

Utilizing the Format Painter

The Format Painter tool allows the user to copy a format from
selected text and apply the format to other selections. For example,
if you have inserted text in Word, and have it formatted using a
specific font type, color, and font size, you could copy that
formatting to another section of text by using the Format Painter
tool. Select the text or place your cursor in the paragraph that
contains your source formatting, then click the Format Painter

tool from the Home tab's Clipboard group. The cursor will

change to include a paintbrush , which indicates that the user
can now select the destination text that should receive the source
formatting. If multiple areas of text need the same formatting, the
user should double-click the Format Painter tool to be able to apply
the formatting to multiple selections, until the user presses the Esc
key. The Format Painter tool works similarly in Excel and
PowerPoint too.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 49
Indenting Paragraphs

Indenting a paragraph results in moving the editable insertion point
from the left or right margins. Users can indent the left or right edge
of a paragraph, just the first line, or all lines except the first line.
Paragraphs are indented relative to the page's margins and indenting
a paragraph doesn't affect the paragraph's alignment. The default
indents are 0 inches, meaning that lines of text extend from the left
margin to the right margin. Indenting paragraphs can be performed
by pressing the Decrease Indent or Increase Indent buttons on the
Paragraph tab of the Home tab. Alternatively, to make precise
changes to the Left and/or Right Indents or Paragraph Before/After
Spacing, utilize the Paragraph group of the Layout tab. Indents are
measured in inches and Spacing is measured in point, much like font
sizes.

A semi-block letter style requires the first line of each paragraph to
be indented from the left margin, which is known as a first-line
indent. Precise indent definitions can be specified in the Paragraph
dialog window which can be opened by clicking
the Launcher button in the Paragraph group. Alternatively, indents
can also be set by dragging the markers on the ruler:

Indent ruler markers

                      Word Chap 2 Page | 50
A first-line indent requires the user to drag the marker on the ruler
to the position where the first line of the paragraph should begin.
Typically, this is the .5" mark, which can also be accomplished by
pressing the Tab key to indent the first line to the default .5" tab
stop. A hanging indent occurs when the subsequent lines of a
paragraph are indented more than the first. Hanging indents are
often used when manually creating citations in a bibliography. To
create a hanging indent, drag the marker on the ruler to the right.
When citing long quotations in a research paper, users typically use
both a left and right indent to offset the quotation, as shown below.

Setting Tabs and Tab Stops

Tabs allow users to align text vertically at a specific location in a
document. A tab stop is a point on the horizontal ruler that
indicates the location at which to align text. A tab stop is a location
where the insertion point will stop when the user presses

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 51
the  key. Tab stops can be used to help align text to create

columns of data. Custom defined tab stops are displayed on the ruler

above the document. A set of default tab stops are located every half

inch, but they do not appear on the ruler. When a new tab stop is

defined, Word automatically removes the default tab stops to the

left. Using tabs, users can align text to the left, right, or center of a

tab stop, or text can be aligned at a decimal point. Word stores

paragraph formatting, such as tab stops, in the paragraph marks at

the end of a paragraph. Therefore, when the user pressing the

ENTER key, tab stops are copied to the next paragraph. The same

tab stops can then be used in sequential paragraphs to create columns

of text. Tabs can be set by clicking on the horizontal ruler, or by

using the Tabs dialog window. The following icons represent

different tab stops on the horizontal ruler:

Each type of tab stop is used in the example shown below. Note the
markers on the ruler:

                                              Word Chap 2 Page | 52
The default tab stop is Left, but tab stops can easily be switched
by multi-clicking the tab selector on the horizontal ruler. Existing
tab stops on the ruler can be dragged to a new position if needed. To
remove a tab stop, drag the tab stop off the ruler and release the
mouse. The text will realign itself to the existing tab stops. Once the
tab stops are in set, newly inserted text will align to the stops when
the tab key is pressed. Alternatively, some users prefer to enter text
with tabs, but
without tab stops,
and then apply
the tab stops to
the existing text.

The Tabs dialog

window is useful

for adding new

and       editing

existing  tab

stops. The Tabs

dialog window

can be opened by

double-clicking

an existing tab

stop or by

clicking  the

Tabs... button in

the Paragraph

Dialog window,

which is opened from the Paragraph Launcher button. The Tabs

window is useful for precise position definitions, and it is the only

option for adding Leaders to tab stops. A tab leader is a character

that is repeated to fill the space spanned by a tab. The dotted leader

is very commonly used on menus to make it easier to associate the

menu description with its correlating price. The Tabs window is

also a convenient way to clear one or all tab stops in a document.

                   Word Chap 2 Page | 53
Practice 3: Wine Prices - Part 1

1. Open the data file Wines unformatted.docx from your data files.
2. Insert two blank paragraphs at the beginning of the document.
3. Select the text Name in the first paragraph. Apply the Arial font,

         size 12, bold and red text color.
4. Use the Format Painter tool to apply the same formatting from

         Name to Country, Color, Year, Type and Price. Hint:
         Double-click the Format Painter after placing the cursor in
         Name, and then click each the headings. Click the Format
         Painter tool again to turn it off.
5. Select the text starting with Name through $16.99. Click the
         Paragraph Launcher button and then click the Tabs... button
         to open the Tabs dialog window.
6. Set the following five tab stops:
    1. Center tab stop at the 1.5" position. (Type 1.5 in the Tab stop
         position field, then click Center, then click Set.)
    2. Left tab stop at the 2.15" position.
    3. Right tab stop at the 3" position.
    4. Center tab stop at the 3.75" position.
    5. Decimal tab stop at the 6" position. Add a dotted leader
         before clicking Set. Then click OK.
7. A slight error may be noticeable. If you enable the

         Show/Hide , you should notice that there are two tabs
         between Country and Color. Remove one of the tabs. This
         should align the data into neat columns.
8. Select the same block of text as step 5. Remove the 8 pt of
         paragraph spacing After each paragraph via the Layout tab.
9. At the top of the document enter the text: Wine Prices. Center-
         align the paragraph, and make the font 36pt and bold.
10. Save the file with a new name: Tab formatted Wine Prices.docx.

Your file should look like this:

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 54
Creating and Formatting Tables

A table is a great way to organize information within a document.
A table is a grid of cells arranged in rows and columns. Tables can
be used to organize any type of content, whether you're working
with text, graphics or numerical data. Unlike tabs, table cells can
have headers (in bold), as well as borders or boundaries, which make
the information easier to read. A table typically includes headings
that identify each column or row that contains data. The following
is a 5×3 table, which means it has five columns and three rows.

Sample table

To create an empty table, click Table from the Insert tab, and move
the cursor over the grid to select the number of cells for the table.
Click the grid to create the table and then type text into the
individual cells. Word automatically adjusts the column widths to
be equal so that the table fills the space between the left and right
margins. To manually adjust the width or height of a cell, drag the

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 55
border. Press the Tab key to move from cell to cell. If the insertion
point is in the last cell, pressing the Tab key will automatically add
a new row.
If the number of rows and columns created turns out to be different
than what is needed, you can easily add or delete rows and columns
via the Table Tools Contextual tab. The Layout side of this tab will
also allow the user to change cell size, merge & split cells, sort table
data, change text alignment, and modify the table properties.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 56
The Table Tools Design tab offers additional functionality to modify
Word tables. Design elements include defining Table Style Options,
like Header and/or Total Rows, selecting from a gallery of Table
Styles, as well as adding shading and borders. You can easily insert
and delete table rows and columns via this tab as well.

It is possible to create a table from text that already exists. However,
the data must be consistently separated, field-by-field, using a

                                       delimiter. A delimiter can be tabs,
                                       paragraphs, commas or some other
                                       user-defined character which is
                                       used to separate each field. With
                                       the cursor residing inside the
                                       existing source data, select the
                                       Convert Text to Table... option
                                       from the Table tab of the Insert
                                       ribbon.

Clicking an option from a menu
that ends with the ellipsis notation
(...) indicates that a dialog window
will appear. The Convert Text to
Table dialog window allows the user to define the table size, AutoFit
behavior, and the delimiter.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 57
The contents of the rows in a table can be sorted based on a column.
Users can sort in alphabetic (text), numerical (numbers), or
chronological (dates) order using either Ascending (A  Z) or

Descending (Z  A) manner. Clicking the Sort button on the Table

Tools Layout tab will open the Sort dialog window.
The Sort by options will be the column headers, or Column 1,
Column 2, etc. if there is No header row. The first sort selection is
known as the primary sort, followed by the secondary, and tertiary
sort options. The Type drop-down list will offer the choices of Text,
Number or Date, depending on the existing table data. Make sure to
choose either Ascending or Descending for each sort level.

Inserting Headers and Footers

A header is the area at the top of a page, and a footer is the area at
the bottom of a page. Headers and footers consist of one or more
lines of text, page numbers, graphics, and other fields, such as the
file name, document title, current date and/or time, or author's name.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 58
To create a header or
footer, click either
the Header or Footer
drop down list from
the Insert ribbon.

A gallery of built-in

designs is displayed.

Clicking a built-in

design makes the

header or footer the

active area of the

document, while the

body of the

document fades to

the background. A

header or footer has

three sections: left,

center, and right. The

user can either type

text into existing

placeholders, or

insert fields from the

Header & Footer

Tools       Design

contextual         tab,

which only appears

when the cursor is

placed in either the     Header gallery

header or footer.

To return to the body of the document, double-click in the document
body, or click the Close Header and Footer button on the Header &
Footer Tools Design tab. Double-click in the header or footer area
to make it active and allow for editing.

                         Word Chap 2 Page | 59
The header or footer is printed on each page of the document. To
specify a different header and footers for the first page, select the
Different First Page checkbox on the Options group of the Header
& Footer Tools Design tab. Any existing header or footer will

Header & Footer Tools tab

automatically be removed. A different first page is common in long
documents to prevent the cover page from including the headers and
footers contained in the rest of the document. A cover page usually
does not include any header or footer data.

One of the most common purposes of headers and footers is to

include page numbers. Page numbers are helpful in documents that

                           have more than one

                           page. To add a page

                           number at the current

                           location in an existing

                           header or footer, click

                           Page Number >

                           Current Position, and

                           then choose a style

                           from the gallery of

                           choices.                       Scroll

                           through the list of

                           style options in the

                           gallery to find one you

like. You can select a plain number style, or a Page X of Y style to

get a more defined starting and ending number (Page 1 of 7) format.

Experiment to find the style that best meets your needs.

                           Word Chap 2 Page | 60
An inserted page number can be further formatted as needed.

Number formatting and different starting page numbers can be

defined in the Page Number Format dialog window, which is

                                             opened when the

                                             user selects Format

                                             Page Numbers....

                                             from the Page

                                             Number drop down

                                             list.     Number

                                             formats include

                                             Arabic, alphabet,

                                             and roman numeral

                                             formats.

                                             The       Page

                                             numbering options

                                             allow a user to

                                             restarting the page

                                             numbers at a user-

defined number. This can be useful to recognize unnumbered pages

that precede the main part of the document.

In the Position group, you can control the amount of space allotted
to the header and footer. By default, each is 1/2-inch tall. Users can
change these values in the Header from Top and Footer from Bottom
list boxes. Manipulating these selections will affect the printable
area of the document's margins.

It is a "best practice" to add page numbers before adding other
header and footer fields, because any existing text will be replaced
by adding page numbers using the Insert > Page Number process.
Alternatively, users can add page numbering to existing header and
footer text through the Quick Parts feature, which is not explained
in this text. Other than page numbers, headers and footers often
contain the document's author, date and/or title. Each of these fields
help identify the document, particularly when the document is
printed and compared with other similar documents.

                                             Word Chap 2 Page | 61
Setting Page Orientation and
Margins

The page setup of a document includes settings such as margins,
orientation, and other pagination settings. These settings can be
applied to the entire document, or specific sections, which can be
created by inserting section breaks (not explained in this text). The
Page Setup group found under the Layout tab contains these
selections.

Page orientation refers to how a rectangular page is arranged for
viewing. The orientation of a Word document can be either portrait

                          or landscape. Portrait orientation is taller than
                          it is wide (vertically), and landscape
                          orientation is wider than it is tall
                          (horizontally). The default orientation is
                          portrait.

                          Choosing a page orientation needs to consider
                          the paper size selected for the document. The
                           standard

                             paper
                          size in
North America is called Letter,
which has the dimensions of
8.5" x 11". Legal documents are
14" instead of 11", which
means when printed in portrait
orientation, legal documents are
three inches longer (and a pain
to fit in a standard folder!). The
standard paper size in Europe is
known as A4. Its dimensions
are 210mm x 297mm, which is
closer to the Legal size, than the

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 62
Letter size. Many posters and tables are often printed on Tabloid
sized paper, which is 11" x 17". However, since a lot of home
printers cannot accommodate this size of paper, many users choose
to change their orientation to landscape, which changes the printable
width to 11", and the printable height to 8.5". If adjusting the
orientation doesn't solve the layout challenges of the document,
consider adjusting the margins!
Margins are the white space surrounding the text on a page.
Margins can be specified for the top, bottom, left and right edges of
a document. The default margins are 1" each, but margins can easily

be adjusted from the pre-set choices in the Margins drop-down list,
or by manually adjustments in the Page Setup window, which can
be opened by clicking the launcher button in the Page Setup group
in the Layout tab. Narrow margins leave more room for more data,
while wider margins decrease the amount of printable space.
Similarly, larger top and bottom margins decrease the available
space. If adjusting orientation and margins aren't enough to resolve
page formatting, consider using page breaks.
Pagination is how a document is divided into pages. Word
automatically determines how much text will fit on a page based on
the amount of text and the document formatting. As new data is

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 63
added to a page, Word creates automatic page breaks, also known
as soft page breaks. To force data to a new page, a user can insert a
manual (hard) page break. Inserting a page break moves the text
after the insertion point to the next page. To insert a page break,
press Ctrl + Enter or click Page Break from the Insert tab. To remove
manual page breaks, utilize the Show/Hide button to display
formatting marks, such as the Page Break

mark:

To remove a hard page break, place the insertion point to the left of
the page break and press the Delete key. Word will re-paginate
itself and move data to the previous page.

Creating and Inserting Citations
& Bibliographies

Many college courses require students to write research papers.
While conducting the appropriate research may be the main
objective of the assignment, collecting the research is often not as
challenging as documenting the sources of the research. Part of the
challenge associated with properly documented sources is
understanding the format of the required style guide assigned by the
instructor. A style guide is a set of standards for creating documents
and citing of sources. A citation, or a reference, is a formal
acknowledgement to a published or unpublished source. The
purpose of using citations is to give credit to the author of the
original research and avoid plagiarism. Plagiarism occurs when a
user presents the data of another author as if it were their own. The
major writing style guides include MLA, APA, CSE, and Chicago.
Each style has unique requirements for handling citations.

A typical requirement of a research paper is the production of a
bibliography, a Works Cited or References page. A bibliography is
an alphabetic list of the sources used to produce a scholarly work.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 64
Each style guide has different requirements for what data is needed
to be listed for each source. The bibliography helps the reader
identify the source of the writer's research. Manually creating a
bibliography can be a tedious and inexact process and updating a
manually-generated bibliography will likely induce heartburn.
However, by carefully entering sources into Word, a bibliography
can be accurately generated and re-generated with ease.

                                          Before a user can create a
                                          bibliography, they must create at
                                          least one citation and source in
                                          the document. Whenever a
                                          source is referenced in a
                                          document, the user should create
                                          a citation to give the original
                                          author credit. To add a citation,
                                          place the cursor in the desired
                                          location (follow the style guide),
and click Insert Citation from the References tab, then choose Add
New Source...

The Create/Edit Source dialog window will appear where the user
can enter as much information regarding the source as possible. The
first field, Type of Source, will dictate which bibliography fields are

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 65
needed for the source depending on the specific style guide. After
entering the publication details, and clicking OK, the citation will
appear in the document, and the source will be saved.

Types of sources can include books, a web site, an article in a
periodical, a sound recording, and many more. Often, a single source
can be cited numerous times in a report.
Users can easily add the citation again by
clicking the Insert Citation drop down
button from the References tab and
selecting the source from the drop-down
menu. A citation can be edited to add
page numbers. Open the citation's inline
drop-down menu and choose Edit Source.
Certain fields can even be suppressed.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 66
After completing the paper, adding all the sources for the document,
and completing the summary, adding the bibliography or works
cited is extremely easy! Typically, a bibliography will reside on its
own page. Therefore, create a manual page break, and then on the
References tab, in the Citations & Bibliography group, choose the
Bibliography option and choose from the pre-designed formats to
insert the Bibliography or Works Cited into the document.

The bibliography appears and the sources are formatted to match
the selected style guide. If the user ends up adding more sources to
the document, they can easily update the bibliography by clicking
it and selecting Update Citations and Bibliography.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 67
Printing and Saving Files in
Alternative File Formats

Before printing a document, it is a good idea to preview the
document and specify which pages should print. The preview might
help the user discover some layout issues that can be addressed
before wasting ink/toner and paper. The Print Preview window can
be accessed in Backstage view by clicking File > Print. It is also a
popular idea to add the Print Preview command to the Quick Access
toolbar if it doesn't already exist.

Print Preview
Numerous options can be defined in Backstage view, such as which
printer, how many copies, which pages, etc. Once these decisions

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 68
are made, pressing the big Print button in the top left of the window,
will send the data to the selected printer. The back button will
exit Print Preview.
If printing a hard copy is not desired, saving the file is the obvious
alternative. The way that the user saves a document and the format
that they save it in depends on how they plan to use the
document. While choosing Save from the File menu will resave the
file in its existing format, choosing the Save As command (F12)
provides numerous alternatives.
The first option available by using the Save As dialog window, is
the ability to choose an alternative storage destination versus the
existing location. Alternate storage destinations include a different
file folder on the user's hard drive, a portable file storage location,
such a USB drive device, or a cloud-based storage location.
OneDrive is Microsoft's cloud-based storage option, but other
cloud-based solutions, such as Dropbox, exist as well. Cloud
computing requires Internet-connectivity to access the current
versions of the files. An alternative file format is another option to
consider from the Save As window. Choosing the drop-down list to
the left of the Save button displays a list of alternative file formats.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 69
One of the most common alternative file formats is a PDF (Portable
Document Format) file. PDFs are popular formats to share with non-
Microsoft Office users, commercial printers, and users for whom the
document is not to be edited. The PDF format looks the same on
most computers, has a smaller file size, and preserves most
formatting characteristics of the source document. The only
software that is required to read or print a PDF file is Adobe Reader,
which is available as a free download from Adobe's web site. While
prevention of editing was a key feature of PDF files, the current
version of Word can actually edit PDF files, however, the edits are
traceable.
The other common file format is saving a file to be viewed on a web
site or simply in a web browser. Saving a file as a Single File Web
Page is the optimal approach to allow users to open the document
using a web browser. The file extension of a single file web page is
.MHT. Other occasionally used file formats include: .XPS, .ODT,
and RTF.

Practice 4: The Solar System - Part 3

    1. Open the recently edited data file The Solar
         System2.docx from your data files.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 70
2. Create a 2 x 9 table at the end of page 2.
3. Add and format data to table as shown to the right.
4. Add a new column to the table to the left of the Name

    column. The header should be Proximity to the Sun. The
    data should be 1, 2, 3 .... 8.
5. Sort the table in descending order by Number of Moons.
6. Apply the Grid Table 4 - Accent 4 table style to the table.

7. Add the file name field to the left side of the footer, and the
    Accent Bar 2 page number to the center section of the
    footer. Refer to the illustration at right for steps 4-8.

8. Change the paper size to Legal.
9. Insert a page break before the paragraph beginning with

    The Dwarf Planets.
10. Change the margins to the Office 2003 defaults.

                                                       Word Chap 2 Page | 71
    11. Add a new citation source following the period at the end of

         the paragraph regarding the Sun on page 1. The source
         details should be a web page (The Sun) on a web site (Nine
         Planets). Use today's date for the Year, Month, Day, and the
         URL: nineplanets.org/sol.html. Mark the Corporate Author
         checkbox.
    12. Add a Works Cited at the bottom of page 2.
    13. Save the file with a new name. i.e. The Solar System3. Save
         another version of the file in PDF format.

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                            Word Chap 2 Page | 72
Word Index

Alignment .............................. 47       Picture Styles gallery ............. 42
Auto Type ..............................26        point ...................................... 46
bibliography ........................... 64       Print Preview ......................... 68
Borders ..................................41      Quick Access toolbar ........... 24
bulleted list ...........................31       Ribbon
citation ...................................64
cut and paste.........................28             Tabs ................................... 24
delimiter ................................57      ruler ....................................... 50
Find and Replace ...................31            Save As .................................. 29
first-line indent ......................50        Selecting Text ........................ 27
font ........................................46   Shading.................................. 41
Format Painter .......................49          shapes ................................... 36
hanging indent .......................51          sizing handle ......................... 36
Headers and footers ...............58             SmartArt................................ 38
Highlight ................................42      sort ........................................ 58
Hyphenation ..........................48          spelling and grammar ........... 26
Insert Pictures .......................34         Symbol .................................. 33
line spacing............................25        tab leader ............................... 53
link .........................................39  tab stop .................................. 51
Lock Aspect Ratio...................36            table....................................... 55
Margins .................................. 63     Tabs....................................... 51
numbered list ........................32          Tell Me ................................. 24
page break..............................64        Thesaurus.............................. 26
Page Layout ...........................25         title bar ................................. 24
page number ..........................61          Word Count........................... 26
Page orientation .....................62          WordArt ................................ 37
Pagination ..............................63       word-wrap ............................ 25
paragraph spacing .................25             Wrap Text ............................. 37
                                                  Zoom slider ........................... 24

                                                  Word Chap 2 Page | 73
 Microsoft Excel Chapter 1:
      Spreadsheet Basics

· What is a Spreadsheet?
· Entering, Selecting and Inserting Data
· Manipulating Sheets
· Formatting Worksheets
· Creating Formulas to Perform Calculations
· Copying and Pasting Formulas
· Adding Basic Functions to Formulas
· Inserting Headers and Footers
· Adjusting the Page Layout and Preparing to Print

                                                   Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 74
What is a Spreadsheet?

A spreadsheet is a collection of data that is organized into rows and
columns. Microsoft® Excel is a spreadsheet application used to
store and analyze quantitative data. An Excel file is called
a workbook, and it is saved with an .xlsx extension. A workbook
file consists of one or more worksheets which consists of many
columns and rows. Columns are the vertical part of a worksheet
grid identified by letters. Rows are the horizontal part of a worksheet
grid identified by numbers. The intersection of a row and column is
called a cell. Each cell can store a single item of data. The data can
contain text, numbers, formulas, and/or functions. Clicking a cell
with the mouse pointer will make the selected cell the active cell.
The active cell's contents are displayed in the formula bar.

Typical uses for Excel include:

    · Accounting reports (Balance Sheets, Income Statements,
         etc)

    · Budgets
    · Calendars
    · Checklists and task lists
    · Contact/Address lists
    · Expense tracking
    · Inventory control
    · Invoices
    · Mortgage and other financial calculations
    · Operational statistics
    · Sales price lists, forecasts and analysis

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 75
Entering Data

Excel is great tool for generating useful information from data.
However, the data must be entered before it can be analyzed and
manipulated. There are numerous types of data, and numerous ways
to streamline data entry. As data is typed, it appears in the active cell
and in the formula bar. Pressing the Enter key will complete data
entry and make the next cell in the column the active cell. If moving

to the next cell after completing data entry is not the desired
outcome, try clicking the Enter check mark in the formula bar. The
data will be entered, but the active cell remains the current cell.
Pressing the Esc key before completing data entry will cancel data
entry and restore the original cell contents.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 76
Streamlining data entry in Excel can be accomplished using several
different features including keyboard shortcuts and Automatic
Completion. Keyboard shortcuts allow rapid navigation in a
worksheet without having to use the mouse. There are hundreds of
keyboard shortcuts available in Excel and many are also available
in other Microsoft Office applications. A few keyboard equivalents
are illustrated at right, but for more examples, use the shortcut F1 to
open the Help pane, and type keyboard shortcuts in the Excel Help
field.

When entering data into a sheet that contains a lot of duplicates,
Excel uses the Automatic Completion feature to speed up data entry.
After typing a couple of characters, Excel guesses how to fill the rest
of the cell based on data previously entered in the cells above. To
accept the suggestion (in highlighted text), press Enter, or
alternatively, continue typing to replace the automatic entry.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 77
Selecting Data

After entering data, a common practice is to begin formatting the
data. However, before a user can format the data, they must first
select the data. Selecting data has multiple techniques based on user
intent. Clicking on a single cell makes that cell the active cell. The
cell reference appears in the Name box to the left of the formula bar.
To select an entire column of data, just click the column letter
heading. To select an entire row, click the row number heading. If a
user wants to select several cells adjacent to each other, this would
be considered selecting contiguous cells. Clicking the middle of the
cell and dragging horizontally or vertically will select
a contiguous range of cells. Another way to select a contiguous
range of sequential cells is to click the first cell, hold down the Shift
key, and click the last cell in the range. For example, clicking cell
A3, and then holding down the Shift key and selecting F7 would
select all of the cells from A3 through F7. The range reference would
be written as A3:F7.

Selecting a non-contiguous range of cells requires the use of the Ctrl
key. To select non-contiguous cells, click the first cell, hold down
the Ctrl key, and click each additional cell. This practice is

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 78
sometimes referred to as "cherry-picking" cells. In the example
below, the selected range of cells are A4,A6,A7,F4,F6,F7. This
practice can be used for selecting non-adjacent rows or columns as
well.

To select the entire worksheet, click the triangle box located to the
left of column A and above row 1, or by pressing the keyboard
shortcut: Ctrl+A.

Inserting Data

It is usually easy to add data to an existing worksheet, because Excel
has seemingly unlimited columns and rows of cells. (There are
limits, but this is not Jeopardy!) Nonetheless, sometimes it is
necessary to insert a column or row into the middle of an existing
range of cells. To insert a new column, select the column heading to

                   the right of where you want the new column to
                   appear, and click the top-half of the Insert button
                   from the Home tab. Alternatively, just right-click
                   the column heading to the right of the destination,
                   and choose Insert from the Context Menu. Deleting

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 79
columns is very similar. Whichever column(s) that are selected will
be deleted if using the Delete button instead of the Insert button.
Inserting and deleting rows is also very similar. Selecting the row
below the intended new row and either choosing Insert from the
ribbon or from the Context Menu will create a new row above the
selection. For example, right-clicking row 10, and choosing Insert

from the Context Menu will create a new, blank row 10, and all
existing data will move down one row.
Using the right-click method is a little faster than clicking the
worksheet and then clicking the ribbon, as the shortcut menu avoids
the need to move the mouse to the ribbon. The Context Menu, also
known as Shortcut Menu, provides added functionality by offering
actions that can be taken with the selected item. In addition to
inserting and deleting, formatting column widths and row heights,
as well as hiding and unhiding columns and rows are options from
the Context Menu. Adjusting the column width is a common action

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 80
since excessively wide columns
prohibit efficient worksheet
printing. Therefore, it is often
preferable to widen a column width
by double-clicking the boundary
bar that separates the column
heading letters. This is known
as auto-fitting the column width since the column will resize its
width to be just wide enough to display the longest data contained
in that column. Clicking and dragging the double-arrow pointer to
the left or right allows users to manually adjust the column width.

Manipulating Sheets

An Excel workbook consists of one or more worksheets. Much like
a binder can have multiple sections of sheets divided by colorful

tabs, an Excel workbook can multiple sheets that can be re-arranged,
colored and renamed to fit individual organization plans. Inserting

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 81
and deleting worksheets is similar to the inserting of columns and
rows. In addition to using the Insert or Delete buttons from the
ribbon, right-clicking an existing sheet tab will produce a Context
Menu with a plethora of options.

Just as inserting a new column will add the column to the left of the
selected column, the newly inserted worksheet will appear to the left
of the selected sheet tab. Options exist to insert a blank worksheet
or a new sheet based off of an existing template. Clicking and
dragging sheet tabs are easy method to rearrange the order of sheets.
However, the Move or Copy... command offers the opportunity to
move or place a duplicate sheet within an existing, open workbook.
Adding tab colors and the Rename option can help organize sheets
to user-specific criteria. Sheets can also be hidden and unhidden. If
it is necessary to prevent others from unhiding sheets, the workbook
can be protected with a password to be able to modify the sheets.
The tab scrolling buttons to the left of the sheet tabs are enabled
when too many sheets exist to be displayed above the status
bar. To quickly add a new, blank sheet to the workbook,
click the plus button to the right of the sheet tabs.

Formatting Worksheets

Formatting data generally makes it easier to comprehend, and more
attractive. The goal of formatting a business spreadsheet should be
to make it look professional, accurate, and understandable. Options
to format worksheet data depends a lot on the type of data.
Formatting text in Excel is very similar to formatting text in Word.
Using the Font and Alignment group icons on the Home tab of the
ribbon, users can manually format all of the data in a cell or in a
range of cells. Changing default formats includes things like
changing the font color, style, size, text alignment in a cell, or apply
formatting effects - all in an effort to make the data appear more
visible.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 82
Excel's tabular layout (organized into labeled columns and
numbered rows) sometimes limits the amount of data that can be
efficiently displayed. Using the Alignment group options can help
format data to make it appear as much like a word-processed report
as possible. In the screenshot above, two Excel-unique formatting
features help make the data more readable. In row 1, the text has
been merged and centered across cells A1:F1. This required the cell
range A1:F1 be selected before clicking the Merge &
Center button from the Alignment group. This is very popular for
worksheet titles. If the wrong cell range was selected and the Merge
& Center is not effective, the user must re-select the Merge & Center
button to unmerge the data, so the correct range can be selected
before again clicking the Merge & Center button.

Another popular Excel text-formatting feature illustrated above is
the Wrap Text tool, which will prevent text from being truncated
by wrapping the text into multiple rows within the same cell. If a
cell has a lot of text, the data will overlap into the next cell to the
right of the active cell. However, if the adjacent cell already has data,
the text will be truncated (cut-off) without applying this feature.
Cells C3:E3 in the above screenshot each have the Wrap Text
feature applied.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 83
While Excel has some pretty useful text-formatting functionality,
the majority of data entered into Excel is usually numerical data.
Therefore, utilizing Excel's number formats effectively is crucial to
make the worksheet as professional as possible. Professional
formatting relies a lot on consistent formatting. Therefore, using the
Format Painter tool (introduced in the Word chapters) and
workbook themes are very helpful to maintain that
consistency. Changing the existing theme will dynamically update
the appearance of all worksheets in a workbook by modifying the
fonts, styles, colors and/or effects.

Applying the correct cell format to numerical data is more than just
style - it is substance too, because applying the wrong format can
impact how other, related cell results are interpreted. The following
graphic describes some of the more popular number formats. In
addition to the examples provided, there are also other formats,
including date & time values, which can be accessed by clicking the
Number Format drop-down list.

Changing the number of decimals displayed can be manipulated by
the Increase Decimal and Decrease Decimal buttons in the Number
group. The displayed value could change to a rounded value,
however, the actual value stored in the cell has not changed unless a
ROUND function has been applied. Formatting only affects how the
value is displayed. Applying formats can result in number signs
(#####) being displayed in a cell. This is not an error, but an
indication that the cell width is not wide enough to display the
formatted number.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 84
Excel data can also be formatted as a table. A table is a collection
of related data, organized into a tabular layout of rows and columns,
that can be manipulated via sorting, filtering and formulas. To create
a table, select the data and click Insert > Table from the ribbon to
open the Create Table dialog window.

  Table style Blue, Table Style Medium 16 with banded rows, a header
                              row, and filter buttons.

Applying a table style will format the table with a predefined set of
special table properties that includes options to define a header row
or total row, and to band the row and/or columns to make the data
easier to read. The filter buttons can also be removed. If the table
functionality is no longer desired, click the Convert to Range option
in the Tools group of the Design tab to convert the table to a normal
range.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 85
There are many additional formatting tools available within Excel,
but it is important to consider that sometimes, less is more! Too
much formatting can be overkill and reduce the readability of a
worksheet. Try to limit the use of multiple colors, fonts, and
background colors/graphics. Format with a design purpose, not to
entertain, and don't forget to use the Spell Check tool (F7) to proof
your workbook before printing or sharing!

Creating Formulas to Perform
Calculations

Perhaps the biggest benefit of using Excel is its ability to create
formulas that, when written correctly, can dynamically update when
predecessor data is updated. Formulas are mathematical calculations
using data in the existing workbook to calculate new values. All
formulas in Excel must begin with an equal sign (=), and can contain
cell references, ranges of cell references, arithmetic operators, and
constants as part of the formula's syntax. Calculations in Excel
follow normal math rules as it pertains to the order of operations
rule. There are mnemonics available in various dialects to help
decipher the order. The following graphics illustrate the order of
operations rules and different formula syntax examples:

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 86
Formulas typically reference values stored in other cells. For
example, in the Accounting equation: Assets = Liabilities + Owner's
Equity, one could calculate the Owner's Equity using a formula.
Assume that the value for Total Assets resides in cell D30, and the
value for Total Liabilities resides in D60. The formula for Owner's
Equity in D65 using cell references would be =D30-D60. Using cell
references is advantageous because if any of the cells that generate
either the Total Assets or Total Liabilities is changed, the formulas
in D30, D60 and D65 will also get updated. Another advantage is
when a cell containing a formula is copied to another location, the
formula will dynamically update to the new location's reference
information. This is called Relative Cell Referencing. If the
formulas in column D are copied to column E, the new formula for
Owner's Equity in column E will be =E30-E60. Additionally, if
rows are added or deleted in the range that the Total formulas
reference, the formula will automatically update to the new formula
range.

Entering the syntax for a formula can be accomplished through
typing the formula components, using a pointing technique or a
combination of both. The pointing method can help avoid typing
errors. In the Owner's Equity example, the user would start by

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 87
typing the equal sign, and then instead of typing D30, just click on
D30. Continue by pressing the minus sign, and then click on cell
D60, and the click the Enter check mark on the formula bar. Using
the point method is even more practical when defining large cell
ranges in formulas. Just make sure not to reference the active cell in
the formula. This will likely create a circular reference error,
which is a formula in a cell that directly or indirectly refers to its
own cell.

Copying and Pasting Formulas

                               Data in Excel can be cut, copied and
                               pasted using similar shortcut menu
                               options, keyboard equivalents, and ribbon
                               icon commands as seen in Microsoft
                               Word. Following operating system file
                               management principles, moving data is
synonymous with using the "Cut" and "Paste" commands, while
duplicating data is the same as using the "Copy" and "Paste"
commands. Other terminology that should be recognized is
"source", which is the cell or range to be moved or duplicated, and
"destination", which is the upper-left cell in a worksheet where the
data is to be pasted.

 This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 88
Copying and pasting formulas contain cell references is a very
powerful feature, and to expedite this process, Excel has a nifty
feature called AutoFill. The AutoFill procedure utilizes the fill
handle, which is the solid, green square in the lower-right corner of
the active cell or cell range. Clicking and dragging the fill handle to
adjacent cells (horizontally or vertically) will copy and paste the
contents and update the destination cells with relative cell references
or sequential data aligned with built-in Custom Lists. This should
save significant time, and likely improve accuracy, and AutoFill has
many uses.

Not only can AutoFill copy formulas, but it also be used to complete
lists that have a recognizable pattern. It is helpful to select the source
cells that demonstrate a pattern, then hover the mouse pointer over
fill handle. The mouse pointer will change from the default pointer
icon to a thin, black plus sign. The patterns can be numbers, dates,
months, days of the week, etc. If AutoFill incorrectly guesses the
series pattern, the AutoFill Options icon is available to change the
paste actions. In the screenshots below, the fill handle in cell D5 will
by copied to cells D6:D13. The results shown in the second
screenshot will update the formula from D5 with relative cell
references to rows 6:13. What is happening in cells D7:D8?

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 89
Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 90
Practice 5: Test Scores

    1. In a new Excel workbook, enter the following data:

    2. Make sure to apply bold formatting to row 1, and text
         wrapping to cell E1.

    3. Format the data as a table with a header row and banded
         rows, but no Filter buttons.

    4. Apply the Facet theme.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 91
5. Ensure that cell E1 has the text wrapping format applied and
    then resize the column width of column E to be 7 points wide
    and the height of row 1 to 36 points.

6. AutoFit columns B, C & D.
7. In cell E2, enter the following formula: =B2+C2+D2 and

    click Enter. Your worksheet should look like the screenshot
    at right. Notice that Excel automatically filled in formulas
    for the rest of column E cells using relative cell references!
    If this action is unwanted, click the lightning icon, and
    choose to Undo the Calculated Column.
8. Press F12 to invoke the Save As command and save the file
    as Test Scores.xlsx.

                                                   Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 92
Adding Basic Functions to
Formulas

Excel contains over 400 built-in functions that can be included in a
formula to perform common calculations. A function performs a

calculation on data called arguments to compute a
result. Arguments are variables or values the function requires and
are contained within parenthesis, and usually consist of cell
references, but can also contain constants, text, cell ranges, and even
other functions! The syntax of a formula using a function
is: function name(argument1, argument2, etc.) Functions can be
typed with the help of a ScreenTip, or added from the Insert
Function window, which can be opened by clicking the symbol
found at the left of the formula bar, or at the left side of the Function
Library found in the Formulas tab of the ribbon.
The most popular functions are also the easiest to comprehend,
which might be correlated! Some of these most popular functions

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 93
are easily accessible from the AutoSum button in the Editing

                            group on the Home tab of the ribbon. Look
for the Greek sigma symbol. This feature is invaluable when it
comes to entering functions, especially for common calculations
computed via the SUM, COUNT, AVERAGE, MAX or MIN
functions. There are multiple ways to utilize AutoSum, but the
following procedure is probably the simplest. In the screenshot
below, assume the desire is to total the number of boxes of Thin
Mints cookies were sold the first 15 days of February. Make B19
the active cell (the destination cell), then click the AutoSum button.
The defaulting SUM option will be inserted into the formula bar
with a defaulting cell range (the source cells) inside parenthesis. The
cell range that defaults appears on screen with a scrolling marquee
surrounding the cell range. This range is usually correct, but not
always. If Excel chooses the wrong range, simply type in the cell
range, or use the mouse to re-select the correct range (pointing
method), and then click the Enter check mark.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 94
The formula that defaults should be =SUM(B4:B18). Once this
formula is submitted, the result, 97 will display. The intent of
the SUM function is self-explanatory. The AVERAGE function
takes the SUM function one step further by dividing the sum of the
values by the number of cells in the range.
The MIN and MAX functions are used to find the smallest and
largest values in a range of cells. These can be useful to identify
outlier data that might skew the results. Each of these functions
ignore cells that contain text or are empty. Alternatively,
the COUNT function totals the number of cells that contain values.
If a cell contains the value 0 (zero), it will be counted. However, if
the cell is blank or contains the text zero, the cell will not be counted.
This function is useful for determining the number of people who
mark a checkbox in an Employee roster. For example, how many
employees identify as a Veteran? Those who don't, wouldn't have a
value, and therefore, would not be counted. If the desire if to count
all cells that contain any data - use the COUNTA function.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 95
Inserting Headers and Footers

In Excel, headers and footers are lines of data that print at the top
(header) and bottom (footer) of each page in a worksheet to help
identify printouts. Headers and footers can contain descriptive text,
graphics, and/or fields, such as titles, dates, or page numbers.
Header and footer information does not display in Normal view, so
to edit a header or footer, click Insert > Header & Footer to open the
sheet in Page Layout view, and activate the Header & Footer Tools
contextual tab on the ribbon. There are left, center and right sections
for both the header and footer areas.

Users have the option to use one or more of the many built-in
headers and footers, or they can click any of the buttons in the
Header & Footer Elements group on the Header & Footer Tools
Design toolbar to create custom fields.

Command buttons in the Header & Footer Elements group include:

     Page Number: Click this button to insert the &[Page] code
         that puts in the current page number.

     Number of Pages: Click this button to insert
         the &[Pages] code that puts in the total number of pages.

     Current Date: Click this button to insert the &[Date] code
         that puts in the current date.

     Current Time: Click this button to insert the &[Time] code
         that puts in the current time.

     File Path: Click this button to insert
         the &[Path]&[File] codes that put in the directory path along
         with the name of the workbook file.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 96
     File Name: Click this button to insert the &[File] code that
         puts in the name of the workbook file.

     Sheet Name: Click this button to insert the &[Tab] code
         that puts in the name of the worksheet as shown on the sheet
         tab.

     Picture: Click this button to insert the &[Picture] code that
         inserts the image that you select from the Insert Picture
         dialog box that enables you to select a local image (using the
         From File option) or download one from an online source
         using a Bing Image Search.

     Format Picture: Click this button to apply the formatting
         that you choose from the Format Picture dialog box to
         the &[Picture] code that you enter with the Insert Picture
         button without adding any code of its own.

     This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY

The following screenshot illustrates fields in each section of the
header. The Page Number and Number of Pages fields are in the left
section. Manually entered text is in the center section, and finally,
the Current Time and Current Date fields are being inserted into the
right section.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 97
To create a custom header or custom footer, click the Launcher icon
in the Page Setup group of the Page Layout ribbon to open the Page
Setup window. Next, click the Header/Footer tab, and then choose
to open either the Custom Header... or Custom Footer... buttons.

Four checkboxes appear at the bottom of the "Header/Footer" tab,
and in the Options group of the Design tab of the ribbon. To remove
headers and footers from the first printed page, select the Different
First Page check box. To specify that the headers and footers on
odd-numbered pages should differ from those on even-numbered
pages, select the Different Odd & Even Pages check box. These
options are similar to those in Microsoft Word. The other two
options are unique to Excel. To specify whether the headers and
footers should use the same font size and scaling as the worksheet,
select the Scale with Document check box. To make sure the header
or footer margin is aligned with the left and right margins of the
worksheet, select the Align with Page Margins check box.

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 98
Adjusting the Page Layout and
Preparing to Print

The size of Excel workbooks tends to grow the more each worksheet
is manipulated, typically by adding more columns and rows, and
sometimes, more sheets. This added complexity makes physical
output of Excel data challenging. Too many columns will result in
the sheet not being able to be printed on one sheet of paper, and too
many rows make it difficult to interpret data on pages beyond the
first page. Fortunately, the Page Layout tab can help fit the data on
fewer sheets of paper and make each page easier to understand.

While themes can help modify the appearance of a spreadsheet's
colors and fonts, the other groups in the Page Layout tab can impact
the arrangement of data and streamline the readability of the output.
Starting with the Page Setup group, Excel allows tremendous
flexibility with the margins of each worksheet. For example,
Narrow margins allow more data to fit on one page by reducing the
amount of white space on the edges of the sheet. A quick and easy
way to allow more columns to print on one sheet, is to change
the orientation from the default Portrait, to Landscape, which
allows more columns and fewer rows to print on one sheet. The
effects of these Setup decisions can be more easily illustrated by
switching from the default Normal workbook view to the Page

                                                        Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 99
Layout. The View tab also allows users to enable/disable the Ruler,
Formula Bar, and on-screen gridlines and headings.

If changing the margins and/or orientation is not resolving the issue
of getting extra columns to print on the same page, an alternative
could be changing the paper size. The default printer determines the
paper sizes available from the Size drop-down list. To check the
range of paper sizes that a printer can print on, consult the printer
manual, or view the paper sizes that are currently set for the printer
in the Print Setup dialog box. Some users have the option of
printing to Legal (8.5 x 14) or even 11 x 17 (tabloid) printers.

A final, more drastic option to keep data from overlapping into
multiple sheets, is to utilize the scaling feature. Using the Scale to
Fit group from the Layout tab, a printed worksheet can be scaled by
to modify the font size of printed output by either shrinking or
enlarging the output. The options exist to scale the output to fit to 1
page wide (width) by 1 page tall (height). It might make sense to
only modify the width, or by choosing a Scale percentage, which
adjusts the overall sheet height and width proportionately. Keep in
mind the needs of your audience. Too small of font might make the
spreadsheet unreadable, and for certain audiences, the output might
need to be scaled to a larger font than the editing view.

The Sheet Options group of the Layout tab provides two significant
print features for basic Excel printing. These include the options to
have gridlines and/or headings appear in printed output. By default,
the options appear in the Viewing screen, but do not appear when
printed. Without Headings, the output would be very difficult to
explain to others, and gridlines, much like banded rows, make it
easier for the eye to line up the intersections of rows and columns.

More advanced options exist for enhancing page layout and printing
options by clicking the launcher button in each group. Several print
settings can be adjusted in the Print Preview window. The sheet in
the following screenshot is modified to print in landscape

                                                       Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 100
orientation with Narrow Margins and it is scaled to Fit on One Page.
It also has headings included in the print output.

Practice 6: Test Scores - Part 2

    1. Open the Test Scores workbook previously saved.
    2. In the Table Tools Design tab, click the Convert to Range

         button remove the table functionality from the data. (Click
         Yes to the message)
    3. Type the labels: Total Points in cell A8 and Average in cell
         A9.
    4. In cell B8, click the AutoSum button to insert the SUM
         function. Accept the range that Excel proposes for the
         formula by clicking the Enter check mark on the formula
         bar. The formula should be: =SUM(B2:B7).
    5. With B8 as the active cell, use the fill handle to copy the
         formula to the destination cells C8:D8.

                                                       Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 101
    6. In cell B9, enter a formula using the AVERAGE function
         without using the AutoSum functionality. Instead, use the
         Insert Function button to select the AVERAGE function,
         and enter the range B2:B7 as the arguments. NOTE: B8
         should not be included in the range of argument cells. Use
         the fill handle to copy the formula to cells C9 and C10.

    7. In cell E2, double-click the fill handle. See what happens!
    8. Change the view to Page Layout.
    9. Add a header that includes the Current Date field from the

         Header & Footer Tools Design ribbon in the left side of the
         header.
    10. Ensure the Gridlines and Headings appear in printouts,
         scale the sheet to 150%, then view the file in Print Preview.
         Your worksheet should resemble the following:

    11. Save the file as TestScores2.xlsx.

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                       Excel Chap 1 P a g e | 102
 Microsoft Excel Chapter 2:
       Beyond the Basics

· Absolute versus Static References
· Understanding Complex Formulas
· Date & Time Functions
· Logical Functions
· More Math Functions
· Sorting and Filtering
· Conditional Formatting
· Pie Charts
· Bar & Column Charts
· Line Charts

                                                  Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 104
Absolute versus Static
References

One of the first things that new Excel users need to realize is that
Excel is so much more powerful than a calculator. Some users insist

on setting up a worksheet as if it is merely a calculator. These people
fail to realize the power of cell references. Instead, they use static
references to constant values. A static reference is a reference to a
value that does not change. In the example to the right, instead of
using static references (= 9000-3952.96) for the formula in D5, the
user should employ cell references. (= B5-C5). The main benefit of
use cell references is that the user can manipulate the input values
in columns B and C, and the formulas in column D will remain
accurate. If the user changes either input values in columns B or C
with static references, the formulas in column D will need to be
manually updated.
Cell referencing is an extremely useful feature when formulas need
to be copied across ranges in a worksheet. When creating formulas
that contain references to cells or cell ranges, the default cell
reference is a relative cell reference. When formulas with these type

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 105
of cell references are copied to other cells the formulas will
automatically change relative to the cells that they are copied to.
However, there may be instances where it is necessary for Excel to
keep the exact cell referenced in a formula when copying to other
cells. A cell reference that does not change when copied is called
an absolute cell reference (sometimes called a fixed cell reference).
The indicator that a cell reference is absolute is the presence of a
dollar sign symbol in front of both the column letter and row
number, such as $A$3. To create an absolute cell reference, either
type the dollar sign manually, or press the F4 after entering the cell
reference. Repeatedly pressing the F4 key cycles the reference
through the four different combinations of relative, absolute, and
mixed cell references.
Mixed cell references are a combination of relative and absolute:
either the column is relative and the row fixed (absolute), for
example D$2, or the column is fixed and the row relative: $D2.
Mixed cell references are rarely used, but they play a significant role
when it is necessary to keep a single row or column unchanged while
copying the formula. Mixed cell references are commonly used
when creating a table of values, like a multiplication table or a
mortgage rate table.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 106
Whenever possible, utilize relative and/or absolute references
instead of static cell references. In the worksheet at the right, the
formula in C6 is using relative cell references to both the Sales
amount (B6), and the Commission Rate (B3). Unfortunately, if this
formula is copied (perhaps by using the fill handle) to rows 7:16, the
resulting formulas will be wrong. Some cells will display zeros or a
#VALUE! error, while others will display inflated amounts because
the Rate percentage is being replaced by higher sales values.
Therefore, the reference to B3 in the formula should be an absolute
cell reference, i.e. =B6*$B$3. It may be tempting to construct the
formula using a static reference to the constant value of .075 (i.e.
=B6*.075). However, if the rate needs to be changed to 7.25%, the
formulas with the static references would each need to be changed
manually. Conversely, if the formulas in column C are using
absolute cell references to $B$3, a single edit to B3 is all that is
needed to update all of the cells in column C. Knowing the
differences between the various type of cell reference will make the
worksheet more scalable and flexible for future expansion.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 107
Understanding Complex
Formulas

Formulas can be simple mathematical formulas or complicated
formulas involving multiple mathematical operations, multiple cell
ranges and nested functions. While it is a good idea to remember the
order of operations rules, complex formulas can use parentheses to
identify the arguments of functions and to override the order of
operations. In mathematical operation formulas, operations within
parentheses are performed before those outside of it. For example,
in =A3+B3*C3, B3 is multiplied by C3 before A3 is added to the
result, but in =(A3+B3)*C3, A3 and B3 are added together first, then
the result is multiplied by C3.

Parentheses in operations may be nested inside each other. The
operation in the innermost set of parentheses will be performed
first. Whether nesting parentheses in mathematical operations or in
nested functions, always be sure to have as many closed parentheses
in the formula as there are open parentheses, or you might break
Excel and it will return an error message.

                                    These Excel
                                   formulas are so
                                    complex that
                                    we better call

                                         Saul!

  This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 108
In the illustrated worksheet below, cell D30 contains a complex
formula that calculates the differences between rooms available and
rooms rented to determine the total number of unrented rooms in the
Balcony and Penthouse categories. The formula in D30 is:
=(SUM(C5:C8)-SUM(D5:D8))+(SUM(C25:C28)-
SUM(D25:D28)). Notice the number of open and closed
parenthesis!

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 109
Date & Time Functions

Excel can produce the current date and/or time, based on the
computer's regional settings. Excel can also add and subtract dates
and times. For example, it may be necessary to keep track of how
many hours an employee worked each week, and calculate their pay
and overtime. There are numerous Date and Time functions in Excel
to help calculate the addition or difference between dates or times.
Excel stores all date and time values as sequential serial numbers.
For example, January 1, 1900 is represented by the serial number 1,
and January 1, 2020 is represented by serial number 43831 because
it is 43,831 days after January 1, 1900. To view the serial number of
an existing date, format the date using the General Number format.
The conversion of dates and times to serial numbers simplifies the
process of using dates and times in calculations. The key to
displaying the results of these calculations is using the appropriate
Number format, which may require diving into the world of creating
custom number formats to display only days, hour and/or minutes.
For example, if only the number of years is desired to be displayed
when calculating the difference between two dates, the Custom
Number format should be yy.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 110
The TODAY and NOW functions are very similar since both return
the current system date. However, the NOW function also returns
the current system time. Many users format the results of the NOW
function to only display the current system time. One characteristic
of these functions versus the DATE function is that TODAY and
NOW are volatile functions, so if the workbook is opened tomorrow,
these functions will update automatically, whereas the DATE
function will not change. These functions are for use within the grid
of the worksheet, typically to calculate durations. There are separate
Date and Time fields for use in worksheet headers and footers.

Logical Functions

Many employers and educators are placing increasing emphasis on
the value of critical thinking. Critical thinking skills are often
associated with problem solving skills, empathy, and thinking and
acting in purposeful ways by making fact-based decisions. Excel is
a practical tool for collecting and analyzing data critically. Excel's
logical functions are especially useful for enabling critical thinking.
However, before exploring the utilization of Excel's logical
functions, it is necessary to review the logical operators that are

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 111
used to compare data between cells. The operators are often referred
to as comparison operators. The six main logical operators are
explained in the following graphic:

These comparison operators can be used in Excel functions to
compare all types of data, including dates, numbers, Boolean values
(True or False, Yes or No), or text. All arguments must evaluate to
the Boolean values of either True or False, or contain another, nested
logical function.
The IF function is one of the most popular and useful functions in
Excel. It can be used to make a decision based on a comparison. If
the comparison is true, one value is displayed in the cell; if the
comparison is false, a second value is displayed. The syntax of the
IF function is: IF(logical_test, [value_if_true], [value_if_false]).

          logical_test - a value or logical expression that can be
             either TRUE or FALSE. Required.In this argument, you
             can specify a text value, date, number, or any
             comparison operator.

          value_if_true - the value to return when the logical test
             evaluates to TRUE, i.e. if the condition is met.
             Optional.

          value_if_false - the value to be returned if the logical
             test evaluates to FALSE. Optional.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 112
Simple IF functions test to see if a cell contains a certain text string
and returns different values
depending on if the logical
test returns a True or False
logic. A sample formula is
illustrated in the screenshot
at right. That's some logical
critical thinking!
Instead of returning text
strings, the IF formula can
test the specified condition, perform a corresponding math operation
and return a value based on the result. This is done by using
arithmetic operators or other Excel functions in the value_if_true
and /or value_if_false arguments. For example, =IF(C4>=D4,
E4*.25, E4*10%). This formula is determining if the value in
column C is greater than or equal to the value in column D. If the
result of the comparison is true, then the value to be displayed should
be the value in column E multiplied by .25 (25%). If the result of the
comparison is false, then the value to be displayed should be the
value in column E multiplied by 10% (.10).

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 113
Other popular Excel Logical functions include the AND, as well as
the OR functions. These functions allow users to create multiple
logical tests within a single IF function. These functions return
either TRUE or FALSE results when their arguments are evaluated.
The AND function only returns TRUE if every condition is met.
However, the OR function returns TRUE if any condition is met.
The syntax of both functions are the same: =AND(logical1, logical2,
etc.) Examples of each function are illustrated in the screenshots
below. The first illustration uses the AND function to determine if
any of the people are eligible for the Inner Circle. They need to have
a Customer Satisfaction Score of at least 4.0, and be a Vikings fan.
The second example uses the OR function. The more lenient
comparison operator yields more eligible people for the Inner Circle.

   AND function example

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 114
OR function example

More Math Functions

The most popular Excel function in the Math category is
undoubtedly the SUM function. The Excel Math Functions perform
many of the common mathematical calculations, including basic
arithmetic, conditional sums & products, quotients, and rounding
calculations. There are many more examples, but some of the more
popular Math functions are identified in the table below. There are
many variations of some of these functions to be found in the Insert
Function window.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 115
The first two functions from the table above are considered basic
mathematical operations. Instead of multiplying two cells using the
* operator, Excel users can opt to use the PRODUCT function. i.e.
=PRODUCT(B2,B3) versus =B2*B3. The PRODUCT function is
most useful when multiplying a series of cells. Ensure that the cells
referenced contain numbers or dates. If the data referenced includes
text, the PRODUCT function will return the #VALUE! error
result. The QUOTIENT function is similar to the PRODUCT

function, except instead of multiplying cells, it divides cell(s) by
other cell(s) and returns a result in Integer format. An integer is a
whole number; therefore, it will not display the remainder typically
generated in division calculations. The graphic above illustrates the
differences between using the divide operator and the QUOTIENT
function. The numerator is the dividend and is the value before the
forward slash (/). The denominator is the divisor and is the value

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 116
after the forward slash (/). In this example, A1 (or 13) is the
dividend, and B1 (or 5) is the divisor.
An alternative to using the QUOTIENT function is to utilize the
ROUND function or any of its related functions (ROUNDDOWN,
ROUNDUP,MROUND). In the graphic above, a user could rewrite
the formula in A4 as =ROUND(A1/B1,0) by using the ROUND
function to get the similar results as the QUOTIENT functions. The
difference is that the QUOTIENT result does not store any

remainder amounts. As shown in the graphic at the right, using the
ROUND function can yield significantly different results than using
the QUOTIENT function, however, the user can control the level of
detail desired in the calculation. Some users simply opt for the first
scenario without using either function. Instead, they utilize Excel's
formatting functionality to remove the displaying of decimals.
Using the Decrease Decimal button from the ribbon on cell B4
can change the display to various results. However, the un-
truncated/un-rounded result is still stored in the cell.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 117
Practice 7: Expense Report

    1. Create a new worksheet with the following data from the
         image below:

    2. In row 9 enter the following data:
             o Date: 5/30/2019
             o Description: Travel to Minneapolis
             o Meals: 25
             o Mileage: 205
             o Lodging: 150
             o Other:

    3. In cell G9 enter the following complex formula using
         relative and absolute cell references:
         =C9+(D9*$C$6)+E9+F9 (are the parenthesis necessary?)

    4. Format columns C, E, F and G as Currency format with
         two decimals.

    5. Enter the following in row 10:
             o Date: 5/31/2019
             o Description: Travel home
             o Meals: 20
             o Mileage: 205
             o Lodging:
             o Other: 15

    6. Use the fill handle to copy the formula in G9 to G10.
    7. Insert a new row below the Mileage Rate row, and in B6

         enter the label: Trip Duration. (bold the label)

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 118
    8. In cell C6 enter a formula that subtracts A9 from A10.
         Change the format of cell C6 to General.

    9. In cell B15 enter the label: Totals: (right-align & bold this
         cell).

    10. Select cells C15:G15 and click the AutoSum button.
         Change the format of D15 to General.

    11. Enter the label: Need Receipts? in cell B2. (bold the label)
    12. In cell C2, enter the following logical function:

         =IF(F15>0,"Yes","No")

    13. Save the file as Helga Expenses May2019. Your worksheet

         should resemble the following:

Sorting and Filtering

Worksheets can have large amounts of data, and it can be
overwhelming if it is not sorted correctly. Arranging data in a
specified order is called sorting. Rows can be sorted in either
ascending (low to high) or descending (high to low) order.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 119
Ascending order can also be considered alphabetic order if the data
is text or chronological order if the data is dates or times.
Before data can be sorted, Excel needs to know the exact range of
cells that is to be sorted. Excel will select areas of related data as
long as there are no blank rows or columns in the data range. Blank
rows and columns define the outer limits of the data range. To ensure
that the correct data is selected, highlight the range before starting
the sort.
As Excel determines the defined range of data to be sorted, Excel
also determines if field names exist. Users should format the first
row of the data range with unique formatting Often, just making the
labels bold will help Excel identify the field names. Identifying the
field names will prevent Excel from including these fields in the
records to be sorted. The field names become the sort keys needed

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 120
for multiple column sorts. In the image below, the possible sort keys
are: Cruise Date, Accommodation Category, Rooms Available,
Rooms Rented, Rate, Revenue and Shortfall.

The data range above is already sorted in ascending order by the
Accommodation Category key field. A single column sort is quite

                                        easy. Simply click any cell in the
                                        column that represents the key
                                        sort. In the above example, any
                                        cell from B4 to B28 would
                                        be acceptable. Then, click the the
                                        A-Z option in the Sort & Filter
group of the Data tab. The entire row is sorted because each row is
a record that should stay grouped together. Be careful NOT to select
a single column of data or the records may not be kept together.
Excel will warn the user with a warning message. If the user chooses
to Continue with the current selection, only the data in the column
with change their order, while the data in the other columns remain
unchanged. This will most likely destroy the integrity of the data.
Advanced sorting involves multiple key fields from multiple
columns. A multi-level sort can be set up by clicking the Sort button
from Sort & Filter group from the Data tab (or the Sort & Filter
button from the Editing group of the Home tab and choose Custom

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 121
Sort) to open the Sort dialog window. The first sort criteria, also
known as the primary sort, was previously defined to sort by
Accommodation Category in ascending order. To add a second
level, also known as a secondary sort, click the Add Level button.
After entering additional sort criteria, additional levels can be added.
As shown in the graphic on the previous page, secondary criteria
have been added to sort in descending order by Revenue. The data
in column B will not appear to change, but the records will reorder.
Compare the results below with the previous table.

An Excel filter, also known as an AutoFilter, is used to display only
the data that meet specific criteria. Data that does not meet the
criteria is hidden from view. Excel's basic filter functionality allows
users to filter rows by value, by format and by criteria. Filters can
reduce a large, complex worksheet of data into meaningful
information. With filtering, you can control not only what you want

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 122
to see, but what you want to exclude. Users can filter based on
choices they make from a list, or they can create specific filters to
focus on exactly the data that they want to see. Clicking the filter
button from the Data tab will add drop-down arrows to the column
headers in a range of data. Clicking a drop-down arrow provides
sorting and filtering options, like filter by color or text filters. A
simple AutoFilter will be signified by the clearing of check boxes of
the data that should be hidden. After applying a filter, a user can
copy, edit, chart or print only visible rows without rearranging the
entire list. Like sorting, filters can be applied to multiple columns to
further reduce the results that are displayed.

A column that has been filtered will have its drop-down arrow icon
switch from an upside-down triangle to a filter icon, as shown

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 123
highlighted in yellow below. Only the cruises from the Penthouse
accommodation category will be displayed after clearing all check
boxes except the Penthouse category.

To remove a single filter, click the filter icon in the row header and
choose Clear Filter from.... To clear all filters quickly, choose the
Clear button from the Data tab on the ribbon or to remove filtering
functionality, re-click the Filter icon from the Sort & Filter group.
For more advanced users there are many more ways to utilize filters
in Excel, such as Custom Filters and Advanced Filters. Nonetheless,
a lot can be accomplished with the basic AutoFilter feature.

Conditional Formatting

Using spreadsheet functionality to enhance critical thinking is a
primary reason that Excel is so popular among business
professionals. Decision-making is made easier when users can
quickly spot trends, identify variances, and be alerted when certain
criteria is met. Excel's conditional formatting feature is a really
powerful tool when it comes to applying different formats to data
that meets certain conditions. Conditional formatting is one of the
most simple yet powerful features in Excel by applying user-specific
formats to a cell/cells when user-specific conditions (rules) are met.
Not only does it make a spreadsheet look awesome, but it also helps
make sense of the data.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 124
Clicking the Conditional Formatting button on the Home tab of the
ribbon offers several options to define the condition
criteria (rules), and several formatting options to

display the data in meaningful ways. To choose formats that are
applied to a cell(s) when a condition is met, select a range of cells,
then click the Conditional Formatting button to display a menu of
rules. Clicking a rule will expand an additional menu. For example,
to identify which cruise accommodation categories provide the most
significant revenue shortfall, utilizing a highlighting rule that
formats cells that are greater than $100,000 would be a very
practical conditional formatting rule that could provide some
strategic information. Selecting the range of G5:G28 and applying
the Greater Than rule, will create eye-catching formatting. The data
in the first field can either be a cell reference or a static value, as
shown below.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 125
Numerous rule types exist beyond the preset comparison operator
menu choices. Rules can identify cells that contain certain text or
before/after a certain date, or even highlight duplicate data.
Top/Bottom Rules can reveal the top or bottom 10 records in a
certain column. The quantity can be modified from the top/bottom
10 to a user-specific number.

Custom rules can be defined by choosing More Rules... from the
Highlight Cells Rules menu, which opens the New Formatting Rule

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 126
window. Choosing alternative Rule Types will modify the
functionality available in this window.

After defining the rule criterion, custom formats can be selected by
clicking the Format button. The Format Cells window opens to
allow custom Number, Font, Border or Fill formatting. To enforce
more complex rules, multiple conditional formatting rules can be
applied to the same data. However too many colors can sometimes
be distracting and should be used sparingly. Therefore, Excel offers
more formatting choices than just color fills. Data bars, color scales
and icon sets can also be used to emphasize data that meets certain
conditions.
The icon sets work great when color is not effective, such as when
printing to black & white laser printers. Icons are even more

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 127
noticeable than colors because of their unique look and sparing
use. Icon sets will help visually represent the data with directional

arrows, shapes, indicators, ratings, and other objects. For icons in
sets of three, Excel will assign icons by dividing values into thirds -
the first icon is assigned to the top one third of values, the second
icon is assigned to the second third of values, and the third icon is
assigned to the lowest one third of values. The values are adjusted
for four and five-icon sets. Conditional formatting's flexibility is
extensive, but perhaps even more impressive is that, like formulas,
conditional formatting rules are volatile. As the data changes, the
conditional formatting dynamically adjusts to evaluate the new data
against the existing conditional rules.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 128
Pie Charts

With Excel, users can organize data so that it has context and
meaning. The output of Excel manipulation can take the shape of
either a table or chart. When deciding to use a chart or a table to
communicate the data-driven message, it is wise to always ask how
the information will be used, and who is the audience? People
interact very differently with these two types of visuals. Tables,
which display data in a columnar layout, are meant to be read.
Therefore, tables are ideal when the data requires more specific
analysis. Tables offer preciseness, letting users dive deeper to
crunch the numbers and examine exact values, instead of focusing
on approximations or visualizations.

A chart is a visual representation of a range of related worksheet
data. A chart can illustrate a large amount of numerical data quickly
and in an easy-to-understand fashion. Charts are particularly useful
for simplifying complex sets of data to expose the shape of the data
- numerical patterns, trends, and other significant activity. What
charts lack in terms of precision they overcome with broader insight
and quicker comprehension.

According to some psychologists,
people can be classified as either
"left-brained" or "right-brained"
thinkers. A person who is "left-
brained" is often said to be more
logical, analytical, and objective.
Utilizing tables to display
spreadsheet data may be more
effective with "left-brained" people. A person who is "right-
brained" is said to be more creative, thoughtful, and subjective.
Conversely, displaying spreadsheets data using certain Excel charts
may be more suitable for "right-brained" people. Both tables and
charts offer unique advantages, but one is not always better than the

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 129
other. The choice ultimately depends on the data at hand, the
message that is intended to convey, and the audience that will be
consuming the information.

Learning how to work with charts means not only knowing how to
create them but also realizing that different types of chart and
layouts can reveal and emphasize different knowledge. Like a
picture, a chart can be worth a thousand words. It all depends on
how well the chart is designed and developed. A well-constructed
chart will provide context and clarity for data analysis and
storytelling. The first step to creating useful charts it to organize and
precisely select the data that should be charted. This includes the
cells that contain both the data and the label headings.

The terms charts and graphs are often used interchangeably. There
are some subtle differences, however. Graphs are numerical
representations of data that show correlations and trends. Charts are
visual representations of data that tell a story. Ironically, the term
infographic, is better defined as a chart than as a graph.

Each chart type conveys information in different ways. Pie charts,
for example, are best for charting data that is a percentage of a
whole. For example, what percentage of your monthly income is
spent on transportation? Charts contain different objects for each
chart type. Objects in a pie chart include:

    · Chart title - describes what is charted. The label heading of
         the data series is used by default, but this can be edited.

    · Legend - an index of information that corresponds to the
         category labels.

    · Data labels - identify each value in the data series.
    · Plot area - the part of the chart that displays data

         graphically.
    · Chart area - the entire chart and all its elements.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 130
A pie chart can only include a single series of data, whether it is a
single column or a single row of data. A data series is the sequence
of values that Excel uses to plot in a chart. Each value from the data
series is represented by a slice (or wedge) of the pie. The size of
each slice varies with its percentage of the total of the entire
data series. To create a pie chart, first carefully select the appropriate
data range before selecting the chart type from the Insert tab. In the
above chart, the selected data range is $B$3:$F$3, $B$19:$F$19,

                                  since the only data series being charted
                                  is the total sales (quantity) of each
                                  cookie flavor. Every date (row)
                                  represents an additional data series, but
                                  since pie charts only plot a single data
                                  series, these series' should not be
                                  selected. Pie charts should be avoided
                                  when there are many categories, or
                                  when categories do not total 100%.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 131
Typically, 2-D charts are easier to read than 3-D charts.
When a chart is created as an object on a worksheet, sizing handles
will appear on the outer borders. The chart, or any object within the
chart, can be moved and/or resized similarly to a picture or other
objects in Microsoft Office. When a pie chart is first created, Excel
will use the default colors and design. Users can customize the chart
look easily by utilizing chart styles. In the Design contextual tab of
the Ribbon, several different styles will be displayed in a row.
Mouse over them to see a preview:

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 132
An additional option for quickly changing the look of a chart is to
utilize the Quick Layout menu to select one of several preset to add
elements like percentage labels, value labels, and differently located
legends to the chart. Users can also add and
remove individual elements, such as chart
titles, data labels, data tables, and more by
using the Add Chart Element menu. Some
elements are not available for certain chart
types. One of the most useful chart elements
that get added manually to a chart
are data labels. Data labels are linked to

                                            values on
                                                the

                                            worksheet, and they update
                                            automatically when changes
                                            are made to these values. Data
                                            labels make a chart easier to
                                            understand because they show
                                            details about a data series or its
                                            individual data points. Users
                                            can add data labels to all data
                                            points or a specific data slice by
                                            ensuring that only the specific
                                            slice is selected. In addition to
                                            the Add Chart Element menu
                                            and quick layout options, users
                                            can add data labels by right-
                                            clicking the chart and choosing
                                            Add Data Labels from the
                                            shortcut menu. Once added, the
                                            data labels can be further
                                            modified by right-clicking the
                                            chart and choosing Format

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 133
Data Labels to open the Format Data Labels task pane. One or more
types of labels can be added and positioned. Adding Category Name
labels make the legend redundant. Be careful not to add so many
labels that the chart becomes too crowded to read!
After adding labels, it may become necessary to resize or move the

chart. After adding a title, data labels, and removing the legend, the
chart looks different, but is still the same size, even though certain
elements have resized.
Which pie chart looks better? Generally, removing the legend
through use of data labels is considered a preferable design strategy.
Alas, there are even more ways to customize a pie chart that is
beyond the scope of this text! Additional functionality includes
creating 3-D pie charts, exploding slices, rotating, sorting, adding
different fill designs, and much more!

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 134
Bar & Column Graphs

Bar graphs are practical for comparing the differences between
values with horizontal bars. The lengths of the bars are proportional
to the size of the data category they represent. A vertical bar graph
is referred to as a column chart, and they are basically the same -
just 90° apart. Unlike a pie chart, a bar graph can include several
series of data. Bar graphs are simple, easy and flexible, and thanks
to the horizontal layout, bar graphs can accommodate longer
category names. Bar (and column) graphs contain the following
objects:

    · Chart title - describes what is charted.
    · Chart area - the entire chart and all of its elements.
    · Plot area - the region within the horizontal and vertical

         axes.
    · Axes titles (horizontal, vertical)- describe the data.
    · Legend - an index of information that corresponds to the

         series names.
    · Data labels - identify each value in a data series.
    · Value axis (y-axis) - contains values. Horizontal axis on

         bar charts and vertical axis on column charts.
    · Category axis (x-axis) - contains the category labels.

         Horizontal axis on column charts and vertical axis on bar
         charts.
    · Gridlines - mark the intervals on an axis.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 135
While the data and chart on the previous page only display one data
series, most bar and column charts tend to display multiple data
series to compare and contrast one set of data against another. The
chart below adds a second data series in column C and changes the
chart type to a column chart. The two different data series are
illustrated with different color data points. Also, note how the axes
change directions! The value axis maximum, major and minor units
were also modified to different numerical values.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 136
A histogram is a column chart that shows frequency of data. It is
similar to a bar graph but has important differences. For example,
the bars of data in a histogram are not separated with a gap. Also, in
general, histograms depict ranges instead of categories. Histograms
are often used to show statistics.

To create a histogram in Excel, you provide two types of data -- the
data that you want to analyze, and the bin numbers that represent the
intervals by which you want to measure the frequency. You must
organize the data in two columns on the worksheet. These columns
must contain the following data:

     Input data - This is the data that you want to analyze by
         using the Histogram tool.

     Bin numbers - These numbers represent the intervals that
         you want the Histogram tool to use for measuring the input
         data in the data analysis.

The output of the histogram analysis is displayed on a new
worksheet (or in a new workbook) and shows a histogram table and
a column chart that reflects the data in the histogram table.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 137
Charts can easily get crowded with details. Therefore, keeping the
chart on the same worksheet as the data is not always feasible. Users
can move a chart to any location on a worksheet or to a new or
existing worksheet. By default, a chart is created as an object within
a sheet. The chart can be resized, but sometimes the chart needs to
be as large as possible. To move the chart to a new worksheet, click
the Move Chart button on the Chart Tools Design tab. Next, click
the New sheet radio button, and then in the New sheet box, type a
name for the new worksheet. After clicking OK, the new sheet will
be to the left of the existing sheet. A new, standalone chart will
occupy the entire page to maximize the visibility of the data. The
Move Chart window also provides the option of moving the chart as
an embedded object into an existing sheet.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 138
Line Graphs

A line graph displays a series of data points connected by a straight
line. Line graphs are a good way to show change or trends over time.

                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 139
Line graphs are simple to create and easy to read. In contrast to
column or bar graphs, line graphs can handle more categories and
more data points without becoming too cluttered. Each line displays
as a different color. Line graphs help people examine why data is
changing and make decisions about how to proceed. The Line graph
is especially effective in displaying data trends. Stock market
investors utilize line charts to track historical stock performances
and help determine if a trend can be forecasted in the future.

In a Line Graph, the vertical axis (Y-axis) always displays numeric
values and the horizontal axis (X-axis) displays time or other
categories. Time intervals can be measured in years, months, days,
or hours.

To create a line graph, start by selecting the data range, then

choosing the Line Graph button  in the Charts group from the
Insert tab.

In the 2-D line graph illustrated on the previous page, two sets of
data series are plotted for fifteen days. The Skinny Mints cookies
are identified by the red line, and the orange line plots the
Chocolate/Peanut Butter cookies. Each date is a data point.
Additional data series can be added by expanding the data source
range. Line graphs provide an easy way to track historical data. In
many cases, the way the data is trending makes it easy to predict the
results of data in future periods.

Excel offers numerous other graphs and charts that might better
help illustrate the story behind the data, however all charts must
address the challenge of sharing or outputting the graphic(s) to
their target audience(s). Here are a few printing issues to consider:

· Printing only the chart. If the active cell is not selecting the
    chart, both the chart and worksheet data will print. However,
    if the chart is currently selected, only the chart will print by
    default (as a chart sheet). If the intent is to print both the chart

                                Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 140
    and the data, make sure to move and/or resize the chart to
    ensure everything fits appropriately within the sheet
    margins. This will embed the chart within the sheet.
    Utilizing the Print Preview window to verify what will print
    by default will allow the user to make numerous changes,
    such as the orientation, margins and scaling. A different
    installed printer can also be selected. The graphic below
    illustrates from the Print Preview window, an embedded line
    chart in landscape orientation with headings enabled for

    print. The sheet has also been scaled to fit to one page.

· Chart colors that are not compatible with black and white
    printers. A lot of office printers are black and white laser
    printers due to their low-cost to operate at high volumes. A
    color laser printer may be a worthy investment for common
                                                  Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 141
    chart printing. If a black and white printer is all that is
    available, it may be necessary to change the colors to
    patterns or contrasting shades of grey.
· Not enough or too much information. Reads of the chart
    must be able to comprehend the message the chart is
    attempting to convey. This might require adding context,
    such as titles, data labels, and text-box callouts. Conversely,
    a chart can have too much information that the chart is
    cluttered and unreadable. In this case, summarizing the data
    my be prudent, or even re-selecting a different source data
    range. A chart can also be unreadable due to poor design
    considerations like wrong fonts and font sizes, as well as
    distracting colors and object sizes.
· Excel charts are volatile and will change as often as the
    source data is changed. If a static copy of a chart is needed,
    consider saving the chart as a picture. This can be
    accomplished through using the copy and paste special

                                              Infographic example

                                                  Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 142
         commands. Using Paste Special will allow a chart to pasted
         in either PNG, JPEG, GIF or other formats. Alternatively,
         Excel files can be saved as PDF files for inserting in other
         electronic documents/files.

Practice 8: Weather Report

    1. Open the data file The Weather Report.xlsx or create a new
         sheet from the illustration at right.

    2. Add conditional formatting to all cells in B6:E17 so that
         any cell is at least 90° with red fill cell formatting, or below
         32° in light blue fill.

    3. Use the Internet to research average monthly high temps
         for Fort Myers, FL. Enter a label and the temps in column
                                                       Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 143
    E. The conditional formatting should dynamically format
    the cells.
4. Create a 2-D bar graph of Anchorage and Mesa temps for
    all twelve months.
5. Move the bar graph to its own chart sheet.
6. Return to the original source data sheet and create an
    embedded 2-D line graph with markers for all four cities
    for all twelve months. Change the graph title to Average
    Month High Temps. Move the chart slightly so the top-left
    edge is in cell F6.
7. Use Print Preview to view the entire sheet (not just the
    chart). Change the orientation to landscape. Compare your
    results with the screenshot below:

8. Save the file as The Weather Report2.xlsx to your drive.

                                                  Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 144
Excel Index                   histogram, 161
                              icon sets, 152
absolute cell reference, 132  Keyboard shortcuts, 105
active cell, 103              logical operators, 137
Add Chart Element, 158        margins, 126
Arguments, 120                Merge & Center, 111
AutoFill, 117                 Mixed cell references, 132
auto-fitting, 109             non-contiguous, 106
Boolean, 138                  orientation, 126
cell, 103                     Print Setup, 127
chart, 154                    Quick Layout menu, 158
circular reference, 116       Relative Cell Referencing, 115
Columns, 103                  Scale to Fit, 127
complex formula, 135          sorting, 144
Conditional formatting, 149   static reference, 131
contiguous, 106               syntax, 114
data labels, 158              table, 113
data series, 156              Tables, 154
dividend, 141                 theme, 112
divisor, 141                  workbook, 103
fill handle, 117              worksheets, 103
filter, 147                   Wrap Text, 111
footers, 123
function, 120
headers, 123

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where

otherwise noted.

                              Excel Chap 2 P a g e | 145
Microsoft Access Chapter 1:
        Database Basics

· Absolute versus Static References
· The Four Main Objects in a Database
· Database Design
· Creating a Table
· Primary and Foreign Keys
· Table Relationships
· Entering and Editing Records
· Creating Forms

                                                Access Chap 1 P a g e | 146
What is a Database?

A database is a collection of related data that is organized so that it
can be easily access, managed and updated. Databases can store
details about people, products, orders, or anything else. Data can be
defined as facts and statistics about people, objects, events and
ideas. Organizations interpret, process and analyze data to turn the
data into useful information. This information is used to make
better decision-making.

In the past, many databases were paper       The Interior Decorator's
based. Paper records were stored in          Nightmare - a filing cabinet
files within file cabinets. File cabinets
still exist today, in large part due to the
fears associated with the insecurity of
electronic records being compromised.
The individual documents (records)
are categorized into different folders
(tables) to streamline user access.
However, this process is labor-
intensive, susceptible to errors, and an
office eyesore!

                                             Access Chap 1 P a g e | 147
Databases are used for two major purposes: for processing
transactions and analytical research. Transactional databases track
daily operations. This data can be extracted into other software
programs for further manipulation, summation and classification.
This allows users to perform analytical research and prepare reports
to help create strategic information.

Computerized databases organize data into rows, columns and
tables, and is indexed to make it easier to find things quickly. Data
gets updated, expanded and deleted as new data is added. Automated
processes quickly manipulate the data, and data accuracy is
enhanced through automated rules. The advancements in database
software technologies have contributed to the Information Age that
currently exists. The growth of the filing cabinet market cannot
compare to the growth of electronic data contained in private and
public networks, and web sites throughout the Internet!

While a spreadsheet can function as a database, with its utilization
of columns and rows, the flat-file structure creates redundancies and
inconsistencies which limit the ability to find and understand the
data. In contrast, a relational database uses a tabular structure so that
data can be easily reorganized and accessed in several different
ways. Relational databases are made up of a set of tables with data
that fits into predefined categories (fields). Each table has at least
one data category (field) in a column, and each row has certain data
for the categories (fields) which are defined in the columns.

Microsoft's relational database software program is called
Access. Access only functions with Windows operating systems
(not available on a Mac O/S) and is not available in all Office
versions. Access is a tool to organize, store, and manipulate data, in
order to report on the data stored in tables. The power of a database
comes from the ability to link tables together to provide data
processing efficiencies for large sets of data. Access' integration
with the other Microsoft Office programs makes it a very popular
and economical relational database solution.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 148
The Four Main Objects in a
Database

While Microsoft Access is made up of seven components, this text
will focus on the main objects: tables, forms, queries and reports.

                 Navigation Pane

Together, these objects allow users to enter, store, analyze and
compile data in various ways. When an Access database is opened,
the objects are illustrated in the Navigation Pane on the left side of
the window. The standard view in the Navigation Pane displays all
objects in the database organized by object type. The Navigation
Pane is used to run, open, and manage the objects of a database.
Double-clicking an object will open the object in a document
window.
A table is the database object that stores data organized in an
arrangement of columns and rows. Each row is a record and each

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 149
column is a field within each record. A record is all of the data
pertaining to a person, place, thing or event. Each record will have
one or more fields and every database must have at least one table.
A relational database must have more than one table.

The other three objects are typically based off of the tables, so take
the time to set up the tables correctly, the first time! A form object
is typically used for entering new records into a table or
edit/deleting/display existing records in a table. Forms are the
primary interface that most users of a database enter and display
data. A query object retrieves specific data from other database
objects and then displays only the data that the user specifies.
Queries are the equivalent of asking questions about the data.
The report object summarizes the records from a table or query into
an easy-to-read format suitable for printing or exporting to other
software programs.

Access objects have several views. Each view gives users different
perspectives and offer different functionality. The two most
important views are Datasheet view and Design view. Datasheet
view displays a table in a datasheet where fields are in columns and
records are in rows. This view is useful for comparing records and
is often used when sorting or filtering data. This view is also
practical for printing data since many of the records can fit on a
single sheet of paper. Records can be added in datasheet view, but
forms are a more typical object for data entry. Nonetheless, the
asterisk (*) that appears to the left of the row below the last record
indicates where a new record will appear. The grey box to the left of
each record is a record selector. Clicking a record selector will make
the record active. Right clicking the record selector will allow users
to delete the selector record or add a new record to the table. Design
view allows users to setup and edit the fields in an object.

Datasheet view of a Customer table

                                    Access Chap 1 P a g e | 150
Database Design

A properly designed database will divide data into tables to
eliminate duplicate information (also known as data
redundancy). Redundancy occurs when data is repeated several
times in a database. Redundant data is bad, because it wastes space
and increases the likelihood of errors and inconsistencies. A good
database prevents redundant data when, for example, customer data
(ID, Name, Address, etc) is stored in one table and then other tables
store just the customer ID to refer to the customers. Another
important design consideration to maintain is data accuracy. A
common motto when performing data entry is "garbage in, garbage
out". The correctness and completeness of information is important
if the user wants to rely on their data. If your database contains
incorrect information, any reports that pull information from the
database will also contain incorrect information. As a result, any
decisions you make that are based on those reports will then be
misinformed.

Creating a new database involves determining the database schema,
which is a description of the data and the organization of the data
into tables. Designing a schema consists of the following steps:

    1. Determine the purpose of the database and which data to
         include in the database. It is a good idea to write down the
         purpose of the database on paper -- its purpose, how you
         expect to use it, and who will use it.

    2. Divide information into related groups to create tables and
         then give each table a descriptive name. Data should be
         grouped to ensure there is little to no redundancy. Each table
         must have data related to at least one other table through a
         table relationship.

    3. Describe the fields and determine the primary key for each
         table.

                                                      Access Chap 1 P a g e | 151
Creating a Database Table

As previously stated, a database cannot
exist without at least one table. Therefore,
when a new database is created in Access,
the first object that opens is a table in
datasheet view. Switching the view to
Design View allows the user to make
many design decisions in a much more
intuitive view. Many users like to use
Datasheet View to paste data copied from
Excel. However, setting up the fields in Design View makes it easier
to define each field's properties and data type.

Design View doesn't display any data. Therefore, there's more
space available to display other settings. In Design View, you can
see the data type listed next to each field. When a user clicks on a
field (in the top frame), the bottom frame displays the properties for
that field. The user can then change these properties as desired.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 152
Creating a table in Design View allows the user to define advanced
settings, like data types and properties, for each field in the table.
However, the first step is defining the field names. Here are a few
guidelines when creating field names:

    · Names can include numbers, UPPER and lowercase letters,
         and any combination. Avoid special characters (exclamation
         points, periods, brackets, quotes, etc.)

    · No leading spaces. Spaces between words is acceptable, but
         not common practice, because:

    · Make the names as short as possible without excessive
         abbreviation. Formatting column widths for displaying in
         printouts can be challenging with excessively long field
         names. For example, Order # or Order Number are better
         than Customer Order Number.

    · Ensure the names are unique per table. If a table has fields
         for Customer ID and Product ID, neither field should be
         named simply ID. Likewise with the word Name. It is too
         generic and needs a prefix identifier.

    · Break data into multiple fields. For example, instead of one
         field for Customer Name, create fields for First Name and
         Last Name. This will allow sorting and filtering on single
         fields. Another example would be separating an address into
         multiple fields for Street Address, City, State/Province and
         Zip/Postal Code.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 153
Every field has a data type. A field's data type indicates the kind of
data that the field stores, such as large amounts of text or attached
files. A field's data type determines what other properties the field
has including its size and formatting options. Field data types are
defined in the table design grid, whereas field properties are defined
in the Field Properties pane in the bottom of the Table Design View
window. Data types include:

Data type     Description                      Size

Short Text    Use for text or combinations of  Up to 255
Long Text     text and numbers (i.e. Phone     characters
Number        Numbers).
Large Number
              Use for larger amounts of        Up to 1 GB
Currency      alphanumeric data, including
              sentences and
              paragraphs. Note: You cannot
              sort a memo field. However,
              they are searchable.

              Numeric values.                  4 bytes

              Numeric values. Stores a non-    8 bytes
              monetary, numeric value and is
              compatible with the
              SQL_BIGINT data type in
              ODBC. Use this data type to
              efficiently calculate large
              numbers.

              Use for monetary data. Holds     8 bytes
              up to 15 digits of whole
              dollars, plus 4 decimal
              places. Tip: You can choose

                               Access Chap 1 P a g e | 154
            which country's currency to
            use.

AutoNumber  Unique value generated by          4 bytes
Date/Time   Access for each new record,
Yes/No      usually starting at 1.

Ole Object  Use for dates and times.           8 bytes
Hyperlink
Attachment  A logical field can be             1 byte
            displayed as Yes/No,
Calculated  True/False, or On/Off. In code,
            use the constants True and
            False (equivalent to -1 and
            0). Note: Null values are not
            allowed in Yes/No fields.

            Can store pictures, audio,         Up to 2 GB
            video, or other BLOBs (Binary
            Large Objects).

            Contain links to documents or      Up to 8
            other files, e-mail addresses, or  bytes
            web pages.

            Attach pictures, documents,        Up to 2 GB
            etc. Can contain an unlimited
            number of characters per
            record. Access will compress
            the file.

            Use to create an expression        Dependent
            that uses data from one or         on the data
            more fields. You can designate     type of the
            different result data types from   result type
            the expression.                    property

            Access Chap 1 P a g e | 155
Lookup     A wizard starts to help define    Dependent
Wizard...  either a simple or complex        on the data
           lookup field. A simple lookup     type of the
           field uses the contents of        lookup field
           another table or a value list to
           validate the contents of a
           single value per row. A
           complex lookup field allows
           you to store multiple values of
           the same data type in each row.

After creating a field and setting its data type, users can set
additional field properties. The field's data type determines which
other properties that can be set. The field size is the number of
characters or the type of number it can store. For Number and
Currency fields, the Field Size property is especially important,
because it determines the range of field values. For example, a one-
bit Number field can store only integers ranging from 0 to 255. In
the Field Properties pane, on the General tab, enter the new field
size. Users can choose from the following values:

    · Byte -- For integers that range from 0 to 255. Storage
         requirement is a single byte.

    · Integer -- For integers that range from -32,768 to +32,767.
         Storage requirement is two bytes.

    · Long Integer -- For integers that range from -
         2,147,483,648 to +2,147,483,647. Storage requirement is
         four bytes.

    · Single -- For numeric floating-point values that range from
         -3.4 x 1038 to +3.4 x 1038 and up to seven significant digits.
         Storage requirement is four bytes.

    · Double -- For numeric floating-point values that range from
         -1.797 x 10308 to +1.797 x 10308 and up to 15 significant
         digits. Storage requirement is eight bytes.

           Access Chap 1 P a g e | 156
    · Replication ID -- For storing a GUID that is required for
         replication. Storage requirement is 16 bytes.

    · Decimal -- For numeric values that range from -9.999... x
         1027 to +9.999... x 1027. Storage requirement is 12 bytes.

Numeric and date/time fields can have a specified format to define
how the data is displayed. Short text, long text, and hyperlink fields
usually have no format. Predefined numeric field formats include:

    · General Number - (Default) Display the number as
         entered.

    · Currency - Use the thousand separator; follow the settings
         specified in the regional settings of Windows for negative
         amounts, decimal and currency symbols, and decimal
         places.

    · Euro - Use the euro symbol ( ), regardless of the
         currency symbol specified in the regional settings of
         Windows.

    · Fixed - Display at least one digit; follow the settings
         specified in the regional settings of Windows for negative
         amounts, decimal and currency symbols, and decimal
         places.

    · Standard - Use the thousand separator; follow the settings
         specified in the regional settings of Windows for negative
         amounts, decimal symbols, and decimal places.

    · Percent - Multiply the value by 100 and append a percent
         sign (%); follow the settings specified in the regional
         settings of Windows for negative amounts, decimal
         symbols, and decimal places.

    · Scientific - Use standard scientific notation.

When it comes to date/time fields, Access automatically displays
the date and time in the General Date and Long-Time formats. The
dates appear as, mm/dd/yyyy in the U.S. and as, dd/mm/yyyy
outside the U.S. where mm is the month, dd is the day, and yyyy is

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 157
the year. The time is displayed as, hh:mm:ss AM/PM, where hh is
the hour, mm is minutes, and ss is seconds. Here are some other
predefined formats for date/time fields:

    · Long Date - Displays only date values, as specified by the
         Long Date format in your Windows regional settings. i.e.
         Monday, May 13, 2018.

    · Medium Date - Displays the date as dd/mmm/yy but uses
         the date separator specified in your Windows regional
         settings. i.e. 13-May-2018.

    · Short Date - Displays date values, as specified by the
         Short Date format in your Windows regional settings. i.e.
         5/13/2018.

    · Medium Time - Displays hours and minutes followed by
         AM or PM. Access uses the separator specified in the Time
         setting in your Windows regional settings. i.e. 9:23 AM.

    · Short Time - Displays only hours and minutes. Access
         uses the separator specified in the Time setting in your
         Windows regional settings. i.e. 9:23.

Other popular (not all inclusive) field properties that appear based
on certain data types include:

    · Decimal Places - Specifies the number of decimal places to
         use when displaying numbers.

    · Caption - The label text that is displayed for this field by
         default in forms, reports, and queries. If this property is
         empty, the name of the field is used. Any text string is
         allowed.

    · Default Value - Automatically assigns the specified value
         to this field when a new record is added. Popular with State
         or Country fields for data entry in regional uses.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 158
· Input Mask - Controls how data is entered and is useful
    when text or date entries should follow a certain format.
    Access has several predefined masks. To open the Input
    Mask Wizard, click the ellipses (...) at the end of the Input
    Mask field. Popular existing input masks include the Phone
    Number and Zip Code masks. Typically, clicking Next to
    accept the default options throughout the wizard will create
    the most common input masks. Custom masks can be created
    by clicking the Edit List button. Mask characters include the
    digits 0 and 9. A 0 placeholder means that a digit is required,
    whereas a 9 means that a digit is optional. For example, the
    last four characters of a Zip Code are often optional, so the
    mask would display as 00000-9999.

                                                Access Chap 1 P a g e | 159
· Validation Rule - Helps ensure accurate data through
    creation of an expression criterion that must be true
    whenever the value is added or changed in the field.
    Validation rules are popular for numeric and date entries and
    are formed with one or more relational operators and/or
    logical operators. A typical rule in an Order Entry table/form
    might require the Quantity be at least one. The rule in the
    Quantity field could be >=1.

· Validation Text - If an entry breaks the rule, it is cleared
    from the entry box and the Validation Text is displayed in a
    dialog box. Highly recommended to be used in conjunction
    with the Validation Rule so the data entry person knows why
    their entry is not acceptable.

· Required - Specifies if data must be entered or not. Choice
    is Yes or No. Default is No.

· Indexed - Specifies whether the field has an index. There
    are three available values: Yes (No duplicates) - Creates a
    unique index; Yes (Duplicates OK) - Creates a non-unique
    index; No - Removes any index on the field. If users often
    search a table in Access or sort its records by a particular
    field, users can speed up these operations by creating an

                                                Access Chap 1 P a g e | 160
         index for the field. Access uses indexes in a table as people
         use an index in a book: to find data, Access looks up the
         location of the data in the index. In some instances, such as
         for a primary key, Access automatically creates an index. At
         other times, it may be necessary to create an index manually.

Primary and Foreign Keys

Fields that are part of a table relationship are called keys. A key
usually consists of one field but may consist of more than one
field. There are two kinds of keys:

    · Primary key - To ensure that no two records in a table are
         identical, one field in each table is designated the primary
         key. A primary key consists of one or more fields that
         uniquely identify each record that you store in the table.
         Often, there is a unique identifier, such as an ID number
         (Employee ID, Customer ID, etc), a serial number, or a
         social security number that serves as the primary key.
         Always choose a primary key whose value will not change.
         A key icon appears next to the name of the primary key field.
         AutoNumber data type fields make good primary keys.

    · Foreign key - A table can also have one or more foreign
         keys. A foreign key contains values that correspond to values
         in the primary key of another table. For example, you might
         have an Orders table in which each order has a customer ID
         number that corresponds to a record in a Customers table.
         The customer ID field is a foreign key of the Orders table.

                                                      Access Chap 1 P a g e | 161
Table Relationships

Access is a relational database management system. In a relational
database, users divide information into separate, subject-based
tables. Keeping data separated in related tables produces the
following benefits:

    · Consistency - Because each item of data is recorded only
         once, in one table, there is less opportunity for ambiguity or
         inconsistency. For example, storing a customer's name only
         once in a table about customers versus storing it repeatedly
         (and potentially inconsistently) in a table that contains order
         data.

    · Efficiency - Recording data in only one place results in less
         disk space used. Additionally, smaller tables tend to provide
         data more quickly than larger tables. Finally, not using
         separate tables for separate subjects will introduce null
         values (the absence of data) and redundancy into the tables,
         both of which can waste space and impede performance

    · Comprehensibility - The design of a database is easier to
         understand if the subjects are properly separated into tables.

In relational database terms, a relationship is a situation where
multiple tables can contain related data that is linked by a common
field. A relationship consists of a parent table and a child table. The
child table references the parent table by having a field that matches
a field in the parent table. The child's field is the foreign key,
whereas the parent's field is the primary key. In a relationship, any
data entered into the child's foreign key field must match a value
from the parent's primary key field. By ensuring that the foreign
key's data matches data in the primary key, Access ensures that all
records in the child table will have an associated record in the parent
table. There are three types of relationships:

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 162
    · One-to-One - A row in table A can have only one matching
         row in table B, and vice versa. i.e. A baseball player can
         have only one Jersey Number.

    · One-to-Many - A row in table A can have many matching
         rows in table B, but a row in table B can have only one
         matching row in table A. i.e. A baseball player can have
         many games played.

    · Many-to-Many - A row in table A can have many matching
         rows in table B, and vice versa. This is achieved using a third
         table (commonly called a junction table) that contains
         lookup data for both tables. Multiple players can play
         multiple games.

Determining the relationships between tables helps ensure that the
right tables and columns exist. When a one-to-one or one-to-many
relationship exists, the tables involved need to share a common
column or columns. When a many-to-many relationship exists, a
third table is needed to represent the relationship.

Entering and Editing Records

Entering records directly into Datasheet View is probably the most
intuitive way to enter data into a database. In Access, this is common
because many Access databases are considered single-user
databases. With multi-users databases, data integrity policies would
discourage most users from having editing rights directly to the
tables. Therefore, in these databases, the more common method for
entering and editing records in a database would be via a form.
Nonetheless, entering records directly into Datasheet View has
some advantages, including:

    · Users can look at their data in columns and rows in a
         datasheet without using any special formatting.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 163
    · When a user opens a table in Datasheet View it resembles a
         Microsoft Excel worksheet, and the user can paste or add
         data in one or multiple fields. Data can be copy and pasted
         from a Word table or Excel worksheet into Access.

    · Printing a table's datasheet in Portrait or Landscape
         orientation. Use Print Preview to change the orientation and
         margins before printing. Output can also be sent to a PDF
         file.

    · Users don't need to explicitly save their data. Access
         commits user's changes in the table when they move their
         cursor in the same row towards a new field, or if they move
         their cursor towards another row.

    · Sorting and filtering data is very similar to Microsoft Excel.

Access allows users to sort data in Datasheet View one iteration at
a time in either Ascending or Descending order. Ascending order is
also referred to as alphabetical order when the sort is based on a text
field, chronological order when the field is a date/time data type
or numerical order when the data type of the field is Number.
Sorting a datasheet does not affect the order that the records are
displayed in a form.

Displaying records based on specified criteria is called filtering.
When a filter is applied, records that do not meet the specified
criteria are hidden from view until the filter is removed. To filter
records based on the data in a field, click in the field to base the filter

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 164
on and then click on the Filter button on the ribbon or click the drop-
down triangle to display a menu similar to the graphic below.

To remove a filter, clear the check boxes, and click OK or click the
Filter button again or click the Advanced button on the ribbon
and choose Clear All Filters.
Most databases contain hundreds, if not thousands, of records.
Therefore, when a table becomes so large that the records and data
do not fit in the datasheet window without scrolling, the Find feature
becomes very practical.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 165
In Datasheet view, use the Find command, from the Home tab, to
quickly locate specific records using all or part of a field value
entered in the Find What: field. If in the States table above, if the
user entered the value North in the Find What field, Access would
find two records for North Carolina and North Dakota, but only if
the Match: value was changed from Whole Field to Any Part of
Field or Start of Field. Using wildcard characters can be extremely
helpful if the user does not know the exact spelling of the value they
are looking for. A wildcard character can replace a single character
or multiple characters, which can be both text and numbers. Clicking
the Replace tab will allow the user to replace the data in the Find
What: field with the data entered in the Replace With: field. This
could be very useful when updating name changes, such as when
Kentucky Fried Chicken changed their name to KFC in 1991.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 166
Creating Forms

A form is a database object that offers an alternative interface to a
table beyond the Datasheet view of the table. Forms can improve
data entry proficiency by rearranging the order and tab sequence of
fields within a table. Forms can also be designed to hide certain
fields from appearing. For example, a credit limit or credit card
number field might only be accessible from the table Datasheet view
to limit the access to sensitive data from users who do not have rights
to view or edit tables. In Access, users have the option of creating a
blank form from scratch, using the Form Wizard, or having Access
automatically create a form from a table or query.
A basic form can be easily created by using the Form tool. Simply
select the table (or query) in the Navigation Pane that the form
should be based off, and then click Create > Form (from the Forms
group). all the fields from the underlying data source are placed on
the form. If Access finds a single table that has a one-to-many
relationship with the table or query that you used to create the form,
Access adds a datasheet to the form that is based on the related table
or query.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 167
A split form can be created by clicking More Forms from Create tab,
and then choosing Split Form. A split form displays two views of
the data simultaneously -- a Form view and a Datasheet view.
Working with split forms provides the benefits of both kinds of
forms in a single form. For example, a user can use the datasheet
portion of the form to quickly locate a record, and then use the form
portion to view or edit the record.

Split Form

To be more selective about what fields appear on your form, use the
Form Wizard. This multi-step process allows the user to define how
the data is grouped and sorted, and in some instances, fields from
multiple tables/queries can be added to the same form. Once a form
is created, use the different views to modify the forms design or
populate the forms with data. Forms have three views:

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 168
· Form view - shows the data in the form. This is the view to
    use to enter or change data. Record controls at the bottom of
    the form are used to display specific records and add a new
    record (the right arrow with the yellow star). The form's
    design properties cannot be changed in this view.

Form View

           Access Chap 1 P a g e | 169
· Layout view - shows the form and the data in a visual
    layout. This is the view that opens when a form is initially
    created. Some of the form design properties, such as field
    fonts and column widths, can be changed in this view.
    However, the data cannot be changed in this view. Notice
    the Form Layout Tools contextual tabs!

Layout View

             Access Chap 1 P a g e | 170
· Design view - shows the form design, but not the data. Any
    aspect of the form's design can be changed in this view, but
    the data cannot be changed. The Design, Arrange and
    Format contextual tabs appear for this view too.
    The Design tab allows the user to modify the color, fonts or
    theme of the form. A logo, title and/or date/time field can
    also be added to the form. Form controls (buttons, text
    boxes, combo boxes, etc) can also be added.
    The Arrange tab is used for modifying the order and position
    of the fields on the form. The Format tab allows the user to
    modify the style of the form including the fonts and a
    background image can be added.

Design View

             Access Chap 1 P a g e | 171
A user can switch between views as often as desired while
customizing the form. Switching views can be done by using the
View button on the Ribbon, or the three icons at the bottom right of
the Access window.
NOTE: If a field in a table has been modified after the form is
created, the existing form does not automatically update. The form
can be modified, but sometimes it is easier to delete the existing
form and recreate it based off the new table settings.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 172
Practice 9 - Auto Sales - Part 1

1. Open the data file AutoSalesData.accdb.
2. In the Customers table, apply an input mask to the Phone

     field. (Hint: The Salespersons table has an input mask on its
     Phone field.)
3. In the Sales table add a Validation Rule to the SalesPrice field
     to ensure no auto is sold for less than $500. Add Validation
     Text that instructs the data entry person to add a valid price if
     less than $500 is entered for a record.
     (Hint: validation rules should use comparison operators). Say
     Yes to Data Integrity rules alert messages.
4. Add the following two records to the Customers table.
     (Accept the default CustomerIDs)
     Arnold; Hammer; 218-555-8811; 212 Elm Street; Aurora;
     MN; 59990
     Susan; Wong; 218-555-0182; 212 Fir Street; Aurora; MN;
     59990

5. Add the following two records to the Salespersons table.
     MT001; Ming; Tran; 218-555-4470; 5.00%
     SS001; Sandy; Swensen; 218-555-7788; 4.50%

6. Add the following two records to the Autos table.
     N331155007; Honda; Pilot; 2017; White; 13600; $31,499
     N991155007; Toyota; Camry; 2016; Red; 26500; $21,499

7. Add the following two records to the Sales table. (Accept the
     default InvoiceNums)
     Arnold; N331155007; Ming; 9/1/2018; $29,500
     Susan; N991155007; Sandy; 10/1/2018; $18,000

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 173
8. In the Autos table, make the Serial Number field the primary
    key field by clicking the Primary Key icon on the Design
    ribbon. Say Yes to save the table.

9. Create a form based off the Autos table named Autos_F.
10. Add a new field to the Autos table named Certified. The Data

     Type s/b Yes/No. Close and Save and verify the new field
     appears in the Datasheet view, but not in the recently created
     form.
11. Delete the existing form, and then re-create a new form based
     off the new Autos table. Verify that the new form now
     includes the Certified field.
12. Close all open objects and then close the database. Notice that
     the database is always saving edits. If you want to save the
     database with a new name, use the File > Save As > Save
     Database As command. The Save As button appears at the
     bottom of the window.

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                                     Access Chap 1 P a g e | 174
  Access Chapter 2: Retrieving
  Information from a Database

· Query Basics
· Types of Queries
· Sorting Queries
· Access Reports

       This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

                                                Access Chap 2 P a g e | 175
Query Basics

Queries are far more powerful than the simple searches or filters that
might be used to find data within a table. This is because queries can
draw their information from multiple tables. The real power of a
relational database, like Access, lies in its ability to quickly and
easily retrieve and analyze data by running a query. Access queries
allow users to pull information from one or more tables based on a
set of search conditions the user defines. A common synonym for
the word query is: question or inquiry. Queries essentially ask
questions of databases. Queries do not store data. Therefore, a major
benefit of queries is the ability to save a query to be re-ran at a later
time after table data has been updated. This eliminates the need
spend time recreating all the fields and criteria desired to answer a
popular question, such as a customer calling frequently to check on
their latest account balance.

Queries can be something simple, like list all names in a table, or
something a little more complex, like list all products that are priced
over certain amount. A query can be very simple or very complex,
depending on the user's requirements. As tables grow in size they
can have hundreds of thousands of records, which makes it
impossible for the user to pick out specific records from that table
without a query. The tricky part about queries is that one must
understand how to construct one before one can actually use them.

When a query is run, the results are presented in a table, but when a
query is designed, a different view is used. This is called Query
Design View, and it lets users see how the query is put together.
While the Simply Query Design Wizard can be used to display fields

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 176
from one or more tables or queries with the option to choose a
detailed or summary report, the wizard is limited by its inability to
select data criteria. This is why most Access queries are created in
Query Design View, as this allows for far more complexity to be
added to create complex simple to complex queries.
After clicking the Query Design button on the Create tab, the Query
Design View opens and by default the Show Table dialog window
appears with a list of available tables and queries that can be added
to build the query. Select one or more tables that contain the data
desired to produce the answers to the potential questions. However,
only add tables that contain fields that you intend to add to the query
design. Tables added to the query design that do not have fields in
the query grid can skew the query results. The exception to this rule
is if the table is needed to join two or more other tables that are part
of the query design. After the Show Table window is closed, it can
be re-opened by clicking the Show Table button in the Design
contextual tab.

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 177
The next step to creating a query is to add the fields from the
tables/queries into the query design grid (at the bottom of the
window). Fields can be added by double-clicking the fields from the
tables in the Object Relationship pane. A user can also drag a field
from the table to the grid. A field can also be selected from the Field
drop-down list in each column of the query design grid. If the fields
are added in the wrong order, the column can be deleted or moved
by clicking the top of the column and dragging the field to the
appropriate location.

Types of Queries

Numerous queries from simple to complex can be created. A few
of the more popular queries include:

    · Single-Table Select query
    · Multiple-Table Select query
    · Range query
    · Complex query
    · Totals query
    · Action query
    · Parameter query
    · Crosstab query

The simplest query is a Single-Table select query. A single-table
query is based on only one table. It is essentially the same as an
advanced filter applied to a table. To create a query in Design View
follow these steps:

    1. Add the data source(s). This can include table(s) and/or
         queries from the Show Table dialog window. For a single-
         table query, only one table will be selected.

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 178
  2. Join related data sources: Access does not automatically
      create joins between queries and tables that are not related.
      If Access does not create joins when data sources are added,
      joins should be created manually. Data sources that are not
      joined to any other data source can cause problems with the
      query results. To add a join, drag a field from one data source
      to a corresponding field on another data source. Access
      displays a line between the two fields to show that a join has
      been created. Note: the graphic below is NOT an example of
      a Single-Table query. A Single-Table query would only have
      one table, so a join would not be applicable.

                                                                              Query By Example Grid

Query Design View

  3. Add output fields - Double-click or add a field from a data
      source in the upper pane of the query design window down
      to the Field row of the QBE grid, in the bottom pane of the
      query design window. To quickly add all fields down to the
      Field row of the query-by-example (QBE) grid, double-
      click the table or query name from the upper pane to
      highlight all the fields in that source and then drag them all
      down to the QBE grid at the same time. Alternatively,
      double-click the asterisk in the table.

  4. Specify criteria - (Optional) Use the Criteria: and/or Or:
      rows in the grid to limit the records that the query returns

                                                   Access Chap 2 P a g e | 179
         based on whether data from the fields meet the specific
         criteria. Non-Select queries utilize this row extensively.
    5. Execute (Run) the query - To see the results of the query,
         click the Run button on the Query Tools Design tab. Access
         will display the query results in Datasheet view. To make
         additional changes to the query, click the View button to
         return the Query Design View to make necessary edits
         before re-running the query. If the query is complete, click
         the Save command in the Quick Access toolbar. When
         prompted to name it, type a descriptive name and click OK.
         The new query should now appear in the Navigation Pane in
         the Queries object group.

As previously stated, a relational database must have multiple
tables. Therefore, Multiple-Table Select queries are far more
common than Single-Table queries. The key to these queries is
adding tables or queries that are related through joins via a common
field. This may require a little planning before composing at the
computer. Determine what information is needed for output, and
then pinpoint which tables contain the fields needed to produce the
information. Further analysis may reveal that criteria might be
needed to streamline the results. The query in the previous graphic
uses fields from four related tables.

A select query with criteria that matches a range of values is called
a range query. This type of query relies on relational operators to
restrict the query results. When a range query compares text,
alphabetical order is used to determine which data matches the
criteria. For example, to return all used vehicles less than $10,000
from a database of used vehicles, the criteria would be < 10000.
Note the lack of a dollar symbol or comma delimiter? Adding a $ in
front a number would change the datatype from a Number to a Text
data type. Another example using the States table that tries to return
results that do not include North Dakota results would use a criterion

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 180
such as <> "ND". Using the quotation marks indicates that the
criteria is of the Text data type.

A complex query is any query that uses criteria in multiple fields.
Criteria can include relational operators as well as logical operators.
If multiple criteria exist in the same row, the And operator is
implied. The Or operator can be used in the Criteria row or using the
Or: row below the Criteria: row. Complex queries often utilize

Complex Query

wildcard characters to add additional complexity. Complex queries
sometimes include the same field twice to accommodate additional
criteria. In these situations, the Show checkbox is often cleared to
prevent the field from displaying twice in the query results. The
graphic above illustrates a query that includes AND as well as OR

                                                      Access Chap 2 P a g e | 181
criteria, and wildcard characters too! The results should produce a
list of music CDs that include any Classic Rock CDs and any
Country CDs from Artists that include the name "Brooks" in any
combination. This would include any Garth Brooks CDs as well as
any Brooks and Dunn CDs.
There are times when setting simple criteria won't generate the
desired results, especially when working with numerical values. The
objective may be to see the query results grouped or counted in some
way. A Totals query uses a type of function called an aggregate
function to sum the data in a query result set. Aggregate functions
perform a calculation on a column of data and return a single value.
Access provides a variety of aggregate functions,
including Sum, Count, Avg, Min and Max.
To sum data, add the Sum function to the query, to count data use
the Count function, and so on. The following example will illustrate
how many of various bakery menu items have been ordered. The

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 182
query datasheet results below display the quantity of various cakes
ordered on separate order transactions.
Creating a Total query will group all identical menu items from
separate orders, and then by using the Sum function, Access will add
values in the Quantity field to calculate the total number
ordered for each menu item. To create the Total query, the first
step is to click the Totals button from the Show/Hide group

of the Query Tools Design tab. This will add a Total: row to the
query design grid. The default values in the row are set to Group By.
Clicking the drop-down arrow in the Quantity column of the Total:
row, and selecting Sum will accumulate (add) the quantities of
products ordered. Executing the query by clicking the Run button
will display the results in the query's datasheet view as shown

below. Note the Quantity field name changes to SumOfQuantity.
In Access, queries can do a lot more than just displaying data.
Through the use of assorted Action queries, Access can perform
various actions on the database data. Microsoft Access provides
four different types of Action Queries:

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 183
· Append -  Retrieves data from one or more tables and

adds the data to another table.

· Update - modifies or updates records. Criteria can be
    specified to limit which records are updated, but if no criteria
    is specified, all records will be updated.

· Delete - useful for quickly deleting a set of data on a
    regular basis.

    · Make-table - retrieves data from one or more tables,
         and then loads the result set into a new table. That new table
         can reside in the database currently open, or a new database
         can be created.

Action queries change data based on some set of criteria. Action
queries can delete records, update data, append data from one or
more tables to another table, and make a new table. Users must be
cautious because once the query is executed, the data is changed and
cannot be undone. Experts advise to make a backup of the database
before proceeding with significant action queries.

A parameter query retrieves information in an interactive manner
by prompting the end user to supply criteria before the query is run.
If a particular query is used often but modified slightly, a parameter
query may be more efficient. When the query is run, the user is first
prompted to enter a parameter (or multiple parameters). Once the
parameter has been supplied, the query can return the results, based
on the parameter provided. The key to creating parameter criteria is
to enter the parameter prompt inside square brackets, such as:
[What's your favorite color?]. The square brackets will cause a
parameter dialog box to open when the user runs the query. The text
inside the square brackets will be displayed to the user, and an input

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 184
field will be displayed for their input. If the user enters purple in the
prompt, all records in table that store the data: purple will be

returned as the query results.
In the example above, parameter criteria are entered in the Genre
field's Criteria cell. When the query is executed, Access will display
the following prompt: If the user were to enter the data: Pop in the
prompt, the following results would be displayed the query
datasheet view. (The data entered into the prompt is not case-
sensitive)
A crosstab query is a special type of query that calculates a sum,
average, or other aggregate function, and then groups the results by

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 185
two sets of values -- one down the left side (row headings) of the
datasheet and the other across the top (column headings)- much like
an Excel spreadsheet. When building a crosstab query in Design
view, use the Total and Crosstab rows in the design grid to specify
which field's values will become column headings, which fields'
values will become row headings, and which field's values to sum,
average, count, or otherwise calculate.
In the above example, the Music database will calculate a Count on
the number of CDs are possessed by Artist - using the Row
Headings and by Genre - using the Column Headings. The Title
field will serve as Value field. The data source is an existing query
named Classic Rock CDs, which provides the fields necessary to
create the crosstab query. After executing the query, the datasheet
results appear similar to:

A crosstab query does not always populate all the fields in the result
set because the tables used in the query do not always contain values
for every possible data point. It is possible to enter an expression in
the Criteria row to limit the results for the column heading field.
However, using a criteria expression with the column heading field
does not limit the number of columns returned by the crosstab query.
Instead, it limits which columns contain data. For example, suppose

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 186
you have a column heading field that has three possible values: red,
yellow, and blue. If you apply the criterion ='blue' to the column
heading field, the crosstab still displays a column for red and a
column for yellow, but only the column for blue contains data.

Sorting Queries

Sorting in Access is the process of rearranging records in a specific
order. Sorting data can create a significant
impact on the usability of Access queries and
reports. Sorting can occur before or after
executing a query. In the datasheet view, a
query can be sorted after running the query by
using the Sort Ascending and Sort Descending
buttons in the Sort & Filter group of the Home tab. To create more

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 187
complex sorting criteria, use the Query Design window to create
multi-field sorts.

Multi-field sorting requires the use of primary, secondary and
potentially, tertiary sorting fields. Using Access' Query Design
View, fields can be arranged in any order in the QBE grid to
accommodate the desired order. It is important to comply with the
sorting rules inherent with the various data types of each field (see
table above). If you sort by multiple fields in Access, the order of
the sorting is applied by field, from left to right, when viewing the
result set. When sorting this way, you include the sorting criteria in
the query's SQL code. This then sorts the query result set the same
way each time you run the query. However, this can be manipulated
by adding duplicate fields to the grid, specifically for sorting

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 188
purposes. The key to this strategy is to utilize the Show checkbox
for these sort-only fields. Clearing the Show checkbox will prevent
these fields from displaying the Datasheet results, but their sorting
mission will still be accomplished! Using Query Design also affords
the ability to sort one field in Ascending order and another in
Descending order in the same sort process.

In the example below, the goal is to sort the records primarily by
Last Name. However, some records might share the same Last
Name. Therefore, if there are duplicates, the First Name field will
serve as the secondary sort criteria. Furthermore, it is desired that
the results set display the records with the First Name field to the
left of the Last Name field. This necessitates the use of a duplicate
First Name field that will only be used for sorting purposes. Also
notice that the Show checkbox is cleared for this duplicate field, so
as not to confuse the layout of the results set. Hiding a field, by
clearing the Show checkbox. can also be used for applying Criteria
restrictions on a field that is not desired to be displayed in the results
set but is needed to narrow the results. This is popular with the
sensitive data, like Salary or Credit Limits.

Access Reports

Utilizing Access to analyze data results in lots of information. This
Information needs to be shared - often will people who do not, or
should not, have rights to utilize the Access database.
Access reports organize and present data in a reader-friendly,
visually appealing format by using data from any queries or tables

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 189
in the database. The tables or queries that provide the underlying
data are also known as the report's record source. A report is a
database object that comes in handy when you want to present the
information in your database for any of the following uses:

    · Display or distribute a summary of data.
    · Archive historical information.
    · Provide details about individual records.
    · Create labels.

There are four different report views in Access. Two are essentially
print views and the other two are report building views. As with all
other Access objects, you can toggle the view using the buttons at
the bottom right of the screen, or by using the View button on the
Ribbon. The four views include:

    · Report view - shows how a report would appear with
         dummy data using a continuous page layout.

    · Print Preview - allows users to see what the report will look
         like when printed. This view can be used to change the page
         layout, including the report orientation.

    · Layout view - allows users to edit the report design while it
         contains live data. Considered the most intuitive view to use
         for report modification, this view can be used for nearly all
         potential changes to a report in Access.

    · Design view - allows users to view and change any aspect
         of the report structure, but not the data. This view displays
         any expressions that are used to generate content and
         displays the header and footer bands for the report, page, and
         groups. This is the preferred view for adding controls to the
         report, such as labels, images, lines and rectangles.

The design of a report is divided into sections that can be modified
in the Design view. Reports created by using the Report button are
plain and simple, and have several sections, as detailed in the table

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 190
to the right. More complex reports created using the Report Wizard
can also have multiple group header and group footer sections to
print grouping details and summary information.

Reports can be designed and formatted in a similar way to forms.
When you create a report, four new tabs appear in the Report Layout
Tools section of the Ribbon specifically for working with reports.

                                                      Access Chap 2 P a g e | 191
    · Design: Group and sort elements in the report, add text and
         links, insert page numbers, and modify the sheet's
         properties.

    · Arrange: Adjust the table to be stacked, tabular, etc.; move
         rows and columns up an down or left and right; merge and
         split columns and rows; control the margins and bring
         elements to the "front" or "back" in a layering format.

    · Format: Includes regular word processor formatting tools
         like bold, italic, underline, text and background color,
         number and date formatting, conditional formatting, etc.

    · Page Setup: Allows adjusting of the page's overall size and
         toggling between landscape and portrait.

Another popular approach to creating reports is to use the Access
Report Wizard. The Report Wizard provides more flexibility than
by simply using the Report button. The Report Wizard guides users
through a series of questions and then generates a report based on
these answers. Users can choose the tables and fields, group the data,
sort the data, summarize the data, choose a layout and orientation,
apply a style, and title the report. Grouping data puts all the values
in a field into a group based on the field's value. By using the Report
Wizard, users can create up to four sort levels. If the data has been
grouped, the option exists to summarize the data by displaying the
sum, average, and minimum or maximum value for each numeric
field. Choose to have the report display just the summary data or
each detail line and the summary data. Note: Users can also add
grouping, sorting, or totals by using the Group, Sort, and Total pane
while the report is open in Layout view or Design view.

To print a report, right-click the report in the Navigation Pane and
choose Print Preview from the shortcut menu. Print Preview
command options include:

    · Print the report
    · Adjust page size, margins or orientation
    · Zoom in or out, or view multiple pages at a time

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 192
     · Refresh the data on the report
     · Export the report to another file format.
To save paper, or to send a print job to a professional printer, or send
the report via e-mail, you can create a .pdf or xps format of your
report: On the Print Preview tab, in the Data group, click PDF or
XPS. Reports can be saved as an object in the Navigation Pane, and
at later date, updated and re-printed. Unlike Access queries, the page
settings are maintained in Access reports when saved.

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA

                                                      Access Chap 2 P a g e | 193
Practice 10 - Auto Sales - Part 2

13. Open the data file AutoSalesDataChap2.accdb.
14. Add the following records to the Sales table. (Accept the

     default InvoiceNum)
     Ahmed; N840084247; Sandy; 10/1/2018; $450 (You should
     receive an error message that the minimum price must be
     $500). Change the price to $950.
15. While many employees at the auto
     dealership cannot add or delete new
     records, most can run queries to
     "read" the data. You decide to create a
     simple query (via Query Design) of
     the Customers table that displays all
     details. (Hint: double-click the
     asterisk (*) in the Customers table.)
     Run the query, close and save the
     query as All Customers.
16. Create a select query that displays
     First Name, Last Name, Phone, and
     City of only the customers from Aurora. Save the query as
     Aurora Customers.
17. Create a complex query that displays all autos that are Hondas
     sorted by most expensive to least expensive. Display the
     Make, Model, Year, Color and Price. Save and name the
     query Honda Autos.
18. Edit the Honda Autos query to sort by Year (newest models to
     oldest) and if there are duplicate Year models, sort by Price as
     the secondary sort.
19. Create a new query similar to the Honda Autos query. Modify
     the new query to restrict the results to display all autos with a
     price of at least $10,000, sorted by Make and secondarily by

                                                     Access Chap 2 P a g e | 194
     most expensive to least expensive. (You should get 22 results)
     Save and name the query as $10K Autos.
20. Create a parameter query named Which Color?, that displays
     the Make, Model, Year, Mileage and Price of all autos. The
     query should prompt the user for the color, but the color
     should not display in the results. Run the query and enter
     Black as the color. (You should get 6 results)
21. Close all objects and save the database.

Access Index           Indexed, 185
                       information, 172
Action Queries, 208    Input Mask, 184
Caption, 183           Layout view, 195
complex query, 206     Multiple-Table Select queries,
crosstab query, 211
Data, 172                 205
data type, 179         Navigation Pane, 174
database, 172          numeric field formats, 182
Datasheet view, 175    parameter query, 209
date/time fields, 182  Primary key, 186
Decimal Places, 183    query, 175, 201
Default Value, 183     query design grid, 204
Design view, 175, 196  Query Design View, 201
field, 174             range query, 205
Field Properties, 181  record, 174
field size, 181        record source, 214
filtering, 189         Redundancy, 176
Foreign key, 186       relationship, 187
form, 175              report, 175
Form view, 194         Report Wizard, 217
group footer, 215      reports, 214
group header, 215
                           Access Chap 2 P a g e | 195
Required, 185                   Totals query, 207
schema, 176                     Transactional databases, 173
Single-Table select query, 203  Validation Rule, 185
sort, 189                       Validation Text, 185
Sorting, 212                    wildcard, 191
table, 174

LICENSE

Business Computers
365 by Marcus Lacher is
licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0
International License,
except where otherwise
noted.

                                Access Chap 2 P a g e | 196
 Microsoft PowerPoint Chapter 1:
        Creating Presentations

· Planning a presentation
· Adding and deleting slides
· Adding slide text versus slide notes
· Creating bulleted and numbered lists
· Comparing presentation views
· Utilizing tables and charts
· Inserting and modifying graphics
· Creating a photo album
· Inserting and modifying shapes
· Utilizing WordArt
· Inserting SmartArt
· Inserting slide and handout footers
· Apply design themes
· Formatting the slide background
· Replacing text and fonts
· Printing a presentation

                                          PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 197
Planning a Presentation

Microsoft PowerPoint is a presentation software program used to
organize and present information to others. PowerPoint is a popular
presentation aid that utilizes visual and stimulating elements to
accompany a presenter's communication through slides and
multimedia tools. Planning a presentation necessitates defining the
purpose of the presentation, identifying the target audience for the
presentation, and deciding the type of output for the information.

The purpose of the presentation can generally be categorized into
either of two general areas. The most common purpose for a
presentation is to inform an audience by providing facts and figures.
Informational presentations often include slides with tables, charts,
graphics and text. Classroom lectures that utilize PowerPoint are
typically information-type presentations. A secondary purpose of
presentations is to persuade or sell the audience on an idea. Sales
and political speeches fall into this category of persuasive
presentations. Style is almost as significant as content for persuasive
presentations. Therefore, design themes are important
considerations for this type of presentation.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 198
Another important consideration when planning a presentation is to
determine the audience, including the venue in which the
presentation will occur. The characteristics of the audience will help
distinguish the type of vocabulary, font size, and design themes that
would be appropriate. An audience of colleagues will allow more
flexibility versus a group of customers, in terms of language and
content. Understanding who the audience is, and why they are there
can really influence the design and content of a presentation. The
venue also influences the design of a presentation. A large room will
require larger fonts and louder audio for the presentation to be
understood by the audience. Conversely, a smaller room make
necessitate a softer design. The presenter should also take time to
ensure that the venue has ample and compatible audio-visual
equipment (projector, cables, screen, speakers, etc.) to successfully
run the presentation.
Get to know the elements of the Microsoft PowerPoint window!
Note the similarities to Word and Excel!

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 199
· The Quick Access toolbar contains one-click buttons for
    saving, undoing, redoing, and print previewing a
    presentation. You can easily modify this toolbar to add your
    most frequently used commands. Just click the down-arrow
    on the right edge to customize this toolbar!

· The title bar displays the name of current presentation, and
    the program. A new presentation will default with a
    temporary file name, such as Presentation1 until you save
    the file with a different name. The Minimize, Maximize and
    Exit buttons appear on the right edge of the title bar.

· The Tell Me tool is a new way to get assistance with specific
    tasks in PowerPoint. When the user starts typing,
    PowerPoint suggests commands that are related to your
    keyword(s). The tool is context sensitive and integrated into
    your current presentation versus opening a separate window.
    Therefore, if you type insert picture into the field, and click
    the resulting command, PowerPoint will open the Insert
    Picture dialog window without explaining the navigation
    instructions.

· The Ribbon interface is a set of toolbars at the top of the
    window in Office programs designed to help you quickly
    find the commands that you need to complete a task. The
    ribbon displays a combination of icons and tabs.
    Commands are grouped under multiple tabs. Some
    commands are so extensive that they need additional
    windows to display their entire functionality. The dialog box
    launcher icon will open these windows. Contextual tabs will
    appear only when the user needs them, such as when a
    picture is selected, or a table is inserted.

                                          PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 200
Adding and Deleting Slides

New slides can easily be added to a presentation by clicking the
bottom half of the New Slide button in the Slides group of the
Home tab. If the top half of the New Slide button is clicked, the
default slide layout (Title and Content) will be inserted into the
presentation. By clicking the bottom half of the button, a gallery of
several different slide layouts will appear.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 201
The type of content the user intends to add will dictate which slide
layout is selected. Most slide layouts include one or more
placeholder to guide the user where to add content. Placeholders
can contain different types of content, including text, graphics,
tables, charts, and videos. Placeholders can be resized, reformatted
or deleted. The most common slide layout (Title and Content) has
two placeholders. The user simply needs to place the cursor inside
the placeholder and begin typing to add text or click an icon to add
an object. PowerPoint automatically sizes the text as it is typed to fit
within the placeholder.

The AutoFit icon is displayed next to a placeholder when more
text than can fit is typed.
The alignment, font, size, and other formats can be applied to the
selected text in a placeholder by using the Mini toolbar or the Home
tab. A layout can be changed by clicking the Layout button to the
right of the New Slide button and choose a different layout. To
delete a slide, right-click the slide in the thumbnail pane, and choose
Delete Slide from the shortcut menu.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 202
Adding Slide Text vs Slide Notes

While text can be added to slides via placeholders in various slide
layouts, text can be added directly to the Notes pane to create
speaker notes for the presenter of the slide show. Maintaining a
minimal number of slides requires that each slide only contain

summary text, not details. The details need to be added orally
through the presentation speaker. The data in the Notes pane does
not appear in Slide Show view. The Notes pane can be opened or
closed by clicking the Notes button on the status bar.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 203
Creating Bulleted and
Numbered Lists

The Title and Content slide layout is both the default and the
overwhelming most popular slide layout for most slides in a
presentation. This is the root cause of why so many PowerPoint
presentations bore their audiences with mundane amounts of text.
The worst offense is when users simply write sentence upon
sentence of text, which often gets read to the audience by the
presenter. This is a known symptom of the notorious, "Death by
PowerPoint" condition. A better approach is to create presentations
which utilize bulleted and numbered lists to help organize text or
show sequential processes. Too many slides of the same format can

             This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 204
exhaust the audience, so use lists in moderation. However, when
used with animation (discussed in the next chapter), lists can really
help manage the flow of information by synchronizing the visual
elements of the slide show with the verbal accompaniment of the
speaker.
As defined in the Word chapters, bulleted lists differentiate from
numbered lists in that numbered lists demonstrate sequencing,
whereas bulleted lists simply imply that each item is part of a non-
ordered group. Bullets and numbers can be formatted using custom
symbols and number formats to synchronize with the presentation
design. Bullets and numbers can also be indented to create sub lists.
The Paragraph group contains the commands to increase and
decrease the indentation of bullets and numbers.

A slide with bullets and a numbered list

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 205
Comparing Presentation Views

PowerPoint can display its slides in several different presentation
views, which can be accessed from the View tab, the Status bar, or
the Slide Show tab. Each view has its own unique purpose as
described in the table below.

Presentation Views

                    PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 206
PowerPoint offers a variety of views to display content depending
on the situation. Some views help create a presentation, while others
help deliver a presentation. Choose wisely!

Utilizing Tables and Charts

The organization of a PowerPoint presentation necessitates that the
presentation be concise and meaningful. Tables and charts represent
an opportunity to present a lot of data in an organized, structured
graphic. Tables can be created and inserted into a slide in a similar
process as Word tables. Tables can be inserted from the Insert tab,
or by clicking the Table icon from a Content layout
placeholder. Two contextual tabs are available for formatting the
table, similar to Word. Adding table styles that match the theme of
the presentation is desirable. Creating tables through this process is
ideal for tables full of text, such as the table in the illustration below.
Tables can also be created in Word, and then copy and pasted into
PowerPoint. Either way, tables are a great way to consolidate a lot
of information into a single slide.

If the table contains a lot of numerical data, it might make more
sense to create the table in Excel and paste it into PowerPoint. Data

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 207
can be edited in PowerPoint using Excel formatting tools. Data can
even be linked so that when the Excel file is updated, the
PowerPoint slide is also updated. If the data is not linked, it is an
embedded object. Embedded objects become part of the
PowerPoint file and, after they are inserted, they are no longer part
of the source (Excel) file.

Charts are used to illustrate numerical data, which can help the
audience visualize patterns, relationships, or trends in data. The
decisions about linking or embedding a table are very similar to the
decisions regarding inserting charts. Charts can be created in
PowerPoint or Excel, but most are typically already created in Excel
and simply need to be pasted into PowerPoint. Then comes the
decision about embedding or linking the chart. When a chart is
selected on a slide, options on the Chart Tools Design and Format
contextual tabs can be used to modify the look of the chart.

Inserting and Modifying
Graphics

Graphics can be utilized to make a presentation more interesting and
informative. If the PowerPoint developer is trying to keep the length
of a presentation to ten or fewer slides, keep in mind that many
believe that a picture is worth a thousand words! Sometimes
graphics can be more informative than words and enhance a
presentation by evoking emotion in the audience. PowerPoint
graphics typically refer to pictures, and pictures can take the form of
digital photographs, clip art, or computer-generated imagery
(CGI). Digital photographs are realistic images captured with a
digital camera or scanned to a file by a scanner. Clip art images are
line-based drawings that are intentionally non-realistic. An example
of a computer-generated image is a logo, typically produced in a
software program such as Adobe Illustrator, or a 3-D graphic, such
as an avatar.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 208
                                                              This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed
                                                              under CC BY
                                                            An example of Computer-Generated Imagery (CGI)

Inserting graphics into PowerPoint is very similar to Word.
However, in addition to using the Images group options on the Insert
tab, users can also insert a graphic via an icon in a content
placeholder. Graphics can either be inserted from the user's own
device, or from online sources.

Each type of graphic has its pros and cons. Clip art can be popular
because their simplicity results in a compact file size, which can be
increased or decreased without distortion. Additionally, the
unrealistic nature of these images makes them appropriate for
representing sensitive topics that require anonymity. Digital photos
are very realistic, which inspire authentic reactions. However, these
images result in large files that can be difficult to transfer among
devices. Additionally, resizing a digital photo can create undesirable
pixilation.

Caution should be used to ensure that graphics are used
appropriately by only including images that are relevant to the
message being advanced. Graphics usage should also obey
applicable copyright laws, especially when downloading images
from Internet sources. According to the U.S. Copyright Office,

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 209
a copyright is a form of protection for "original works of
authorship", and is usually identified by the © symbol. Photos and
high-quality artwork that has been self-produced are not at odds to
copyright infringement, but images downloaded from online
sources should be credited, purchased or defined as royalty-free or
be accessed through a Creative Commons (CC) license. By
default, Microsoft's Bing Image search engine will only return
images licensed under Creative Commons when utilizing the Online
Pictures command in PowerPoint.

The robust photo-editing functionality within PowerPoint makes it
easy to manipulate the size, location, and look of inserted graphics.
After selecting the graphic, sizing handles will appear around the
graphic, and the Picture Tools contextual tab will appear to offer a
plethora of image formatting features.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 210
Some of the most commonly used picture formatting tools include:

                                                                    Sizing
                                                                    Handles

    1. Resizing and cropping. The easiest way to resize a graphic
         is to drag the sizing handles. The corner handles will
         increase or decrease the image's size proportionally,
         whereas the middle or top/bottom handles can distort the
                                                PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 211
    image's size. Specific height and width measurements can
    be defined in the Size group. Click the launcher to open the
    Format Picture pane. Clearing the Lock Aspect Ratio
    checkbox will allow the user to define specific sizes for the
    height or width without proportionally resizing the other
    dimension. Cropping an image result in a part of the image
    being removed. This is useful when an image has a lot of
    unwanted content that can distract from focusing on a certain
    aspect of an image. An image can even be cropped to fit into
    a specific shape. To reduce the file size of the presentation,
    use the Compress Pictures feature, in the Adjust group, to
    permanently delete the cropped portion of the image.
    Clicking Reset in the Format Picture pane or Reset Picture
    in the Adjust group will return the image to its original size.
2. Corrections and Color adjustments. If an inserted picture
    is too dark, the Corrections feature allows the user to edit the
    picture's brightness and contrast. The picture can be
    softened or sharpened as well to make the picture blurry or
    distinct. Color adjustments can also be applied to change the
    saturation (how vivid the colors are) and tone (the
    temperature - cool or warm) of a picture. Colored filters can
    also be overlaid to recolor a picture to fit the presentation's
    theme.

                                          PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 212
3. Picture styles. Applying a picture style or effect from the
    numerous preset gallery options can visually enhance the
    way a picture appears. Picture styles make the picture look
    more stylish by applying a combination of borders, 3-D
    rotations, shadow effects or frame shapes. After selecting the
    picture, hover the cursor over any of the gallery choices, and
    PowerPoint will display a live preview of the style applied
    to the image. Clicking a selection will apply the picture style
    settings.

4. Picture effects. Users can enhance a picture by adding
    effects, such as Shadows, Reflections, Glows, Soft Edges,
    Bevels or 3-D Rotations. To fine-tune the effect, click
    Options at the bottom of any effect menu. Multiple effects
    can be applied to the same picture, such as an outer shadow,
    an angle bevel and a contrasting right, perspective 3-D
    rotation.

                                          PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 213
Practice 11: The Continents

    1. Plan your presentation. Your goal is to create a slide show to
         accompany your presentation regarding the planet Earth.
         The content will include slides with text, a table and some
         photos of various continents. The design will be basic. The
         audience is your fellow classmates.

    2. Open the data file Continents.pptx from your data files.
    3. View the presentation in Slide Sorter view, and then revert

         back to Normal view.
    4. In the title slide, add your name to the subtitle placeholder.
    5. Insert a new Title and Content slide after the title slide (slide

         1). Add the title: Earth's Continents, and then add seven
         bullets to the Content placeholder with the text: North
         America, South America, Europe, Africa, Asia, Australia,
         Antarctica. Make the title font 54pt.
    6. In slide 3 (North America), add an online picture of North
         America to the content placeholder using the Online Pictures
         icon.
    7. In slide 4 (South America), change the size of the graphic to
         have a height of 4.5". Let PowerPoint adjust the width
         proportionately.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 214
    8. In slide 7 (Africa), apply a Brightness +20%, Contrast -20%
         correction adjustment.

    9. In slide 8 (Oceania/Australia), apply a Metal Oval picture
         style, and a Glow 18pt, blue picture effect, as well as a
         Perspective: Turned Left, Tilted Up 3-D Rotation picture
         effect.

    10. Add the following speaker note to the Oceania/Australia
         slide: Talk with an Aussie accent!

    11. Change the layout of the Oceania/Australia slide to a Title
         and Two Content layout. In the new content placeholder, add
         the following text bullets by referring to the illustration to
         the right:

    12. Save the presentation with the file name My Continents.pptx
         to your default local folder.

Creating a Photo Album

If your presentation's purpose is more slanted towards entertaining
versus educating, then a photo album is a popular feature that might
facilitate that entertainment. PowerPoint's photo album allows
users to load a bunch of digital photos into a single file, one photo
per slide, formatted consistently, with a variety of formatting
options. Photo album is a great tool for creating self-running
presentations that display photos from an event or a family memory
(graduation, wedding anniversary, funeral, etc.) PowerPoint creates
a new presentation file when a user chooses to create a photo album.

To start, take note of where the photos you want for the album are
located (preferably on a local device). Then go to the Insert tab and
click the Photo Album button. Once the Photo Album window
opens, the next step is to insert the pictures from your device by
clicking the File/Disk... button. The Insert New Pictures dialog
window will appear. The user should then navigate to where the
photo files reside on their device, then select multiple picture files
(remember to use the Ctrl button to select multiple non-consecutive

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 215
files) and choose Insert. The selected files will appear in the Pictures
in Album scrolling window in the Photo Album window. The order
of the slides can be rearranged in this window or in the main
PowerPoint window.

The more important decisions that should be determined before
clicking the Create button pertain to the Album Layout and Picture
Options. Notice how the Captions below ALL pictures option is
disabled? This is due to the Picture layout currently being set to the
Fit to Slide option. Choosing any other Picture layout will enable
this option. Captions are a great way to add accompanying text to
each slide in the album and provide explanation for the photos when
no presenter is present. If this feature is skipped and needs reversing,
choose the Insert tab, click the Photo Album drop down arrow, and
select Edit Photo Album. The picture layout, frame shape, theme
and picture options can all be redefined, and pictures can be added
or deleted as well. The Insert Text Box is an alternative way to add
manually add text to a separate slide versus the captions, which
defaults with the operating system's file name as the slide caption.
This data can be edited for each slide via the normal PowerPoint

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 216
view. Photo albums can become even more entertaining when
additional (yet to be explained) functionality is added. However,
these features, which demand a lot of creative attention, can become
very time-consuming! The Photo Album feature was designed to
work with the Windows operating system. Therefore, this feature is
not available for Mac users.

Inserting and Modifying Shapes

Many different types of shapes can be inserted into a PowerPoint
slide to help illustrate concepts and draw attention. Want to
emphasize a certain focal point on a slide? Draw an arrow and add
a custom format! The basic shapes are found in the Drawing group

of the Home tab, but more extensive selections exist from
the Shapes drop-down list from the Insert tab. Shape
categories include lines, geometric figures, arrows, stars,
callouts, and banners. Once a shape is selected from the
gallery, a crosshair pointer allows the user to draw the
shape on a slide. Shapes can be filled, stacked, aligned, grouped and
merged using advanced formatting.

Many aspects of each shape can be further modified, including its
line gradient, line color, fill color, weight, outline, shadow and other
3-D effects. Similar to other graphics, like clip art or a photo, a shape
can be resized, relocated and reset to complement the design of the
presentation. Text can be added to further annotate a shape and
explain a concept.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 217
Utilizing WordArt

Keeping the audience's attention requires using non-standard text in
order to maintain interest in the presentation. Strong visual elements
help hold the audience's attention. As discussed in the Word
chapters, WordArt is a feature that applies decorative text styles

and text effects to any text object in order to attract the audience's
attention. Features such as shadows, outlines, colors, glows, bevels,
gradients, and 3-D effects can convert ordinary text into something
extraordinary! The easiest way to utilize WordArt is to select an
existing text object, then from the Drawing Tools contextual Format

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 218
tab, click a predefined WordArt style from the gallery of choices.
Clicking the More drop-down arrow will expand the gallery. After
selecting a style, the text will appear in the selected style, and can
be further customized by choosing text fill, outline or effect options.
WordArt is a great replacement for title text. Notice the difference
between the two titles with normal text versus WordArt with text fill
color, and a transform 3-D text effect.

Inserting SmartArt

Like WordArt, SmartArt is a cross-application feature that adds
appeal, design and intrigue to an Office file. A SmartArt graphic is
a professional-quality diagram that visually illustrates text using a
variety of shapes. Like WordArt, a SmartArt graphic can be created

               from scratch or text can be converted with a few simple
               clicks. Converting a bulleted list to a SmartArt list is
               very easy! To create a SmartArt diagram from scratch,
               click the icon on the Insert tab. A gallery of graphics
               will appear.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 219
Users can choose from among many different layouts to effectively
communicate a complex concept. Categories range from process
and cycle diagrams to list and relationship graphics. Choosing the
appropriate graphic is key, because some of these diagrams are
complex, and therefore, can be more confusing than informative.
Other considerations when choosing to use a SmartArt graphic
include the amount of text that will be included with the shapes
versus the amount of legible space available on a slide. Too many
shapes can easily overcrowd a slide to the point that it is illegible.
Users can quickly and easily switch layouts, so try different layouts
(across types) until you find the one that best illustrates your
message.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 220
After selecting a SmartArt graphic, the diagram will replace the
content placeholder of the slide. New [Text] placeholders will
appear to allow the user to customize the diagram. Alternatively, a
Text pane should appear to the left of the graphic to ease the
insertion of text. If the pane does not automatically appear, click the
arrow control on the left size of the SmartArt graphic.

After adding text, and possibly photos, additional formatting is
available from the SmartArt Tools contextual Design and Format
tabs. The Change Colors and SmartArt Styles options offer radical
format changes. A SmartArt style is a preset combination of
numerous effects, such as line style, bevel, or 3-D, which can be
applied to a SmartArt graphic to create a unique and professional
design.

                                To create a SmartArt graphic from
                                existing text on a slide, place the cursor
                                inside the text, click the Convert button
                                from the SmartArt Tools Design tab, and
                                then choose the Convert to Text option.
                                This is a great way to liven up basic
                                bulleted lists to eye-popping
                                information!

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 221
Inserting Slide and Handout
Footers

Slide footers represent another way to further customize the look of
the presentation. Slide footers are typically displayed at the bottom
of the slide, depending on the presentation's theme. Several fields
are available to be added to each slide, including the date, a slide

           number or a customizable text field. A combination of
           these fields can be included or excluded. From the Insert
           tab, choose the Header & Footer option from the Text
           group to open the Header and Footer window.

Two options that often get overlooked are the Don't show on title
slide checkbox, and the Apply versus Apply to All buttons. The Don't
show on title slide option is usually selected to prevent the footer
from appearing on the title slide. To assign the footer options to the
current slide, choose the Apply button. Alternatively, the Apply to
All button assigns the footer options to all slides, except the title (if
the Don't show on title slide checkbox is marked).

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 222
Slide footers are different than handout footers. Both can exist in the
same presentation, but each has their own uses. While the slide
footers appear on screen during slide shows, the Notes and Handout
footer is designed for hard copy printouts.

Similar fields are available as the Slide Footer, although the Header
text box represents a new option, and only the Apply to All button
exists, since the header and/or footer will appear on all pages of the
handouts/notes pages. The Header and Footer fields often contain

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 223
data like company or author names, copyright notices, and keywords
like Confidential, Sample, Draft, etc.

To delete any header and footer information from the
Notes and Handouts printouts, open the Header & Footer
window, click the Notes and Handouts icon, and clear all
fields and checkboxes before clicking the Apply to All
button.

Apply Design Themes

The most significant way to add visual impact to a PowerPoint
presentation is to apply a design theme. A design theme is a named
combination of formats that comprise of colors, fonts, backgrounds,
and other effects. Themes exist throughout Microsoft Office so that
files created in one application tie together with files created in other
Office applications. While the default Office theme is plain and
boring, users can choose from a gallery of other themes to give the
presentation a new look and feel. To change the theme, select a
theme from the Themes group on the Design tab. More themes are
available by clicking the More button.

Hover over a theme thumbnail to see the theme name. It's also easy
to quickly change the look and feel of a theme by using variants in
PowerPoint. Each theme has its own Variants that apply some
predefined color and effect variations. Variants appear to the right
of the themes in the Design tab. Variants can be further customized
by clicking the More button to modify the theme colors, fonts,
effects or background styles. To further customize a design theme,
it is easy to apply a new variant while everything else about the
theme remains the same.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 224
Many organizations have a standard, recognizable theme that should
be consistently used to follow the organization's branding standards.
While a theme can be applied to individual slides, it is advisable to
apply one theme to an entire presentation, which creates a uniform,
professional look.

Formatting the Slide
Background

While each design theme has its own background colors, patterns or
images, every slide in a PowerPoint presentation can modify a
background by changing colors, gradient fills, or adding/subtracting
graphics. The background is the area behind the text and graphics
on a slide.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 225
To customize the presentation's background, click the Format
Background button in the Customize group of the Design tab. The
Format Background pane will appear to the right of the slide pane.
When choosing a different color or gradient fill for the slide
background, consider ensuring that a proper contrast between the
font colors and the background make the presentation easy to read
for your projected audience. A dark background might be

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 226
appropriate with good lighting, but a dark room might necessitate
using a light background color. The Transparency slide bar can mute
the color by increasing the transparency percentage. A graphic can
be inserted and strategically located to the side of the content
placeholder by adjusting the Offset percentages.
After defining all background settings, click the Apply to All button
to update all slides with the new background. The slide illustrated
below has the Facet theme with a custom background and a graphic
offset to appear to the left of the content placeholder.

Replacing Text and Fonts

Popular presentations that get used over extended periods of time
often need updating due to product,
personnel or company name changes. This
is particularly the case in technology
companies. Instead of relying on manual
editing to find specific words that need to
be changed, the Find or the Find & Replace
features can be much more accurate to

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 227
accomplish the same goal. In the Editing group of the Home tab,
click the Replace drop-down list, and choose Replace ... to open the
Replace window. Use the Find what: and Replace with: fields to
update the presentation by replacing certain text with new text.
Exact case settings can be required to ensure words like Mark versus
mark are not replaced inadvertently.

Sometimes a new design requires that a font be changed throughout
the entire presentation. Changing fonts throughout a presentation is
very similar to changing certain text throughout a document or
throughout a presentation. In the Editing group of the Home tab,
click the Replace drop-down list, and choose Replace Fonts... to
open the Replace Font window. In the Replace: drop-down list,
choose the existing font that needs to be replaced, and then in the
With: drop-down list, select the new font that should appear instead.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 228
Printing a Presentation

A hard copy of a presentation may be printed for a variety of
reasons. A copy might be printed to provide an editor to review and
edit. A second reason might be to generate speaker notes for the
presenter. A third reason might be to produce handouts for audience
members. Whichever reason is chosen, previewing the printout in
Print Preview can resolve a lot of unforeseen issues before wasting
a lot of time, paper and ink/toner. It is recommended to add the Print
Preview icon to the Quick Access Toolbar to make it easy to review
the presentation's accuracy and organization.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 229
The most common reason to print a PowerPoint file is to produce
handouts, but this objective demands further consideration. How
will the audience use the handouts? Will they use them as a
reference, or will they be used to take notes? The answer to this
decision will affect the first option under the Slides setting. The
default is Full Page Slides, which is rarely the preferred selection
since each slide is printed on its own sheet. Notes Pages should be
the option if the intent is to generate speaker notes. The Outline
option will print the presentation in outline format which prints text,
but no graphics, tables or photos. This option is popular if saving
paper is a goal. The nine different Handouts options offer various
numbers of thumbnail versions of each slide per sheet of paper.
Three slides is appropriate if it is desired to give the audience room
to take notes, whereas six slides is suitable if the goal is simply to
provide reference materials. Once the print options have been
selected, click Print or the Print icon to print the presentation.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 230
Practice 12: The Planets

    1. Download the Planets.zip file from the Course Data Files.
         Extract the files to a location on your device where you
         save files for this course.

    2. Open a new, blank presentation in PowerPoint.
    3. Insert a new photo album using the eight photos unzipped

         from step 1. Choose the 1 picture, Picture layout. Include
         captions below all pictures.
    4. Apply the Celestial theme, along with the blue variant.
    5. Change the title text to Our Planets, then change the text to
         WordArt with the Lime, Accent color 1 Pattern fill.
    6. Insert a slide footer with M State - 2023 on all slides
         except the title slide. Include a handout footer with your
         name.
    7. Capture a screenshot of Print Preview displaying handouts,
         2 Slides per page in full color.
    8. Compare your results with the screenshot below. Cancel
         the printing and save the file as Our Planets.pptx.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 231
PowerPoint Chap 1 Index

background, 225                   linked, 208
bulleted and numbered lists, 204  Lock Aspect Ratio, 212
Captions, 216                     New Slide button, 201
Clip art images, 208              Notes pane, 203
Compress Pictures, 212            photo album, 215
computer-generated image, 208     Placeholders, 202
copyright, 209                    presentation views, 206
                                  sizing handles, 211
Creative Commons (CC)             slide layout, 202
   license, 210                   SmartArt, 219
                                  SmartArt style, 221
Cropping, 212                     Variants, 224
design theme, 224                 WordArt, 218
Digital photographs, 208
embedded object, 208
hard copy, 229

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 1 P a g e | 232
PowerPoint Chapter 2:
Enhancing Presentations

    · Adding slide transitions
    · Apply animations to slide content
    · Scalable Vector Graphics and Icons
    · Adding and modifying audio
    · Adding and modifying video
    · Inserting and modifying hyperlinks
    · Utilizing templates and slide masters
    · Zoom, Zoom, Zoom!
    · Employing proofing tools
    · Saving files in alternative file formats

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 233
Adding Slide Transitions

No one wants to watch a PowerPoint presentation that is neither
interesting or entertaining. Without certain design elements, many
audience members will consider PowerPoint to be boring. In fact,
some audiences sarcastically suffer "Death by PowerPoint" when
the presenter and presentation are not stimulating. Don't be like
Dwight Schrute of "The Office" and start a fake fire to get your co-
workers' attention, because you don't know how to create a great
PowerPoint presentation! One way to add appeal to your
presentation is to use multimedia elements.

Motion and multimedia can evoke emotion in the audience and can
be applied in a variety of ways. Slide transitions are the visual and
audio effects that occur when the presentation moves from one slide
to the next while in slide show view. By default, no transitions exist
in a newly created presentation. However, applying transitions can
be easy and effective.

Users can control the speed, add sound, and customize the properties
of transition effects. When used effectively, transitions can add a
professional feel to a presentation. However, inconsistent and
inappropriate transitions can distract from the purpose of the
presentation, so careful consideration should be taken to ensure that
a transition effect complements the goals of the presentation. While
transitions can be applied to individual slides, consistency across all
slides is considered a "best practice".

Applying a transition can be accomplished by clicking a slide
thumbnail in the left pane, and then clicking the Transitions tab on
the ribbon. This is the slide that will appear after

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 234
the transition. The user can click on any of the transition icons to see
a preview of how the visual and audio effects will display during

slide show view. Clicking the More button will display a gallery of
transition choices. There are three categories of transition types:
Subtle, Exciting, and Dynamic Content. While simplistic, Subtle
transitions are popular because they are effective. Their
effectiveness is partly due to their lack of distraction. Exciting
transitions and Dynamic Content,
which use more complex animations,
can be overkill if not used in
moderation. Any slide transition usage
needs to remember the purpose of the
presentation, and not distract from that
objective.
To customize the look of a transition,
users can utilize the Effect Options

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 235
command to change the direction of a specific transition. These
options will vary depending on the selected transition. To remove a
transition, apply the None option to a slide.

After a transition is selected, enter a time in seconds in
the Duration field. This controls how fast the transition occurs; a
larger number makes it go slower. From the Sound drop-down
menu, a sound effect can be added. Caution! - sound effects can
quickly become annoying if not used sparingly, and many of these
affects are a little cheesy! Under the Advance Slide label, choose
either or both of the On Mouse Click or After checkboxes to
determine how to trigger the transition effects. The On Mouse
Click option is popular for presentations with a live speaker in
control of the presentation's pace. The After combo field is
necessary for self-running presentations, and presentations that need
to be conducted in a specific timeframe. Precise duration's of time
(usually in second equivalents) can be specified for each slide using
the After-combo field.

To apply the same transition and settings to every slide, click Apply
to All to maintain consistency. Otherwise, select different slides and
repeat this process to apply a different transition to each. The
specific timings for each slide are best displayed in Slide Sorter
view. Note: clicking the Apply to All option will override any
existing transition settings already defined on other slides.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 236
Apply Animations to Slide
Content

Animations refer to the movement of objects and text on a slide
during slide show view. Animations can help make a PowerPoint
presentation more dynamic, more memorable, and more interesting.
Animations affect the individual objects on a slide, including
bullets, text, and graphics. Each effect can be timed to appear on a
slide, in a specific sequence, using either Entrance, Emphasis and/or
Exit effects. Entrance animation effects occur as the object
initially appears on a slide, whereas exit animation effects transpire
as the object leaves the slide. Entrance animation is very popular for
introducing bulleted text one bullet at a time, which prevents
viewers from advancing their attention beyond the current
topic. Emphasis animation occurs after the object has displayed on
the slide. It can be useful to draw attention to a specific object on a
busy slide by adding motion or highlights.

To apply an animation, select an object on a slide, and then choose
an animation icon from the Animations tab. In the photo below, a

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 237
callout shape was added, formatted and filled with text, before a
Float In entrance animation effect was applied.

Additional animations can be added to text or objects by clicking
the Add Animation button in the Advanced Animation group. If an
attempt is made to add an animation without first clicking "Add
Animation" it will replace the existing animation instead of adding
to it. This step can be repeated multiple times to add as many
animations to an object as desired.
Clicking the Animation Pane, located in the Advanced Animation
group of the Animations pane, is a useful tool for organizing
multiple animations on the same slide. The Animation Pane lists the
objects on a slide that have animation applied. It can be used to
reorder the animation sequence and choose options for the

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 238
animations. Effect Options can be applied to change the direction of
the animation. To adjust the order of the animated objects, select an
option in the Sequence category in the Effect Options gallery. The
By Paragraph Sequence is very popular with bulleted text
paragraphs. Notice that numbers are assigned to each element to
help identify the order each occurs on the slide.
Transitions and animations have many settings, with opportunities
to apply multiple actions to a single slide. To maintain a professional
design, it is important to maintain consistency with transitions,
animations, and other multimedia, including audio and visual
effects.

Scalable Vector Graphics and
Icons

                           This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-
                           SA

Newer versions of Microsoft 365, including PowerPoint, support
inserting and editing scalable vector graphic (.svg) files. An SVG
file uses an XML-based text format to describe how the image
should appear. An SVG file can be scaled to different sizes without
losing quality--the format is resolution-independent. Therefore,

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 239
website and print graphics are often created in the SVG format,
permitting them to be resized to fit different designs in the future.
SVG files are often created and modified using Adobe software
programs, like Illustrator, InDesign and Photoshop.
The library of icons in Office apps consists of SVG images that
users can insert in an Office file and then customize. These icons are
free to use and there's no royalty or copyright to worry about.

    1. Select Insert > Icons.
    2. Browse or search with keywords for an image. Then select

         it and choose Insert.

Users can insert and edit scalable vector graphic (SVG) images in
presentations to create sharp, well-designed content. Since a

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 240
Scalable Vector Graphics file is really a text file in its details, users
can view the text version of the file in any text editor. Vector-based
graphic files are very customizable. The easiest method to open an
SVG file for viewing (not editing) is via a web browser. Most
modern browsers will render the SVG format without having to
download the file first.

After an SVG image is placed in your presentation, its appearance
can be modified including:

     Resize the image without any loss of image quality
     Change the fill color
     Add or change the outline
     Apply a preset style that includes both a fill color and an

         outline
     Apply special effects, such as a shadow, reflection, or glow

All the above options are available on
the Graphics Format tab of the ribbon when an
image is selected on the canvas:

                                                                                 An icon in SVG format

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 241
Adding and Modifying Audio

An audio file can be added to a slide and played during a slide show.
                             Audio files can be music, voice narration,
                             or sound bites. To record and hear any
                             audio, the computer must be equipped with
                             a sound card, microphone, and speakers.
                             Typical audio file formats include .mp4,
                             .mp3, .wav, and .wma files. To insert a
                             multimedia file (audio, video or
                             screenshot), click the Media button on the
                             Insert tab. When a sound file is inserted, a
                             sound icon is added to the slide and the

Audio Tools contextual tab appears to provide options to format
how the audio plays on a slide.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 242
After the audio file is inserted, and a sound icon appears on a slide,
several formatting decisions should be addressed regarding how the
audio sounds during playback. The sound can be previewed by
clicking the Play/Pause button in the Audio Control Bar. The Audio
Timeline can be dragged to the left or right to advance the audio to
the desired start location. If hiding the icon from displaying on
screen during Slide Show View is desired, clear the Hide During
Show checkbox in the Audio Options group. If the audio file is
hidden during playback, the Start drop-down list selection should be
set to Automatically, since the On Click option is only available if
the icon is visible so it can be clicked. The Play Across Slides option
is great is the file is long enough to play as background music for
many slides. This is a popular choice to complement photo albums.

Record audio

    1. Select Insert > Audio.
    2. Select Record Audio.

    3. Type in a name for your audio file, select Record, and then
         speak. Important: Your device must have a microphone
         enabled in order to record audio.

    4. To review your recording, select Stop and then select Play.
    5. Select Record to re-record your clip or select OK if you're

         satisfied.

    6. To move your clip, select and drag the audio icon to where
         you want it on the slide. Note: If you're using more than
         one audio file per slide, it's advisable to put the audio icon
         in the same spot on a slide to find it easily.

    7. Select Play.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 243
Adding and Modifying Video

Video is even more engaging than video because it adds visual
appeal in addition to audio sensory stimulation. An appropriate
video can provide a lasting memory for the audience, and provide
compelling evidence to influence and educate. Videos offer a lot of
upside, but they require also require a lot of resources and careful
consideration. The overall length of the presentation needs to be
considered when deciding to utilize videos with a slide presentation.
Videos tend to be lengthy and the presentation should stay focused
and on time. Additionally, video file sizes are enormous. Therefore,
storage and portability are often major issues to consider if
embedding videos into a presentation.

There are a couple of ways to add video to a PowerPoint
presentation. You can add a video from your hard drive, embed one
from YouTube, or simply linking an image to the video's location.
Inserting a video is very a similar process to inserting an audio file.
When clicking the Video drop-down list, decide between inserting
a Video on My PC... or Online Video... Either option will open a

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 244
dialog window to allow the user to navigate to the location of the
video file. Like audio files, many media files are available to
download royalty-free from online sites like freemusicarchive.org
or videvo.net.

To insert a link to a YouTube site, or embed a YouTube video code,
choose the Online Video... option. The link to YouTube option will
require a strong Internet connection during playback, however this
will control the size of the PowerPoint file.
Once inserted, ensure that the video is moved and resized to be
legible for the audience during playback. With the video object
selected, a new contextual Video Tools tab will appear with
Formatting and Playback options. The Playback tab offers many
ways to customize the impact of the video.

The first, and most important decision, is to decide whether the
video should play Automatically once the slide appears or until a
mouse click triggers the playback. A lot of time can be taken to trim
and adjust the fade of a video, which can be useful to ensure a
snippet of a video plays instead of the entire video file, which can
often be too lengthy. There is no denying the impact of videos in

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 245
today's multimedia rich world. Nonetheless, careful planning and
design is necessary to ensure that the investment of time and
resources are worthwhile for use in a PowerPoint presentation.
Some common video and audio file formats are listed below.

Inserting and Modifying
Hyperlinks

Hyperlinks make a presentation dynamic by allowing connections
to other slides, documents and/or web pages. A hyperlink is an
object which when clicked, jumps to another location in the current
file or opens another file, or address on the web. Hyperlinks have
two parts: the address (of the web page, e-mail address or file
location), and the display text (or graphic image). For example, the
text: M State, could be linked to the web site www.minnesota.edu.
Likewise, the logo can also be linked to www.minnesota.edu.
To insert a hyperlink, right-click the selected text and
choose Link... from the shortcut menu, or select the text
and click the Link button on the Insert tab.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 246
Select a type of link from the Link to sidebar, and then type a label
in the Text to display field. A link could open a file on from the
Current Folder, a recently Browsed Page from the Internet or a
Recent File that was opened on your computer. NOTE: If you link
to a file on your computer, and move your PowerPoint presentation
to another computer, you'll also need to move any linked files.

For web pages, type a URL in the Address: box, or for an E-mail
Address, type the e-mail syntax into the E-mail address field.
Choose the Place in This Document option to redirect PowerPoint
to a designated slide when the link is clicked. For all options, use
the ScreenTip... button to add text that displays on-screen when the
cursor hovers over the hyperlink. Make sure to test the inserted links
by using Slide Show view and clicking each link.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 247
Utilizing Templates & Slide
Masters

Consistency is an important quality to maintain a marketing brand.
Corporate presentations should maintain consistency when utilizing
certain PowerPoint functionality, particularly features like
transitions, themes, fonts, etc. Two ways to maintain consistency in
a PowerPoint presentation is to use templates or slide masters. A
PowerPoint template is a replica of a slide that is saved as a .potx
file. A template usually contains consistent layouts, fonts, colors,
designs and even related content. Templates are a popular starting
point for creating new presentations, in part because they save time,
and maintain consistency. However, don't be afraid to change
designs add additional slides to these templates to make the
presentation your own. Many organizations create an organization
template that maintains the branding of the organization when
employees create corporate presentations. Microsoft has hundreds
of free downloadable PowerPoint and other Office templates
available on Office.com. Existing and custom-created personal
template files are typically found on your hard drive at:
C:\User\<UserName>\AppData\Roaming\Microsoft\Templates.

A slide master is the template that applies to all slides in a
presentation. When all slides need to contain the same fonts, font
sizes, and images (such as logos); a user can make those universal
changes in one place--the Slide Master, and they'll be applied to all
the slides. To open Slide Master view, on the View tab, select Slide
Master.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 248
The left pane will display thumbnails of the slide master and of all
the slide master layouts. Hovering the pointer over a slide layout
displays the layout name and indicates which slide in the
presentation utilize that layout. The top icon in the left pane will
display the slide master.

Any modifications (formatting or added logos) to the slide master
will apply to all slides in the presentation. Formatting applied to a
slide layout master only affects slides that use that specific layout.
To return to the normal slide view, click the Close Master View
button on the Slide Master tab.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 249
Zoom, Zoom, Zoom!

Make your presentations more dynamic and exciting by using the
zoom for PowerPoint feature (circa 2019). When you create a zoom
in PowerPoint, you can jump to and from specific slides, sections,
and portions of your presentation in an order you decide while you're
presenting. PowerPoint create visual links between sections of your
presentation. It makes the presentation interactive by adding a
clickable thumbnail of a slide or a section in your presentation and
allowing you to easily navigate within your presentation with cool
visual effects!

There are three zoom options. A summary zoom is a landing page
where users can see the pieces of their presentation summarized into
one slide. Think of this zoom feature as a visual table of contents.
When presenting, use the zoom to go from one place in your
presentation to another in any order you like. During the
presentation, you can click on any slide on the summary to proceed
according to the need of the audience rather than the preset slide
progression. Get creative, skip ahead, or revisit pieces of your slide
show without interrupting the flow of your presentation!

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 250
A section zoom is a link to a section already in your presentation.
You can use them to go back to sections you want to really
emphasize, or to highlight how certain pieces of your presentation
connect. (PowerPoint sections are not discussed in this text.)
A slide zoom allows users to navigate freely between slides in any
order without interrupting the flow of the presentation. They're a
good option for shorter presentations without lots of sections but
slide zooms can be used for lots of different presentation scenarios.
Slide zooms help users drill down into multiple pieces of
information while feeling as though they're staying on the same
canvas. From this viewpoint, users can move freely between slides,
emphasize the important slides, and even cut the presentation short
without seeming so to the audience.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 251
Employing Proofing Tools

In today's social media/texting communication environment,
punctuation, spelling and grammar have begun to lose its luster.
While this cavalier attitude might be acceptable for personal
communications, professional communication still demands proper
attention to details. Why is it such a big deal to proofread a
PowerPoint presentation? Well, if you make an error in a Word
document, one or perhaps a couple of people will notice. However,
a presentation is usually given to a large audience, so any spelling,
grammar or punctuation error will be magnified by multiples.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 252
PowerPoint provides users with several proofing features -
including the Spelling and Grammar tool - that can help create
professional, error-free presentations. From the Review tab,
clicking the Spelling button will open the Spelling pane to the right
of the slide pane. For each error in the presentation, PowerPoint will
offer one or more suggestions, which can be ignored or selected by
clicking the Change button. The Spell Checker only recognizes
misspelled and unknown words, not misused words, so proofreading
a presentation is still important. The Thesaurus is a fun tool for
suggesting synonyms for over-used words. Reusing the same words
too often reduces the readability and professionalism of a
presentation, so try out the Thesaurus! It is also a great resource for
solving crossword puzzles! Anyone got another word for thesaurus?

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 253
Saving Files in Alternative File
Formats

The default file extension for a PowerPoint file is .pptx. Various
alternative formats exist depending on how the file needs to be
saved. The biggest factor will be the audience's needs. In special

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 254
circumstances, when it is necessary to share sensitive or legal
information with others, it may be prudent to save the presentation
file in a fixed layout format that locks the file from being edited. The
PDF and XPS formats are two popular fixed layout formats. From
the File tab on the ribbon, click Export and choose the Create
PDF/XPS Document button to open the Publish as PDF or XPS
dialog window. Publishing a file in a fixed layout format requires
appropriate viewer software, such as Adobe Reader, which opens
PDF files. Adobe Reader is a free program downloadable from
Adobe's web site.

If the audience does not have access to a computer with PowerPoint
installed, saving the file as a video or PDF format could be an easy
solution. Other file formats are available from the Export window
by clicking the Change File Type option. Alternative formats
include a PowerPoint Show, or an Image File type which can be
optimized for hard-copy printouts or web sites.

To save a PowerPoint presentation as a video to share with others:

    1. Select File > Export > Create a video.

    2. Select the quality of the video:

              Ultra HD (4K) - Largest file size and ultra-high
                  quality (3840 x 2160).

              Full HD (1080p) - Large file size and full high
                  quality (1920 x 1080).

              HD (720p) - Medium file size and moderate quality
                  (1280 x 720).

              Standard (480p) - Smallest file size and lowest
                  quality (852 x 480).

Note: Full HD (1080p) is recommended for most uses.

    3. Decide if you want to:

              Use Recorded Timings and Narrations

              Don't Use Recorded Timings and Narrations

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 255
    4. In the Seconds spent on each slide box, select the default
         time you want to spend on each slide.

    5. Select Create Video.
    6. Enter a file name and then browse to the location you want

         to save your video.
    7. In the Save As type box, select if you want to save the video

         as a MPEG-4 Video or Windows Media Video.
Tip: The MPEG-4 Video format is recommended for the best
compatibility with video players.

    8. Select Save.
    9. It will take some time to generate the video. Check the

         progress bar at the bottom of the window to see when it's
         complete.

What to do with your video after creating it?

After you create a video, you can share it with others by using the
following methods:

    1. Email your presentation to others (due to the large file size
         of the video, this is not a recommended option)

    2. Upload to your organization's network/web page/portal.
    3. Save to an external file share or other location. i.e. YouTube.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 256
Practice 13: The Planets - Part 2

    1. Open the file Our Planets.pptx.
    2. Press the F12 key and save the file as Our Planets -

         FINAL.pptx.
    3. Via the slide sorter view, rearrange the slides in order closest

         to furthest from the sun.
    4. Apply the Vortex slide transition to all slides in the

         presentation.
    5. Add the From Bottom Effect Option and a 5:00 (second)

         duration to Apply to All slides.
    6. At the end of the presentation, add a new Title and Content

         slide with the following text:
             o Title: The Dwarf Planets
             o Content: (each as its own paragraph)
                       Pluto
                       Ceres
                       Eris

    7. Change the font size of the title text to 44pt and the three
         paragraphs to 32pt.

    8. Apply the Zoom animation scheme (By Paragraph) to the
         three paragraphs.

    9. Change the slide layout to Two Content and in the new
         placeholder, click the Insert Video icon, and add the
         SolarSystemVid file from the Course Data Files. Ensure that
         the video starts automatically.

    10. On the first slide, insert the audio file The Cavern from the
         Course Data Files. Ensure the audio starts automatically, and
         does not appear during playback, but does play across all
         slides.

    11. Add a hyperlink to the Pluto text on the last slide to the web
         site: theplanets.org/pluto/.

    12. Save the file, then save a copy in PDF format.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 257
PowerPoint Chap 1 & 2             Index

After combo field, 236                     linked, 208
Apply to All, 236                          Lock Aspect Ratio, 212
background, 225                            New Slide button, 201
bulleted and numbered lists, 204           Notes pane, 203
Captions, 216                              On Mouse Click, 236
Clip art images, 208                       photo album, 215
Compress Pictures, 212                     Placeholders, 202
computer-generated image, 208              Playback tab, 245
copyright, 209                             presentation views, 206
Creative Commons (CC)                      ScreenTip..., 247
                                           section zoom, 251
   license, 210                            sizing handles, 211
Cropping, 212                              slide layout, 202
design theme, 224                          slide master, 248
Digital photographs, 208                   Slide transitions, 234
Duration, 236                              slide zoom, 251
Effect Options, 235                        SmartArt, 219
embedded object, 208                       SmartArt style, 221
Emphasis animation, 237                    Sound, 236
Entrance animation, 237                    summary zoom, 250
exit animation, 237                        template, 248
Graphics Format, 241                       Variants, 224
hard copy, 229                             WordArt, 218
hyperlink, 246
icons, 240

LICENSE

Business Computers 365 by Marcus Lacher is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where
otherwise noted.

                                               PowerPoint Chap 2 P a g e | 258
