Customer Centric Strategy, 2nd Edition
CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY, 2ND
EDITION

KERRI SHIELDS
Customer Centric Strategy, 2nd Edition Copyright © 2024 by Kerri Shields is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
CONTENTS

Introduction                                                                   1

Chapter 1: Defining Customer Centricity                                        7

Chapter 2: Being a Customer Service Representative (CSR)                       33

Chapter 3: Managing a Customer Service Team                                    64

Chapter 4: Working in a Customer Contact Center                                91

Chapter 5: Managing a Customer Contact Center                                  103

Chapter 6: Using Contact Center Technology to Improve Customer Experience      124

Chapter 7: Designing Products, Services, and Processes with Customers in Mind  145

Chapter 8: Using Design Thinking to Improve Customer Experience                161

Chapter 9: Building Strong Customer Relationships                              178

Chapter 10: Leading a Customer Centric Strategy                                204

Glossary of Terms                                                              229
              INTRODUCTION | 1

INTRODUCTION

Concept

Customer centricity is about organizational transformation, making the customer the focus for business deci-
sions, processes, product development, services, and procedures.

Some companies purport to be customer centric but they fall short in connecting this concept throughout all
functional areas of the business. While it is important to offer superb customer service, being customer cen-
tric is far more than that. It's about mapping the customer journey to discover customer needs and wants,
what's working and what is not, then taking action to improve the customer experience.

Customer loyalty is built through providing exceptional customer experiences. This, in turn, increases rev-
enues through positive company image, referrals, and increased customer lifetime value.

Most organizations today realize that they must focus on the customer to remain competitive.

Book Versions

Below is a record of edits and changes made to this book since its initial publication. Whenever edits or
updates are made in the text, a record and description of those changes will be noted here. The edition num-
ber will only change when there is a major update to the book. The ancillary files (i.e., test bank, slides) that
accompany this book always reflect the most recent version.
2 | INTRODUCTION

                             Table 0.1: Leading Innovation Book Versions

Date of Publication Edition                   Revisions

August 8, 2021    Customer Centric Strategy   · Original OER published with 8 chapters and
                                                 accompanying chapter slides.

November 9, 2022  Customer Centric Strategy,  · New Test Bank with 40 multiple-choice questions and 14
                  1st edition, version 2         short-answer questions, across 8 chapters.

                                              · Minor content updates within several chapters.
                                              · Chapter formatting revisions to ensure content meets Web

                                                 Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0.

January 1, 2024   Customer Centric Strategy,  · Two New Chapters were added-CH 8: Using Design
                  2nd Edition                    Thinking to Improve Customer Experience and CH 9:
                                                 Building Strong Customer Relationships.

                                              · The test bank was updated for a total of 76 M/C questions
                                                 and 25 short-answer questions across 10 chapters.

                                              · Additional content was added to CH 1: Defining
                                                 Customer Centricity, CH 6: Using Contact Center
                                                 Technology to Improve Customer Experience, and CH 10:
                                                 Leading a Customer Centric Strategy.

                                              · Additional End-of-Chapter exercises were added to several
                                                 chapters.

                                              · Statistical references were updated for currency throughout
                                                 all chapters.

                                              · All chapters were modified as necessary to meet Web
                                                 Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0.

                                              · Minor modifications were made within the remaining
                                                 chapters, which included additional content, updating
                                                 broken URL links, and adding to the lists of additional
                                                 resources.
                                             INTRODUCTION | 3

October 3, 2025  Customer Centric Strategy,  · CH 1: Defining Customer Centricity. Added H5P
                 2nd Edition Version 2          Flashcards Self-Check Exercise. Expanded the topic on
                                                Consumer Buying Process. Added Table 1.1, a comparison
                                                between product-centric and customer-centric strategies.

                                             · CH 3: Managing a Customer Service Team. Added
                                                content on Forecasting Customer Demand. Added content
                                                on Why Customers May Not Complain. Expanded the
                                                topic on Employee Empowerment.

                                             · CH 6: Using Contact Center Technology to Improve
                                                Customer Experience. Moved "What is CRM?" video
                                                from CH 9 to CH 6.

                                             · CH 9: Building Customer Relationships. Added content
                                                on Social Listening, Social Selling, and Social Monitoring.
                                                Updated Learning Outcomes and Key Takeaways

                                             · CH 10: Leading a Customer Centric Strategy. Added
                                                content on examples of Quality Standards. Expanded the
                                                topic on Business and Customer Service Metrics. Replaced
                                                the "How to Reduce AHT in a Call Center" video with
                                                the "How Can You Use Customer Service Metrics in
                                                Performance Reviews?" video. Updated Key Takeaways.

Chapter Features and Bloom's Taxonomy

  · Chapter Learning Outcomes -- The learning outcomes listed within each chapter align with the lower
      levels of Bloom's Taxonomy of Educational Objectives for Knowledge-based goals (knowledge and com-
      prehension) based on the activity of simply reading the chapter. Should readers complete the exercises
      within the chapters and at the end of the chapters, higher levels of Bloom's Taxonomy can be reached
      (application, analysis, synthesis, evaluation).

  · Example-rich narrative
  · Embedded videos with PDF transcripts
  · Graphic elements that illustrate and reinforce concepts
  · Self-assessments (e.g., quiz, game, or other H5P content)
  · Explore the Concept and End-of-Chapter Exercises
  · Chapter Key Takeaways
  · Additional resource links and Chapter references for additional reading
  · Embedded navigation and image alt-text for screen readers
  · Free online, PDF, and various other book formats
  · Chapter PowerPoint slides
  · Glossary of Terms
  · Open license, Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License

      permits adoption, adaptation (customization), and sharing
4 | INTRODUCTION

eCampus Ontario

eCampusOntario is a provincially-funded non-profit organization that leads a consortium of the province's
publicly-funded colleges, universities, and indigenous institutes to develop and test online learning tools to
advance the use of education technology and digital learning environments.1

This textbook is part of the eCampusOntario (and BCCampus) open textbook library, which provides free
learning resources in a wide range of subject areas. These open textbooks can be assigned by instructors for
their classes and can be downloaded by learners to electronic devices. These educational resources are cus-
tomizable to meet a wide range of learning needs.

If you decide to adopt this book for a course or training program (or other) please report your adoption as
eCampusOntario is keen to report students' savings and connect with successful OER adopters.

Accessibility Statement

Every attempt has been made to make this OER accessible to all learners and compatible with assistive and
adaptive technologies. The Pressbooks content management system was chosen for its commitment to built-
in accessibility. The Web version of this resource has been designed to meet Web Content Accessibility Guide-
lines 2.0, level AA, and follows all guidelines in Appendix A: Checklist for Accessibility of the Accessibility
Toolkit - 2nd Edition. In addition to the web version, additional files are available in a number of file formats,
including PDF, EPUB (for eReaders), and Course Cartridge (for LMS).

If you are having problems accessing this resource, please contact kshields@centennialcollege.ca. Please
include the following information: The location of the problem by providing a web address or page descrip-
tion. A description of the problem. The computer, software, browser, and any assistive technology you are
using that can help us diagnose and solve your issue (e.g., Windows 10, Google Chrome (Version
65.0.3325.181), NVDA screen reader)

Each chapter has been evaluated using WAVE® and modified as needed to meet zero errors in accordance with
WCAG AA. "WAVE® is a suite of evaluation tools that helps authors make their web content more accessi-
ble to individuals with disabilities. WAVE can identify many Web Content Accessibility Guideline (WCAG)
errors, but also facilitates human evaluation of web content. Our philosophy is to focus on issues that we
know impact end users, facilitate human evaluation, and to educate about web accessibility."2

  · All images that convey information include alternative text (alt text) descriptions of the image's content
      or function. Graphs and charts also include contextual or supporting details in the text surrounding the
                                                                                                                                           INTRODUCTION | 5

      image. Images do not rely on colour to convey information.
  · All colours meet WCAG contrast requirements.
  · Content is organized under headings and subheadings. Headings and subheadings are used sequentially

      (e.g., Heading 1, Heading 2).
  · Embedded videos are from YouTube and do have closed captioning available, although many YouTube

      videos have captions that are auto-generated, and these do not always translate correctly. To combat this
      issue, PDF (English) transcripts have been posted for download with each chapter video.
  · Tables are used to structure information and not for layout. Tables include row and column headers.
      Row and column headers have the correct scope assigned. Tables include a caption. Tables avoid merged
      or split cells. Tables have adequate cell padding.
  · The Microsoft Accessibility checker was run on PowerPoint slides that accompany the book. ALT tags
      were added to images, PDF (English) transcripts are posted with embedded videos, and colour contrast
      was checked.
  · All Web links describe the destination of the link and do not use generic text such as "click here" or "read
      more". If a link opens or downloads a file (e.g., PDF), a textual reference is included in the link informa-
      tion (e.g., [PDF-New Tab]).
  · In-text citations are embedded using the Footnote feature of Pressbooks; therefore, footnotes appear as
      References at the end of each chapter with Web links to the original sources.
  · Font size is 12 points or higher for body text in PDF documents. Font size can be enlarged to 200 per-
      cent in Webbook or Ebook formats without needing to scroll side to side.
  · An H5P element is included with each chapter as a quick review of the chapter's content. These are
      accessible based on the H5P type. The goal for the accessible content types is WCAG 2.1 AA support,
      so the content types have been tested against these criteria and more by the H5P.org developers. Refer to
      the accessible content types list for additional information.
  · PowerPoint slides have been checked with the Microsoft Accessibility checker to ensure proper colour
      contrast. Images contain ALT text. Fonts are 24 points or larger. PDF Transcripts are linked with each
      embedded Video. PDF copies of each slide deck are also provided.

Author

Working as a college professor for many years, I have honed my customer service skills in working with cross-
departmental teams, external partners, and internal customers, and it seems that regardless of the job you
choose to do, developing your customer service skills will help make you more effective and efficient. In the
past, I have worked as a customer service representative in B2B and B2C environments, as a customer service
manager in HR solutions, as a training coordinator in corporate training, and as a call center manager (both
  6 | INTRODUCTION

 in credit and collections and loyalty programs), and have come to realize that every job role has a customer ser-
 vice component.

 During my time as a corporate trainer, I designed and delivered training programs in "Exceeding Customer
 Expectations" as one of the various sessions my employer delivered. In 2016, I designed a college course called
 "Customer Service and Relationship Building," and then in 2018, I designed another college course called
 "Customer Centric Strategy," which became the catalyst for this OER book.

 In developing this book, I have researched many sources and compiled the resources that support the concept
 of customer centricity. When I teach this college course, I also include exercises for students on Salesforce
 CRM using the Trailhead learning platform. It is essential for students to learn technologies used in business
 today, and especially those used to support building long-lasting positive relationships with customers.
 Another exercise I usually provide students is one in which they use the Hootsuite platform to practice pro-
 moting a business through social media. They learn to respond positively to customer inquiries and com-
 plaints.

 I hope you find the content interesting and the lessons helpful, and maybe you get a few ideas for practicing
 customer service skills from the exercises in each chapter. I will try my best to update it from time to time, just
 in case some videos or resources become obsolete or outdated.

 Sincerely,

 Kerri Shields

 References

 (Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
 therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Notes

        1. eCampus Ontario. (2021). About. https://www.ecampusontario.ca/about/#:~:text=eCampusOn-
             tario%20is%20a%20provincially-funded%20non-profit%20organization%20that%20leads,use%20of%20educa-
             tion%20technology%20and%20digital%20learning%20environments.

        2. WAVE. (n.d.). WAVE accessibility evaluation tool. https://wave.webaim.org/
                                                                                                                DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 7

CHAPTER 1: DEFINING CUSTOMER
CENTRICITY

   Chapter 1 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. Define the term "customer service".
         2. Define the term "customer experience".
         3. Define the term "customer journey".
         4. Define the term "customer centricity".
         5. Discuss the five stages of the consumer buying process.

        6. Discuss how changes in consumer behaviour affect how companies serve cus­
            tomers.

        7. Discuss how technological advances affect how companies serve customers.

Customer Service

Customer service is the assistance and advice provided by a company to customers throughout the customer
journey; before, during, and after the sale. Humans usually provide customer service to other humans, but
some service comes from machines, technologies, animals, etc. The service a customer receives becomes part
of the experiences they have with the company.
For example, if you purchase a product and need to return it because it is missing a part, you might drive to
the store, get the product out of your back seat, put it in a cart, wheel it into the store, visit the return counter,
speak with an employee about your return, and so on. You may even phone the store before driving there. In
this example, your perception of the company and your experience with the company will be based on many
factors:
8 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

  · Availability of parking
  · Availability of carts
  · Wait time in the line-up at the return counter
  · The manner in which the employee speaks to you at the return counter (courteous, professional)
  · The efficiency of the employee implementing the return process (equipment, cash)
  · The manner in which the employee speaks to you on the phone (courteous, professional)

Now, imagine that you did phone the store before
driving the product back to the store for a return
and refund. You explained that there was a missing
part to the staff member on the phone. The staff
member on the phone who works at the service desk
informed you that many customers have had this
same issue and that the manufacturer is able to send
you the missing part by express delivery, free of
charge. As well, the manufacturer will include a
small gift, an accessory item for your product, due
to the inconvenience. Will you now decide to keep The owner of a food truck is serving a customer
the product? You may or may not, but you will feel
that the information the customer service representative shared with you over the phone was valuable and you
will appreciate that they did so. This touchpoint, over the phone, is an experience that should leave you with
a positive view of the manufacturer and the retail store, even though the manufacturer made an error by not
including one of the parts in the first place. Would your perception of your experience have been negative if
the representative on the phone had not shared this information with you, and you found out only after you
had driven all the way to the store and stood in the return line for some time? Most likely, it would not be as
positive as hearing this information before you put in the effort to return the product. That is why it is so
important for leaders and managers to build a culture of customer centricity, train employees, build stan-
dards, and measure performance pertaining to customer service. Companies need to retain customers to stay
in business, and you need to help the company retain customers to stay employed.

A final note about the scenario above, the retailer is actually a customer of the manufacturer (product sup-
plier or vendor); therefore, the manufacturer also has the desire to keep the relationship positive with their
customer (the retailer). If the manufacturer did not satisfy the retailer's customers by offering a free replace-
ment part with express shipping, the retailer's customers would become angry at the retailer (the place they
purchased from). If this situation occurs often, the retailer will most likely search for a different product sup-
plier or at least stop purchasing that product from that specific supplier. So, it is not only important to keep
individual customers happy in business-to-consumer sales (B-2-C), but it is also important for businesses to
keep their business customers satisfied in business-to-business sales (B-2-B).
                                                                                                                DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 9

In subsequent chapters, you will learn about providing customer service in both a face-to-face retail environ-
ment and a contact center environment, and about managing customer service teams and customer service
technologies.

Watch the "Poor versus Great Customer Service" YouTube video below for an example of what bad service
looks like compared to good service.1 Transcript for "Poor vs Great Customer Service" Video [PDF-New
Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=28#oem­

bed-1

Customer Experience (CX)

Customer experience is the result of an interaction            A customer being served in a restaurant
between the customer and the company. It is how cus-
tomers perceive their interactions with the company or
brand. A customer touchpoint is a point in time when
the company connects in some form with the customer
(e.g., website, phone, email, social media, retail store,
returns, service, and products). There are many different
customer touchpoints, for example, when a customer
phones the contact center for support, when a customer
first visits the company website to review its products, or
when the customer visits the store. The customer will get
an impression of the company from each of these interac-
tions. If the store is unclean, the products are difficult to
find, or the staff are rude, this may leave the customer with
a negative impression of the company, which the cus-
tomer will perceive as a negative customer experience.
The customer's perception IS the customer's experience.

Companies work hard to create a positive experience for customers, but things do go wrong at times, and
some customers will perceive that the company has not met their expectations in some way, thus leaving those
customers with a negative impression or perception of the company.
10 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

Over time, as the customer has more and more experiences with the company, these experiences may shape
the customer's perception negatively or positively, and too many negative experiences will most likely cause
the customer to discontinue engaging with the company; they will visit a competitor's store instead.

   Explore the Concept - Customer Experience (CX)

     Consider the following questions:

         1. When shopping or eating at a restaurant, what might cause you to have a negative cus-
             tomer experience? What might occur that would cause you to have a positive customer
             experience?

         2. What were your expectations when you entered the establishment? Did the company meet
             your expectations?

         3. If you visited this restaurant twice and had positive experiences both times, but then on the
             third visit you had a negative experience, would you return a fourth time?

         4. What would you suggest as three "best practices" for creating a positive customer experi-
             ence?

There is a popular saying, "A company is only as good as its people." This saying refers to the need to hire
good people, train employees, and create a positive corporate culture. When employees are happy working for
the company, they will most likely do their best work to help the company provide positive experiences to cus-
tomers. Of course, while the interactions your employees have with customers are a large part of the customer
experience, other factors are also important.

Customers have certain expectations of service and what they experience with the company. For example,
when you shop at a Dollar Store (e.g., Dollarama, Dollar Tree, Dollar Store, Dollar Shop, etc.), you probably
expect low prices and do not expect that every product the company sells is of high quality and comes with a
warranty. You might expect those things from Apple, BMW, Harley-Davidson, or other companies that are
known for high quality and prestige. From a dollar store, you expect the store to be clean and the products
arranged in a manner that makes it easy to find the products you are looking for. You expect prices to be low.
You probably expect the staff to be helpful, friendly, and professional. If, for example, you walked into the
store and the lights were not working, it might upset you, or if it was the middle of winter and the store had
                                                                                                               DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 11

no heat, you might not shop very long. If the products were not on the shelves and there were boxes blocking
the aisles, you might become annoyed.

What if you had received poor service at the store, the store was a mess, the cash register was not working the
day you visited the store, and you could not find the product you wanted in stock? What would you do or say
to the staff? What would you think about the store? Would you shop there again? Would you tell your
friends about the poor experience you had? Most likely, you would not go back, you would think the store
was not professional, you would not shop at that location again, and you would probably tell your friends and
family what a bad experience you had there.

Organizations that do not improve their customer experiences through improved customer service, improved
customer journeys, and improved customer centricity will not stay in business long in today's global and tech-
nological world. Consumers today are savvy, and they can easily shop online to purchase whatever they desire
quickly and easily. They can also switch to a competitor, in most cases, with little risk or switching costs.
Consumers research and learn about products they want before they buy, and they expect a lot from the orga-
nizations they patronize.

Customer experience has become the ultimate competitive advantage. The big retailers, with Amazon at the
forefront, have served consumers so effectively that most people now demand high-quality, ultra-fast service
for everything they buy.2

Customer Journey

The customer journey is the complete sum of experiences that customers go through when interacting with
a company and its brands. It considers the complete path from brand discovery to purchasing and beyond.
The focus is not on purchases made, but rather on how the customer feels about the interactions throughout
their journey with the company.

Below is an example of one customer's journey.
12 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

Tom is shopping online for a new car (website touch-

point). He decides to phone a car dealership to ask

about a vehicle he saw online (phone touchpoint).

Tom is greeted in a friendly manner and has all his

questions answered by a salesperson (employee touch-

point). Tom makes an appointment and comes to the

dealership to test-drive the vehicle he is interested in

(location/organization touchpoint). The salesperson,

Jordon, whom Tom spoke with on the phone, greets

him, answers his questions, demonstrates a friendly       A customer leaning against their new car
and professional manner while dealing with Tom, and

sends him out on a test drive (employee and product

touchpoints). Tom decides to purchase the vehicle, and Jordon completes the paperwork, processes the sale

and payment, and offers to deliver the vehicle within two days (employee and company policies/practices

touchpoints).

Jordon assures Tom that the vehicle comes with warranties, and should Tom change his mind about the pur-
chase, he may return the vehicle within the first 30 days, no questions asked (employee, manufacturer, and
company policy touchpoint). Jordon asks if Tom would like to register for a loyalty program whereby Tom
will receive emails on future promotions and receive gifts for referring others (if they purchase a vehicle too).
Tom is interested, and Jordon gathers Tom's email. Jordan provides Tom with a $100 gas card as a thank-you
gift for purchasing the new vehicle (employee and company policies touchpoints). Later in the week, Tom
tweets a picture of himself standing in front of his new vehicle, and he mentions the dealership and the excel-
lent service he received from Jordon. He even recommended the dealership on dealerrater.ca. A few months
later, Tom, feeling loyal to the dealership and remembering the loyalty rewards program, refers a friend to Jor-
don at the dealership.

In building a customer-centric business, personas and customer journey maps are important strategic tools
that help provide an in-depth understanding of who a company's customers are, what they need, and how
they interact with the company across all touchpoints.3 These tools help to share customer insights across the
organization and can be critical for building employee buy-in and helping teams take targeted action to
improve customer experience.

Personas are fictional customer types created to represent real target customer groups. They are more than
generalized customer segments because they have individual names and stories that reflect personal attributes
and behavioural characteristics such as customer needs, motivations, and attitudes. For example, a company
may target Reza, a college professor, a parent of three teenage children, aged in their mid-40s, who shops
online due to time constraints, orders delivery from restaurants a few times per week, enjoys exercise, eats
                                                                                                               DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 13

vegan, etc. The company creates these personas to help them better understand all the needs of their target
customers, which in turn helps them provide products, services, and processes that will meet or exceed the
customers' expectations.

Once a company fully understands the lifestyle and demands, responsibilities, attitudes, and desires of its tar-
get customer, it can map the customer journey. Mapping the customer journey will allow the company to
identify where they may not be serving the customer to the best of their ability, so they can make improve-
ments to the customer experience.

The customer journey map is a visual depiction (diagrammed or written) detailing the path the customer
takes from the time the customer first discovers the brand, to purchasing, and beyond. The customer journey
map examines the full experience of being a customer with the company and examines all touchpoints and
channels.

It is important to create many personas and scenarios because every customer's journey will be slightly differ-
ent. It is also important for companies to talk to customers (and employees) to learn more about the cus-
tomer journey and the experiences customers have. Creating personas and customer journey maps will help
organizations identify poor service issues so they can take action to improve their customers' experiences.

Consumer Buying Process

When consumers are in the process of buying a new product (especially an expensive purchase), they pass
through five key stages:

Stage 1. Problem/Need Recognition

This is the starting point of the buying process. The consumer realizes they have a problem to solve or a need
to fulfill--this could be functional (e.g., needing a new phone because the old one broke) or emotional (e.g.,
wanting a treat or luxury item).

  · Companies often try to stimulate need recognition through advertising, promotions, or highlighting
      pain points.

  · The recognition stage sets the foundation for customer loyalty because if a company is top of mind
      when a need arises, the consumer is more likely to begin their journey with that brand.
14 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

Stage 2. Information Search

Once the need is clear, the consumer begins gathering information to make a decision. This may involve online
research, reviews, word of mouth, or in-store browsing.

· Customers weigh options based on price, quality, convenience, and reputation.
· Companies can offer comparisons (charts, demos, or side-by-side features) to help customers feel confi-

   dent that they are making an informed choice.
· Brands that provide transparent, easy-to-find, and trustworthy information strengthen the chance of

   being chosen in the selection phase.
· At this stage, advocacy plays a huge role--satisfied customers may influence potential buyers by sharing

   positive reviews and recommendations.

Stage 3. Evaluation of Alternatives

Here, the consumer compares products or services side by
side to determine the best fit for their needs.

· The selection phase may include analyzing features,     A consumer using a phone to compare prices on
   value for money, customer service, warranties, and     winter jackets.
   brand reputation.

· To provide reassurance, companies may offer free
   samples, trial periods, or demonstrations that allow
   customers to experience the product before com-
   mitting.

· This builds trust and reduces perceived risk, which
   can foster long-term loyalty.

Stage 4. Purchase (or No Purchase) Decision

After evaluating options, the consumer makes a choice--to buy or not to buy.

· Purchase decision: The customer selects a brand or product and completes the transaction.
· No purchase decision: The customer may postpone or abandon the purchase if they feel uncertain, per-

   ceive poor value, or encounter barriers (e.g., confusing checkout process, lack of trust).
· Companies can reduce hesitation by offering money-back guarantees, easy returns, or limited-time trials,

   reassuring customers that their risk is low.
                                                                                                               DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 15

  · Businesses that highlight customer advocacy (e.g., testimonials, ratings) are more likely to convert inter-
      est into sales.

Stage 5. Post-Purchase Evaluation

After the purchase, the consumer reflects on whether the product or service met their expectations.

  · A positive experience can lead to satisfaction, loyalty, repeat purchases, and even advocacy, where cus-
      tomers recommend the brand to others.

  · A negative experience may result in complaints, returns, or switching to competitors.
  · Companies can strengthen relationships by offering follow-up support, loyalty programs, or invitations

      to share feedback. Ongoing reassurance, such as extended warranties, loyalty discounts, or exclusive
      member trials of new products, reinforces the relationship beyond the initial sale.

Not all consumers go through each step in the process, and the steps do not need to be completed in the same
order. The process can also be interrupted at any time with a "no purchase" decision. Companies are trying
to determine what consumers want and how to provide information and solutions to help consumers see the
benefits of buying their products at every stage.

Here is a list of some of the factors that shape the way consumers choose and use products:

 1. Cultural influences include culture (the way of living that distinguishes one large group from another),
      subculture (smaller groups with shared values), and social class (the cultural ranking of groups according
      to criteria such as background, occupation, and income).

 2. Social influences include family, opinion leaders (people whose opinions are sought by others), and ref-
      erence groups such as friends, co-workers, and professional associates.

 3. Personal influences include lifestyle, personality, and economic status.
 4. Psychological influences include an individual's motivations, perceptions, ability to learn, and attitudes.

Consider your decision to purchase the educational services of your college or university. You first recognized
the need for higher education (needing a job, wanting a higher salary, or upgrading your skills). You likely
obtained information about different schools from many sources, including your friends, family, counsellors,
and the Internet. You may have also visited a few campuses to gather first-hand information. You then eval-
uated your options based on a number of factors, including tuition fees (cost), types of programs (meeting
needs), geographic location (convenience), reputation of the institution (quality, reliability), and whether your
friends were attending the same institution (social, support). Your final choice may have been based on ratio-
nal analysis or the result of an emotional decision (based on some "gut feeling"). After making the purchase
16 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

(enrolling and paying tuition fees), you evaluate your decision based on how well your expectations are met.
You will likely continue to evaluate your decision long after you graduate.

Understanding the factors influencing consumer buying behavior--psychological, social, cultural, and per-
sonal--is essential for businesses aiming to effectively connect with their target audience.

Customer Centricity

Customer centricity is a way of doing business
that fosters a positive customer experience before,
during, and after the sale in order to drive repeat
business, build customer loyalty (which leads to
customer referrals), increase business growth, and
gain a competitive advantage.

A customer-centric company is more than a com-        Cartoon by Ted Goff. All Rights Reserved. Used with
pany that offers good customer service. Anytime a     Permission from Ted Goff.
customer-centric business makes a decision, it
deeply considers the effect the outcome will have on
its customers. An organization that forgets about
customers is destined to fail. They will build the
wrong products, invest in the wrong resources, and
lose goodwill with customers.4

Customer-centric organizations identify their most valuable customers and ensure their satisfaction. These
organizations focus on ensuring employees understand how important customers are to the company. Often,
the organization's mission, vision, and values include a customer-centric focus as more and more companies
see a need to build relationships with their customers. Based upon the company's mission, vision, and values,
the company aligns goals, distributes resources, develops products and services, defines processes, and devel­
ops strategies for competitive advantage.

Markets have moved from product centricity to customer centricity. Companies used to focus on design,
manufacturing, and logistics, and in the past, when products and services could achieve a clear product/ser-
vice difference, sustainable and beneficial, a product-centric approach made sense. Today, we have informed
consumers, competitive markets, and a few tangible product/service benefits--a combination that has
resulted in the focus shifting to customers.5 Refer to Table 1.1 for a comparison between product-centric and
cutomer-centric strategies.
                                                                                          DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 17

                 Table 1.1: Product-Centric versus Customer-Centric Strategies

Aspect           Product-Centric                                              Customer-Centric

Focus            Product features, design, and                                Customer needs, preferences, and
                 innovation                                                   experiences

Decision-Making Driven by internal priorities (cost, production, technology)  Guided by customer insights, feedback, and
                                                                              behaviour

Success Metrics  Sales, market share, production                              Customer satisfaction, loyalty, retention,
                 milestones                                                   lifetime value

Approach         Assumes a good product will attract Design solutions around what customers

                 customers                                                    value most

Goal Maximize product performance Maximize customer satisfaction, and adoption engagement, and long-term loyalty

The main reason organizations should follow a customer-centric strategy is that if they do not acquire and
retain customers, they will not survive. Many company leaders believe their business is customer-centric, but
employees and customers do not always agree. Why do you think that is?

Why do so many companies struggle to get customer centricity right? The volume, velocity, and variety of
customer data that now exists overwhelm many organizations. Some companies do not have the systems and
technology to segment and profile customers. Others lack the processes and operational capabilities to target
them with personalized communications and experiences.6

Being customer-centric is about more than just offering a good product or staffing a contact center. It
becomes a cultural way of life for the company and impacts everything from employee engagement to cus-
tomer experience.

No doubt you have probably experienced great customer service in the past. According to Forbes, some of the
most customer-centric companies in the world include the following:7

  · Airbnb regularly donates housing during times of need and prioritizes creating meaningful experiences
      for guests and hosts. Its platform emphasizes belonging and inclusion, connecting travelers with local
      communities.

  · Google invests in improving the user experience across its products and services. The company develops
      tools to make information accessible, ensures privacy and security, and supports small businesses
      through resources and advertising solutions.

  · Lululemon engages customers by building a robust omnichannel experience and offering virtual classes,
      connecting its brand with people's wellness journeys both online and in-store.

  · Nike's app provides personalized recommendations through chat and connects customers to in-store
      workshops and events. Nike Live stores offer unique, interactive experiences, including a shoe bar and
18 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

      personalized consultations.
  · Starbucks continually enhances its drive-thru, delivery, and mobile ordering services to meet customer

      needs. Its Deep Brew AI system streamlines operations, enabling employees to provide faster, more per-
      sonalized service.
  · Shopify empowers small businesses with tools to create and manage online stores efficiently. The plat-
      form highlights local stores in its app and offers plug-ins for creating shoppable ads on social media,
      making it easier for merchants to reach and engage customers.
  · Samsung focuses on customer support and engagement, using AI to analyze feedback, identify patterns,
      and prevent future issues. Its user-friendly support site and chat features have helped it achieve the high-
      est customer satisfaction scores among cell phone companies.
  · Trader Joe's delights customers with unique products, personalized service, and engaging in-store experi-
      ences. The grocery chain also emphasizes sustainability and reducing food waste, creating value for both
      customers and the community.

If a company is committed to making customer centricity a corporate priority for the organization, the
absolute first step is to fully understand the customer's needs and expectations. While much of this happens
through the customer-facing employees, they will require the support of the rest of the organization to suc-
ceed. As such, everyone, regardless of department or role, should actively contribute information, back-
ground, tools, resources, and training to achieve a unified understanding of the customer. Once this happens,
the organization will be well on its way to becoming customer-centric.8

Factors Impacting the Service Sector

Many factors have caused an economic shift from manufacturing to service, some of which include globaliza-
tion of the economy, government deregulation, government programs, customers expecting personalized
experiences, and increased use of technology both by customers and businesses.

The service sector accounts for 75% of Canadian jobs and 70.5% of the country's GDP. As a vital part of the
Canadian economy, the most popular sector is retail, with some big franchise names including Walmart and
Future Shop. In recent years, the financial services, real estate, and communications industries have grown
exponentially, especially in the business hubs of Vancouver, Montréal, and Toronto.9

Services play a key role in economies around the world, and Canada is no exception. The economy is divided
into three sectors: the primary sector, which is the sector in which companies make direct use of natural
resources; the secondary sector, which produces finished goods; and the tertiary sector, also known as the ser-
vice sector, which makes use of people's knowledge and time to improve productivity, performance, and
potential. This sector includes businesses that offer services in the following areas: transportation, govern-
                                                                                                               DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 19

ment, health care, construction, banking and finance, communication, retail, tourism, education, utilities,
recreation, social work, real estate, etc.

Customers Want Personalized Experiences

Consumers today view personalization as the default standard for engagement; they want companies to recog-
nize them as individuals and know their interests. Companies that offer these experiences are able to differen-
tiate their brands and create a competitive advantage.

Personalization has become integral to the customer journey and is now a key driver of brand loyalty across all
channels. Consumers are much more likely to buy from brands, both in-store and online, when offers are per-
sonalized. Consumers are also interested in purchasing more personalized products and services and are willing
to wait longer to get them.10

Forty-eight percent of consumers spend more when their experience is personalized. Seventy-four percent of
people dislike being shown irrelevant content. So what does this say about personalization? In customer expe-
rience, personalization is a winning strategy that can help companies advance their relationship with cus-
tomers. Eighty-eight percent of marketers claim that they've seen a measurable improvement in their
businesses after implementing customer experience personalization tactics.11

Personalized Customer Experiences for Millennials

Millennials, sometimes known as Generation Y, is a demographic cohort that follows Generation X and pre-
cedes Generation Z. Millennials were born between 1981 and 1996 (although this age range may vary depend-
ing on the source). So as of 2023, the millennial age range is between 27 and 42. They were the first generation
to grow up in the Internet Age, but also remember life before social media. They have lived through not one
but two generation-defining recessions and have been noted for craving work-life balance.12

The customer experience for millennials means experiencing something genuine and incredible that will build
lasting memories. Therefore, businesses market their products in such a way that will show millennials how
their experience will be better as a result of purchasing from that brand. For instance, if a company sells lug-
gage and is marketing a new suitcase, the company will not just market the suitcase; instead, it will market the
experiences and trips around the suitcase, thereby making the product a part of a bigger experience.13

Personalized Customer Experiences for Gen Z

Generation Z, sometimes known as "zoomers," is the demographic cohort that comes after millennials and
precedes Generation Alpha. Members of Gen Z were born between 1997 and 2012. So as of 2023, the Gen Z
age range is anywhere from 11 to 26. They are commonly referred to as the first fully "digitally native" genera-
20 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

tion. They grew up with social media and smartphones--they're used to living in a digital-first world. Research
from the National Library of Medicine shows that this diverse generation is highly motivated and more risk-
averse than previous generations.14

Generation Z spends most of their time online; in fact, close to three-quarters of these consumers choose to
spend their free time on the Internet. They value the ability to solve issues on their own, and they find it one of
the most frustrating bad customer service experiences when they cannot find the information they need online.
They may be young, but these consumers have colossal buying power. Uniquely, Gen Z influences everything
from their families' food purchases to clothing, electronics, household goods, and even furniture. Gen Z is
very cyber-savvy and very savvy in general, and just because they are young, companies need to be careful not
to underestimate them or treat them as young and inexperienced. Rather, businesses should bear in mind that
Gen Z's perception of customer service is that things should be frictionless, which is unlike that of any other
generation. Their world is one of immediacy and convenience, and they want their interactions with businesses
to be just as seamless. This expectation extends from making a purchase to the customer experience overall.15

Differences Between Millennials and Gen Z

Refer to Figure 1.1 below for a comparison of the customer experiences expectations and preferences of Mil-
lennials to Gen Z.
                                                                                                  DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 21

Figure 1.1 Comparison of Millennials to Gen Z for Customer Experience Preferences.
Adapted from Zendesk. All Rights Reserved.
22 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

Canada Goose is Getting Personal

Canada Goose is getting personal with its customers,

offering an immersive experience; it has a Cold Room

that blends both entertainment and functionality,

making it a good example of experiential retail that

actually serves a purpose. It has a faux-rock crevasse, a

room that snows, and a floor that cracks like ice, but it

does not have any products the customers can take

home. Customers can only order products for deliv-

ery later, with limited sizes and models to try on. In

fact, the luxury coat retailer is not calling the store a  A person staying warm on a cold day
store; it is calling it "The Journey: A Canada Goose

Experience." Staff will guide customers through a

series of themed rooms, before ending in an area where customers can browse a digital catalogue, talk to sales

staff about fit, and place an order. A certain proportion of people visiting the store do not intend to buy a

jacket, but are just curious about the Cold Room experience. This gives the brand an opportunity to make a

good impression on people who are not yet Canada Goose customers, but might be in the future. The Cold
Room is a fun, unusual experience that helps customers make more informed shopping decisions.16

The Running Room is Getting Personal

The Running Room, which is a store for people
who like to run, provides personalized customer
experiences through training programs that meet
the needs of a wide variety of customers, ranging
from those who are just getting into a fitness rou-
tine to those contemplating a marathon. The store
sells a selection of top brand-name running shoes
and apparel and offers training programs such as
Walking, Learn to Run, 5K Training, Marathon

                                                                     A group of people running a marathon

and Half Marathon training, 10K Training, and For
Women Only Running. The Running Room train-
ing programs are committed to educating customers on a lifestyle of fitness. Running Room's free Run Club
meets twice weekly, where runners of all levels run in a social, supportive group. This social component
brought to running by the Running Room builds a true sense of community in each location. Communicat­
ing with its customers via its in-store team, its website, Running Room Magazine, forums, X (formerly Twit­
ter), and Facebook keeps the company agile and innovative. "We believe that the Running Room philosophy
                                                                                                               DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 23

and our in-store environment are unlike any other retail business in North America. While we offer clothing,
shoes, products, and accessories for walkers and runners, we also help people to change their lives through fit­
ness activities," says the Stanton family.17

    Explore the Concept - Customers Want Personalized Experiences

     Conduct an Internet search for companies that are innovating with personalized customer experi-

    ences. Consider the following questions:

          · Why do you think consumers are seeking these types of experiences? What are customers
             saying about these experiences?

          · What types of companies are developing these innovations? Have the companies' revenue
             or market share increased since investing in these added-value strategies?

Increased Use of Technology

Digital transformation is the integration of digital technology into all areas of a business, resulting in fun-
damental changes in the way a business operates and the value it delivers to its customers. Digital transforma-
tion is forcing companies to change their business models and adapt to the new market reality. Today,
customers expect relevant content in relation to what they are doing anytime, anywhere, in the format, and
on the device of their choosing. It is the customer's journey that dictates the company's strategy.18
Customers have always wanted efficient, friendly, and reliable service, but with the development of new tech-
nology, their expectations have increased. Customers no longer tolerate poor service because there are just too
many businesses out there that will meet or exceed customer expectations.
In 2021, an estimated 2.14 billion people worldwide purchased goods online. At the same time, global ecom­
merce sales were forecast at $4.891 trillion USD. Projections show that ecommerce sales worldwide are going
to grow to $6.4 trillion USD by 2024.19 An online store and social media presence are essential for companies
selling in this global and digital business world. Customers want simple, direct, and easy transactions; technol­
ogy has taught them to expect it.
Customers today are more informed than ever before. They use technology to shop online, conduct research,
24 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

and compare prices, products, and services among competing companies. According to Outerboxdesign.com,
80% of shoppers use mobile phones in-store to check product reviews, compare prices, or find other store
locations. It's estimated that over 50% of all ecommerce purchases during the 2022 holiday season were made
on a smartphone.20 With so many individuals owning cell phones today, social media is a great way to con­
nect with customers.

In order to keep up with this new kind of "always-connected" customer, businesses must embrace technology
to deliver unmatched customer experiences. Fortunately, putting the customer first is already at the center of
many organizations' strategies. Global digital transformation spending will reach $6.8 trillion USD by 2023.
One of the main benefits is faster time to market, with 36% of businesses citing this as a key advantage. In fact,
79% of companies admit that COVID-19 increased the budget for digital transformation, and 70% of organi-
zations already have a digital transformation strategy or are working on one.21

Below is a list of a few of the customer experience technology trends that are changing how businesses interact
with their customers and shaping the future of customer experience.

 1. Machine learning is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI) and computer science that focuses on the use
      of data and algorithms to imitate the way that humans learn, gradually improving its accuracy. Over the
      last couple of decades, technological advances in storage and processing power have enabled some innov­
      ative products based on machine learning, such as Netflix's recommendation engine and self-driving
      cars.22 Some advantages of machine learning include intelligent customer service chatbots, improved
      product search, and fraud detection and prevention. By analyzing customer interactions and feedback,
      machine learning models can predict the likelihood of a customer issue escalating to a higher level of
      support, such as a supervisor or manager. This enables customer service teams to intervene early and
      address concerns to prevent escalations, resulting in improved customer satisfaction.23

 2. Remote Work is also referred to as telework, telecommuting, mobile work, flexible workplace, flex-
      hours, or e-commuting and is a work arrangement in which employees do not commute to a central
      location instead, they work outside the office location from various locations. Many workers can work
      from home (WFH) when they have access to the technologies they need to do their jobs. Remote Work
      has become a popular choice and employee incentive in some cases for those who wish to work from
      home. Customer service and sales representatives need to learn how to use customer relationship build-
      ing (CRM) software in order to meet customer expectations, whether working from home, at the office,
      or on the road. With access to technology, employees can be located in the same city as the company
      they work for, or anywhere in the world.

 3. Customer-centric virtual and augmented reality (AR) retail applications today focus on helping con-
      sumers experience brands and products without having to go into stores. Beauty brand Cover Girl, for
      example, opened an AR makeup station in its flagship store in New York, where shoppers can virtually
      try on a range of cosmetics and then share their makeovers on social media with friends. Pottery Barn
                                                                                                            DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 25

    offers an AR app for its Pottery Barn and PBteen brands that lets users drag and drop items in a room to
    see how they work with existing furniture and decor. They can also completely empty a room to start the
    design process from scratch, and shoppers can purchase the items they like right from the app. Swedish
    retail IKEA has a similar offering with its "Place" app, helping users visualize how an item will look in
    their homes before they purchase it.24
4. The Internet of Things (IoT) is made up of billions of smart, connected devices, and gives any "thing"
    a voice through the data it gathers, produces, and distributes. With around 26 "smart objects" for every
    human being on Earth predicted by 2020, the ability for companies to leverage connected products and
    other sensor-generated data to enhance the customer experience is unprecedented.25

    IoT devices will change ecommerce by turning
    everyday objects into potential sales channels for
    retailers. IoT products and devices include smart
    and digitized vehicles, laptops, smartphones,
    smart gadgets, and smartwatches. You may
    already own some of these devices. Have you
    heard of the Amazon Dash Button? A device that
    connects over Wi-Fi to ensure that you do not run
    out of household items such as milk, bread, medi­
    cine, soap, or dog food, ever again. Maybe you A smart connected device that recognizes voice
    have a Google Home Voice Controller. It allows commands
    you to enjoy features like media, alarms, lights,
    thermostats, control the volume, and many more functions just using your voice.
5. Business intelligence (BI) is software that ingests business data and presents it in user-friendly views
    such as reports, dashboards, charts, and graphs. BI tools enable business users to access different types of
    data -- historical and current, third-party and in-house, as well as semi-structured data and unstructured
    data like social media. Users can analyze this information to gain insights into how the business is per-
    forming.26 BI can help marketers create a unique customer experience by providing them with data that
    shows who their customers are, what motivates them, and which channels they use most often. It also
    helps marketers understand why customers abandon carts or leave negative feedback on social media
    sites such as Facebook, X (formerly Twitter), and Yelp. BI helps businesses monitor what's happening
    with customers across channels. BI enables companies to see patterns of behavior, such as when cus-
    tomers are most likely to buy, that might otherwise go unnoticed so that improvements can be made
    accordingly.27
26 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

    Explore the Concept - Increased Use of Technology

    Consider the following questions:

          · Do you own an IoT device?
          · What forms of digital or technology-driven customer service have you experienced? For

             example, does your library have a live chat with a librarian available from the library's web-
             site?
          · Have you experienced speaking with a chatbot or an automated attendant on the phone?
          · Have you watched live video streaming from a company?
          · Have you experienced personalization on the websites or social media you frequent?
          · How does technology impact the way you shop and the way companies interact with you?

   Key Takeaways

         1. Customer service is the assistance and advice provided by a company to customers
             throughout the customer journey; before, during, and after the sale. Humans usually provide
             customer service to other humans, but some service comes from machines, technologies,
             animals, etc. The service a customer receives becomes part of the experiences they have
             with the company.

         2. Customer experience is the result of an interaction between the customer and the com-
             pany. It is how customers perceive their interactions with the company or brand.

         3. A customer touchpoint is a point in time when the company connects in some form with
             the customer (e.g., website, phone, email, social media, retail store, returns, service, and
             products).

         4. The customer journey is the complete sum of experiences that customers go through
                                                                                                     DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 27

     when interacting with a company and its brands. It considers the complete path from brand
     discovery to purchasing and beyond. The focus is not on purchases made, but rather on how
     the customer feels about the interactions throughout their journey with the company.
 5. In building a customer-centric business, personas and customer journey maps are impor-
     tant strategic tools that help provide an in-depth understanding of who a company's cus-
     tomers are, what they need, and how they interact with the company across all touchpoints.
 6. Personas are fictional customer types created to represent real target customer groups.
 7. The customer journey map is a visual depiction (diagrammed or written) detailing the path
     the customer takes from the time the customer first discovers the brand, to purchasing, and
     beyond. The customer journey map examines the full experience of being a customer with
     the company and examines all touchpoints and channels.
8. The consumer buying process consists of five stages: Problem/need recognition, Informa-
     tion search, Evaluation of alternatives, Purchase or no purchase decision, Post-purchase eval-
     uation. It is influenced by several factors: psychological, cultural, personal, and social.
 9. Customer centricity is a way of doing business that fosters a positive customer experience
     before, during, and after the sale in order to drive repeat business, build customer loyalty
     (which leads to customer referrals), increase business growth, and gain a competitive advan-
     tage.
10. Many factors have caused an economic shift from manufacturing to service, some of which
     include globalization of the economy, government deregulation, government programs, cus-
     tomers expecting personalized experiences, and increased use of technology both by cus-
     tomers and businesses.
11. Personalization has become integral to the customer journey and is now a key driver of
     brand loyalty across all channels. Consumers are much more likely to buy from brands,
     whether in-store or online, when offers are personalized. Consumers are also interested in
     purchasing more personalized products and services and are willing to wait longer to get
     them.
12. The customer experience for Millennials means experiencing something genuine and
     incredible that will build lasting memories. Therefore, businesses market their products in
     such a way that will show millennials how their experience will be better as a result of pur-
     chasing from that brand.
13. Uniquely, Gen Z influences everything from their families' food purchases to clothing, elec-
     tronics, household goods, and even furniture. Gen Z is very cyber-savvy and very savvy in
     general, and just because they are young, companies need to be careful not to underestimate
     them or treat them as young and inexperienced. Rather, businesses should bear in mind that
28 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

             Gen Z's perception of customer service is that things should be frictionless, which is unlike
             that of any other generation.
       14. Digital Transformation is forcing companies to change their business models and adapt to
             the new market reality. Today, customers expect relevant content in relation to what they're
             doing anytime, anywhere, in the format, and on the device of their choosing. It is their jour-
             ney that dictates the company's strategy.
        15. Machine learning is a data analysis technique that automates analytical model building.
             Some advantages of machine learning include intelligent customer service chatbots,
             improved product search, and fraud detection and prevention.
        16. Remote Work, also referred to as telework, telecommuting, mobile work, flexible work-
             place, flex-hours, e-commuting, or remote work, is a work arrangement in which employees
             do not commute to a central location; instead, they work outside the office from various loca-
             tions.
        17. Customer-centric virtual and augmented reality (AR) retail applications today focus on
             helping consumers experience brands and products without having to go into stores.
       18. The Internet of Things (IoT) is made up of billions of smart, connected devices, and gives
             any "thing" a voice through the data it gathers, produces, and distributes.
        19. Business intelligence (BI) leverages software and services to transform data into action-
             able insights that inform an organization's strategic decisions. Business intelligence and per-
             formance analytics leverage software to transform data into crucial insights that inform
             company decisions, thereby empowering employees to make better business decisions.

   End-of-Chapter Exercises

         1. Service Sector. Research one of these companies and explain how this company is address-
             ing the changes impacting the service sector: Bank of Nova Scotia, Canadian Tire, PepsiCo,
             McDonald's, IKEA.

         2. The Journey Map. Create a user persona for a distinct customer segment that the Sport
                                                                                                        DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 29

        Chek company would serve. Locate a template for a journey map online (or from your pro-
        fessor) and complete it. List the actions of this persona at each stage of the buying process.
        Include the emotions the customer may have as they navigate through the journey at each
        touchpoint. If customers have to take too many actions to get to their goals, this may frus-
        trate them. Add pain points (where customers may experience negative emotions). Seek
        ways to improve the pain points. Discuss some suggestions with a partner that you might
        make to Sport Chek's management to improve this customer segment's customer journey.
   3. Customer Journey. Map your customer journey for any purchase you recently made. Iden-
        tify the company touchpoints, your experience at each touchpoint, and the perception you
        were left with after the purchase.
   4. Annual Report. Locate an annual report for the GAP Inc. (or some other company) and
        review it. What does it say about brands, customer service, multiple service channels, and
        technology? Does the report mention specific details that relate to this chapter's content? If
        so, what does it say?
   5. Personalized Experience. Think about a time when a company provided you with a per-
        sonalized experience. Share that experience with a friend and they can share their personal-
        ized experience with you. Would the same personalized experience satisfy each of you?
        Why or why not? Share your explanation with your professor.

Self-Check Exercise - Customer Centricity Quiz

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                   here:
        https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=28#h5p-1
30 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

   Self-Check Exercise - Customer Centricity Flashcards

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
              https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=28#h5p-15

   Additional Resources

         1. LinkedIn Learning Customer Service Training
         2. 8 Tips for Becoming a Customer-centric Organization
         3. Customer Experience (CX) versus Customer Service: What They Are and Why They Matter
         4. 50 Stats Showing the Power of Personalization

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Media Attributions

  · The owner of a food truck serving a customers © Image by Kampus Production from Pexels is licensed
                                                                                                                 DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY | 31

       under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
    · A customer being served in a restaurant © Image by Sebastian Coman Photography from Pexels is

       licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
    · A customer leaning against their new car © Image by Andrea Piacquadio from Pexels is licensed under a

       CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
    · Cell Phone Winter Jacket Comparison © Hannes Edinger | Pixabay
    · Cartoon by Ted Goff All Rights Reserved © Ted Goff is licensed under a All Rights Reserved license
    · Comparison of Millennials to Gen Z © Zendesk adapted by Kerri Shields is licensed under a All Rights

       Reserved license
    · A person A person staying warm on a cold day winter jacket © Image by Andrea Piacquadio from Pexels

       is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
    · A group of people running a marathon © Image by RUN 4 FFWPU from Pexels is licensed under a

       CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
    · A smart connected device that recognizes voice commands © Image by John Tekeridis from Pexels is

       licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

Notes

        1. Odyssey Training. (2018, August 30). Poor vs great customer service. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
             Zy1h49_L8ME

        2. acquire. (2021, November 18). Customer experience as competitive advantage: Why you don't have to be Amazon to do it
             right. https://acquire.io/blog/customer-experience-competitive-advantage

        3. August, G. J., & Ramirez, S. J. (2020, January 14). Personas and journey maps: Strategic tools for improving customer
             experience. Beyond the Arc. https://beyondthearc.com/blog/2014/customer-experience/improve-customer-experi-
             ence-with-personas-and-journey-maps

        4. Johnson, B. (2020, February 28). 8 tips for becoming a customer centric organization. Hubspot. https://blog.hub-
             spot.com/service/customer centric

        5. Poynter, R. (2020, February 6). Dissecting the difference between being customer centric and being customer focused.
             Alida. https://www.visioncritical.com/blog/customer centric-versus-customer-focused

        6. Yohn, D. (2018, October 2). 6 ways to build a customer centric culture. Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2018/
             10/6-ways-to-build-a-customer centric-culture

        7. Morgan, B. (2022, May 1). The top 100 most customer centric companies of 2022. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
             blakemorgan/2022/05/01/the-top-100-most-customer-centric-companies-of-2022/?sh=350446502b38

        8. Geldart, P. (2019, December 13). Customer centricity is the key to a competitive advantage. Entrepreneur.
             https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/343531

        9. Canadianvisa. (2023, May 23). Service industry. https://canadianvisa.org/life-in-canada/key-industries/service-industry
       10. IBM Watson Marketing. (2019, February 19). Personalizing Customer Experiences at scale: How human creativity and

             AI-based automation make a winning combination. Marketing Land. https://marketingland.com/personalizing-cus-
             tomer-experiences-at-scale-256563
32 | DEFINING CUSTOMER CENTRICITY

     11. Atif, M. (2019, May 30). Reinventing personalization for customer experience. Toward Data Science. https://towards-
           datascience.com/reinventing-personalization-for-customer-experience-235d8c75aa38

     12. Gorynski, M. (2023, September 1). Millennials vs. Gen Z: Differences in customer service expectations. https://www.zen-
           desk.com/blog/millennials-vs-gen-z-customer-service-expectations-com-
           pare/#:~:text=Though%20Gen%20Z%20and%20millennial%20customer%20service%20expectations,pre-
           fer%20using%20digital%20channels%20to%20contact%20customer%20support.

     13. clincher. (n.d.). What do millennials care about? It's not what you think. https://eclincher.com/what-do-millennials-
           care-about-its-not-what-you-think/

     14. Gorynski, M. (2023, September 1). Millennials vs. Gen Z: Differences in customer service expectations. https://www.zen-
           desk.com/blog/millennials-vs-gen-z-customer-service-expectations-com-
           pare/#:~:text=Though%20Gen%20Z%20and%20millennial%20customer%20service%20expectations,pre-
           fer%20using%20digital%20channels%20to%20contact%20customer%20support.

     15. Telus International. (2017, June 15). Customer service for Gen Z: How to connect with the next power generation.
           https://www.telusinternational.com/insights/customer-experience/article/customer-service-generation-z

     16. Segran, E. (2018, December 21). Canada Goose's cold room was the best retail experience of the Year. Fast Company.
           https://www.fastcompany.com/90285098/canada-gooses-cold-room-was-the-best-retail-experience-i-had-this-year

     17. The Running Room. (2020). About Us. Running Room. http://www.runningroom.com/ca/inside.php?id=3036

     18. Lund, J. (2020, March 4). How digital transformation is driving customer experience. SuperOffice. https://www.super-
           office.com/blog/digital-transformation/

     19. Mohsin, M. (2022, November 13). 10 online shopping statistics you need to know in 2023. Oberlo.
           https://www.oberlo.ca/blog/online-shopping-statistics

     20. Smith, J. (2023, March 17). Mobile ecommerce stats in 2023: What percentage of ecommerce sales are on mobile devices?
           OuterBox. https://www.outerboxdesign.com/web-design-articles/mobile-ecommerce-statistics

     21. Lund, J. (2023, March 9). How digital transformation is driving customer experience. SuperOffice. https://www.super-
           office.com/blog/digital-transformation/

     22. IBM. (n.d.). What is machine learning? https://www.ibm.com/topics/machine-learning

     23. Thompson, J. (2023, August 11). Faster resolution, happier customers: The role of machine learning in customer service.
           https://blog.hubspot.com/service/machine-learning-customer-service#:~:text=By%20analyzing%20cus-
           tomer%20interactions%20and%20feedback%2C%20machine%20learning,to%20prevent%20escalations%2C%20result-
           ing%20in%20improved%20customer%20satisfaction.

     24. Abramovich, G. (2019). 5 Technologies that are Reshaping Customer Experience. CMO. https://cmo.adobe.com/arti-
           cles/2019/1/these-5-emerging-technologies-will-impact-your-business-most-in-2019.html#gs.18yata

     25. McorpCX. (n.d.) 11 Customer Experience Technology Trends to Watch for Through 2020. Retrieved from
           https://www.mcorpcx.com/articles/11-tech-trends-in-cx-innovation

     26. IBM. (n.d.). What is business intelligence? https://www.ibm.com/topics/business-intelligence

     27. Shnaider, H. (2021, December 9). How BI can help create a unique customer experience? https://fortyseven47.com/
           blog/how-bi-can-help-customer/
                                                                                                                                              BEING A CSR | 33

CHAPTER 2: BEING A CUSTOMER SERVICE
REPRESENTATIVE (CSR)

   Chapter 2 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
                  1. Describe the role of the customer service representative.
                 2. Identify skills required by customer service representatives.
                 3. List the benefits of providing excellent customer service.
                 4. Use positive language that will enhance customer relationships.
                 5. Use a variety of non-verbal communication strategies.
                 6. Describe why active listening is important to customer service.
                 7. Practice daily rituals to maintain a positive attitude.
                 8. Apply stress management techniques.
                 9. Apply time management techniques.

Customer service is both a type of job and a set of job skills. As a job, customer service professionals are
responsible for addressing customer needs and ensuring that customers have good experiences. As a skill set,
customer service entails several qualities like active listening, empathy, problem-solving, and communication.
Customer service is used in many jobs at every level. While traditionally you might think of customer care as a
service from a business to a consumer (B-2-C), it is also applicable from one business to another business
(B-2-B), as well as from one department to another department within the same organization.1
When you think of the people who work in a customer service role, who do you think of? Do you think of
the person who greets you at the restaurant, the person who answers the phone when you call your doctor's
office, or the person who delivers to your home the products you ordered online? Each of these people is cer-
tainly working in a customer service role. What you might be surprised to know is that every job position has
34 | BEING A CSR

some degree of customer service embedded in the role. People who work in the information technology,
human resources, or finance departments do not usually interface with external customers on a day-to-day
basis, but they do interact with their colleagues regularly. Internal customers are the company employees
who need support, information, or action from other employees. These internal customers may work just
down the hall, in another building, or in another country, but they are still part of the company and are work-
ing to help satisfy external customers. External customers are the customers who purchase products or ser-
vices from the company. Employees who work in job positions that require them to interface with external
customers directly might be referred to as front-line, front-facing, front-end, or customer-facing employees.
Those who work to serve internal customers are working in back-end/back-office/behind-the-scene job posi-
tions.

An example of an employee working to serve an external customer may be a situation where a customer
phones the store's service desk and the employee who answers the phone listens attentively to the customer's
story, then places the customer on a brief hold while they check with the manager or another employee about
the customer's concern or query. The employee who is asking for help has become an internal customer at
that moment in time, as they are receiving support from their manager or co-worker. After they receive sup-
port, they then return to the phone to follow up with the external customer and finish the call. It takes a team
working together to provide excellent customer service. Those external customers who purchase the products
and services the company provides are the ones keeping the company alive, and ensuring employees have jobs.
If there were no customers there would be no need for employees!

As a service professional, you are the "face" of your organization in customer interactions. Your primary func-
tion is to listen actively and gather the information needed in order to make a decision on what course of
action is needed to best serve the customer in any given situation. This typically requires a polite, professional
demeanor and effective and efficient answers to questions or resolutions to problems.2

Capabilities Customer Service Professionals Require

How can employers ensure they are hiring the right people to represent their brand or uphold their company
image? What skills can customer service professionals develop to become more proficient at their jobs? There
are many skills customer service professionals need to be excellent in their jobs, these include the ability to
communicate clearly, use positive language, use positive body language, serve diverse customers, be persuasive,
use active listening, interact positively in a team, learn continuously, manage time, and manage stress. They
also need to be able to show empathy and think critically to solve problems creatively. These skills and more
are critical to creating outstanding customer experiences, and most require a lot of time and practice to truly
master.
                                                                                                                                              BEING A CSR | 35

To be successful on the job, customer service professionals require the following abilities. Each of these is dis-
cussed in more detail below.

 1. Demonstrate a Customer Service Orientation
 2. Communicate Verbally and Non-Verbally
 3. Use Positive Language
 4. Actively Listen
 5. Think and Solve Problems
 6. Manage information
 7. Be Responsible and Professional
 8. Learn Constantly
 9. Maintain a Positive Attitude
10. Manage Stress
11. Manage Time
12. Contribute to Team Performance
13. Participate in Team Presentations
14. Participate in Team Meetings
15. Participate in Projects and Tasks

Ability to Demonstrate a Customer Service Orientation

You might notice in some job advertisements the phrase, "must have a Customer Service Orientation". Cus­
tomer Service Orientation means that as an employee you are able to display positive attitudes and behav-
iours, and demonstrate an awareness of the importance of meeting or exceeding customer needs and
expectations. Many businesses today think more about attracting new leads, maximizing sales, upselling,
expanding market share, and obtaining a bigger "share of wallet" than they do about meeting and exceeding
customer needs. While increasing profit is important, a company with a genuine customer-first approach will
care about customers and their needs because they understand that this is how they can grow profit.

In practice, it might mean that the company trains its service representatives not to upsell products or services
to customers who do not need or want them. It may mean that service representatives do not encourage cus-
tomers to upgrade a subscription if the customer will not benefit from upgrading. Sometimes, it even means
letting a customer go or referring them to a competitor if the solutions your company offers are not best
suited for the customer. Have you ever shopped at a company and discovered they did not sell what you
needed or wanted? Did a service representative suggest you visit a competing company for that particular
product or service? Why do you think they referred you to a competitor rather than trying to sell you some-
thing else, or just saying, "We don't carry that item"? There may be some good reasons for referring cus-
tomers to competitors, such as creating a positive company image, spreading positive word-of-mouth,
36 | BEING A CSR

connecting with other businesses in a joint effort that will benefit both companies, supporting the values the
company has around true customer centricity, building trust and loyalty with customers, and highlighting
your company's confidence in the products and services you do sell. A great example of this comes from Zap-
pos, "Zappos `refer to competitor' tactic (when they don't have an item in stock), reflects an incredibly strong
customer-centric DNA. The primary focus is not only to maximize revenues but to get the customer exactly
what they're looking for. "3 It's also `un-corporation like' to center on the customer to such a degree that you
try to sell them something similar that is in stock that they don't really want, instead of referring them to a
competitor to get the exact product they want.

Service culture in an organization means putting customers at the center of the business model, developing
policies, procedures, values, norms, and beliefs that are centered around focusing on customer satisfaction
and understanding their needs and wants.

Company policies, procedures, and employees' actions contribute to the organization's service culture.
Employees communicate the company culture through their appearance, interactions with customers, prod-
uct knowledge, skills, and attitude. Maintaining a friendly, positive, and professional attitude in the work-
place will take you far. Here are a few of the benefits of providing excellent customer service for the employee,
the company, and the customer.

Employee Benefits from Providing Excellent Customer Service

  · Receive promotions, bonuses, and recognition
  · Receive project opportunities, growth opportunities
  · Retain employment
  · Intrinsic rewards from knowing you did the best job you could
  · Better relationships with customers
  · Better relationships with colleagues
  · Better relationships with management
  · Happier life

Company Benefits from Providing Excellent Customer Service

  · Positive reviews from customers
  · Increased revenues, customers spend more, and give referrals
  · Positive word-of-mouth, positive company image
  · Retain employees longer
  · Company growth
  · Customers involved in company projects
                                                                                  BEING A CSR | 37

· Increased customer lifetime value (CLV)
· Retaining customers longer, thereby reducing costs in recruiting new customers

Customer Benefits from Receiving Excellent Customer Service

· Obtain objectives and have issues resolved
· Get involved in company projects
· Rewards for continued loyalty
· Build relationships with employees
· Take advantage of company opportunities
· Happier life

Ability to Apply Fundamental Work Skills

As shown in Table 2.1 below, the following fundamental work skills are identified by the Conference Board of
Canada as skills you need to enter, stay in, and progress in the world of work--whether you work on your own
or as part of a team.4
38 | BEING A CSR

                  Table 2.1 Fundamental Skills

Communicate       · Read and understand information presented in different
                     ways (e.g., words, graphs, charts, diagrams).

                  · Write and speak so others can pay attention and understand.
                  · Listen and ask questions to understand and appreciate the

                     points of view of others.
                  · Share information using different technologies (e.g., phone

                     calls, e-mail, social media, the Internet).
                  · Use relevant knowledge and skills to explain or clarify ideas.

Manage            · Find, gather, and organize information using technology.
Information       · Learn and use knowledge and skills from different fields.

Use Numbers       · Decide what you need to measure or calculate.
                  · Study and record data using the right methods and tools.
                  · Make estimates and check answers.

Think and Solve   · Assess situations and spot problems.
Problems          · Find different points of view and evaluate them based on

                     facts.
                  · Recognize multiple dimensions of a problem.
                  · Identify the root cause of a problem.
                  · Be creative and innovative in exploring solutions.
                  · Use science, technology, and math to solve problems and

                     make decisions.
                  · Consider solutions to make recommendations or decisions.
                  · Apply solutions.
                  · Check to see if a solution works, and act on opportunities to

                     improve.
                                                                             BEING A CSR | 39

Use Digital  · Use digital technologies to create and share information and
Tools           content.

             · Safely, securely, and legally use virtual tools.
             · Buy or sell things online and use digital tools to manage

                money.

Ability to Communicate Verbally and Non-Verbally

It is important that a service professional fully understands the customer's needs and is careful to clearly pro-
vide answers, directions, facts, or any other information required to make the sale or serve the customer and
build a positive customer relationship. When communication is unclear, customers may misunderstand or
misinterpret the message and this could lead to lost business. For example, a customer may order a meal at a
fast-food restaurant and ask the server, "Are there onion rings?" when they really mean, "Are onion rings
included with the meal at no extra charge?" The server may answer, "Yes" only to discover that the customer
is upset when the bill arrives to see that they were charged extra for the onion rings they thought were
included in the price of the meal. The customer may choose to eat at a different restaurant the next time due
to this negative experience. Had the server clarified the question before proceeding with the order, the cus-
tomer would not have been upset.

10 Tips for Effective Communication with Customers5

 1. Patience is a must
 2. Accuracy of information is key
 3. A proactive approach always delights customers
 4. Attentiveness helps
 5. Avoid interrupting
 6. Know your product/service offered inside out
 7. Honesty works every time
 8. Active Listening and acknowledgments do wonders
 9. Analogies help in getting your message across
10. Don't take shortcuts

Verbal communication refers to the ability of a customer service representative to think of the right words in
order to appease a customer and provide a solution. It does not necessarily mean that a service representative
should sound too formal and robotic while communicating with customers. However, being too informal is
40 | BEING A CSR

not good either as it could leave the customer with a negative impression. Keeping a balance is what a cus-
tomer representative should strive for.

Non-verbal communication refers to gestures, facial expressions, eye contact, body language, posture, and
other ways people can communicate without using language. Your nonverbal communication skills can cre-
ate a positive (or a negative) impression. Crossed arms can seem defensive. Poor posture may appear unprofes-
sional. A downward gaze or avoiding eye contact can detract from your being seen as confident.

Often referred to as intercultural communication, cross-cultural communication is the study of how verbal
and nonverbal communication takes place among individuals from different backgrounds, geographies, and
cultures.6

During cross-cultural communication, agents should follow these suggestions:

  · Write or speak simply and clearly.
  · Avoid slang, vague words, or colloquialisms.
  · Listen carefully with a positive approach.
  · Speak slowly and be specific.
  · Avoid stereotypes, they are often inaccurate and offer a false view of a culture.
  · Avoid non-verbal hints because they have different meanings in different cultures; for example, some

      hand gestures have different meanings among different cultures, so be cautious when using them.

For cross-cultural communication to be effective it needs to have a base of trust. You can easily earn the trust of
people from other cultures if you are supportive, listen to what they want to say, give them the time to express
their ideas and encourage them when they respond.7

Improving your cultural intelligence by learning bout various cultures will help you become a better commu­
nicator. This will not only make you a more effective service representative or contact center agent but also a
more effective team member since many people on your team will be from various cultural groups.

Watch the "Positive Body Language" YouTube video below for tips on positive body language as it pertains to
Canadian culture.8 Transcript for "Positive Body Language" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is
available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­

bed-1
                                  BEING A CSR | 41

Ability to Use Positive Language

Positive language is the art of using words and phrases to communicate a positive, supportive tone to your
customers (or anyone else for that matter). Using positive language is important for building rapport with
others. Sharing bad news with customers is a part of being a customer service professional. Customer service
professionals must learn how to share negative information without being negative. When sharing negative
information that may make a customer upset, sad, or angry it is always best to speak face-to-face, but that may
not always be possible, and sometimes negative messages must be sent through email or postal mail.

Watch the "Service Recovery - Do Say / Don't Say" YouTube video below to learn key words and phrases to
de-escalate tense situations.9 Transcript for "Service Recovery - Do say/Don't say" Video [PDF-New Tab].

Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­
bed-4

Language is a crucial part of how we interact with others and the perceptions they form of us. For example, a
customer may contact the company seeking a specific product, but the product happens to be on back-order
until next month. The way the customer service professional uses words to convey that the product is on
back-order will help to make or break the sale. Without using positive language, the sales might say, "Sorry,
the product is on back-order and won't be available until next month." With positive language, the sales rep-
resentative might say, "The product will be available next month, and I'm happy to place the order now for
you and have it shipped directly to you as soon as it arrives." Do you see the difference using positive language
makes? The first example seems abrupt and impersonal and may upset customers, while the second example
is saying the same thing but it focuses on when and how the issue will be resolved rather than focusing on the
negative.

Watch the "Sharing Negative Information without Being Negative" YouTube video below to learn how to
share negative information with others.10 Transcript for "Sharing Negative Information without Being Nega-
tive" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
42 | BEING A CSR

        One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view them
        online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oembed-2

Ability to Actively Listen

Active listening means that you focus on what your customer is saying. You try not to let your mind wan-
der while your customer is speaking. You paraphrase what the customer has said and ask the customer if your
understanding of what they have told you is correct. You may ask customers questions to obtain more details
of what the issue is. You may have to calm an upset customer. Certainly, the customer is there to gather
answers and see results so put yourself in the customer's shoes, and really listen to their story so you can pro-
vide the best customer service you can.

Watch the "Customer Service Fundamentals - Actively Listening to Customers" YouTube video below to
learn about active listening.11 Transcript for "Customer Service Fundamentals - Actively Listening to Cus-
tomers" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­
                   bed-5

Ability to Think and Solve Problems

Service breakdowns occur daily in all types of organizations. They happen whenever the product or service
delivered fails to meet customer needs, wants, and expectations. When the customer purchases a product or
service that fails to meet the advertised promises or standards, dissatisfaction and frustration can result which
may lead to confrontation and/or loss of business.

"Customer expectations can affect how service is delivered and perceived. Today's customers are more dis-
cerning and better educated and have access to more up-to-date and accurate information. They also have
many more options offered by your competitors. They are often more demanding than in the past. Their
expectations about your products and services and the way that you will provide them may create a situation
where little you do or say can meet their perceptions. In such cases, remain professional, positive, and offer
                                                                                                                                              BEING A CSR | 43

alternatives or concessions, if appropriate, in order to maintain the relationship and provide what the cus-
tomer needs or wants."12

The training video below was posted on YouTube by Kantola Training Solutions and includes valuable tactics
for dealing with angry, upset, difficult, or irate customers, and includes the following topics:

  · Connect with the angry customer.
  · Show empathy or apologize if appropriate.
  · Guide the customer's attention toward solving the problem.
  · Use positive language.
  · Have the customer make small decisions.
  · Take a timeout or draw the line.
  · Know what you can offer.

Watch the "Dealing with an Angry Customer Training" YouTube video below to learn more about dealing
with angry customers.13 Transcript for "Dealing with an Angry Customer Training" Video [PDF-New Tab].
Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­
                   bed-6

When dealing with angry customers it is important to use positive language, for example, let them know what
you can do for them rather than what you cannot do for them to resolve their issue. Avoid saying, "We don't."
If you are unable to offer something or provide a service the customer wants, then you might say, "What I can
do for you is offer you..." or "I'm sorry, we don't actually sell that product, although we do sell something
similar if you are interested," or "I' sorry, we do not sell that product, but you might try Best Buy," or "I'm
sorry, we do not have that item in stock, would you like me to check our other store locations for you,"
instead of saying, "We don't have that," or "We don't do that." Avoid saying, "I cannot," "Our policy does
not allow for that," or "No." Instead try saying, "I understand why you may be upset. I might be upset too
in this situation. You have had the cell phone longer than the 30-day exchange window, so what I can do for
you in this situation is..." or "I understand what you are asking for, and my manager will need to consider this
request. Would you mind waiting a minute while I get my manager?"

Service recovery is a company's resolution of a problem from a dissatisfied customer, converting them into a
loyal customer. It is the action a service provider takes in response to service failure. It entails the company
44 | BEING A CSR

taking appropriate actions in response to a service failure. The service failure may have occurred for all sorts of
reasons-the service may be unavailable when promised, it may be delivered too late or too slowly, the out-
come may be incorrect or poorly executed, or employees may be rude or uncaring. If you are the customer
service representative serving a customer experiencing a service failure, you represent the company, therefore
you need to apologize, solve the problem, and compensate the customer with something of value. Managers
need to create a service recovery process and train employees on the process. Starbucks and other fast-paced
businesses make a point of training via acronyms and other mnemonics because these can help employees
mentally walk through the steps at times when they may be flustered and struggling with a situation. Star-
bucks uses the acronym LATTE for the customer service recovery sequence where L=Listen to the customer,
A=Acknowledge the problem/situation by verbally explaining it, T=Take action and solve the problem (this
is an opportunity to turn a bad experience into a good one), T=Thank the customer for bringing this to your
attention, E=Explain what you did and encourage the customer to return another time. The service recovery
sequence at Marriott Hotels spells LEARN where L=Listen, E=Empathize, A=Apologize, R=Respond, and
N=Notify.14

Another great way to solve customer problems is to apply a problem-solving model such as the one shown in
Figure 2.3 below. A problem-solving model provides you with concrete, easy to remember steps you can
work through when faced with any issue, customer service related or other. Your company may have its own
version of how to approach customer problems, but here is a simple breakdown used by many customer ser-
vice teams around the world in some similar variations.
                                                         BEING A CSR | 45

1. Identify or Define the Real Problem. What

exactly is the problem? You may need to ask the cus-

tomer some open-ended questions to gather more

information or do some research to look into some

facts, then determine with the customer what the

exact problem is. You want to be solving the cus-

tomer's problem and not assuming you know what

they are upset about.

2. Compile and Analyze the Data. To be able to

effectively determine a course of action you need as

much information as possible. You may need to col-

lect information from a variety of sources. Collate

the information in a structured way, and focus on

the underlying causes of the problem.

3. Develop Alternative Solutions. Analytical, cre-

ative problem solving is about creating a variety of

solutions, not just one. At this stage, it is not about

finding one solution but eliminating the options

that will prove less effective at dealing with both the

symptoms and the root cause.

4. Select a Solution. You need to examine which

alternative solutions best solve the problem as well as

which solutions are doable. If your company, for

example, is not able to provide the solution you

selected, then you would not want to offer it to the

customer. You might offer a choice of solutions to

the customer, those that are feasible, and let your

customer select the one they prefer. If the solution

is too unrealistic, too expensive, too time consum-

ing, or too risky for your company, then you need to

go back a step and consider additional alternatives.     Figure 2.3 Problem Solving Model
Also, if the solution is not satisfying the customer or

solving the problem, you need to back up and consider alternative solutions; you may even need to bring

your manager into the conversation.

5. Implement the Solution. Take action. You may need to communicate with other team members or

your manager to put the solution into action, or you may simply need to apologize to the customer,

thank them for bringing this issue to your attention, and/or refund the customer. If the problem was
46 | BEING A CSR

      more complex you may have to reorder an item and provide the customer with a receipt and expected
      delivery date. Following up with the customer is a best practice in these more complex cases.
 6. Evaluate the Outcome. Follow up with the customer and/or your team to ensure the solution was
      implemented and the customer is satisfied. You may need to take action to correct something if things
      did not go as planned and it is better to catch this before you lose the customer completely. You might
      even ask the customer to provide feedback, evaluate the service, or complete a survey. You might need to
      adjust the customer service process if the process was an issue, and this may include sharing the experi-
      ence with your manager, especially if the process is broken and causes several customers to become dis-
      satisfied. You can suggest improvements to your manager and avoid repeat customer service
      breakdowns. Your manager will be happy you did.

Ability to Manage Information

Information management (IM) is the appropriate and optimized capture, storage, retrieval, and use of infor-
mation.

Email

Email is a business tool used around the world in millions of businesses. It is fast, inexpensive, and can send a
message to almost any place in the world. As a customer service representative, you will use email to corre-
spond with managers, colleagues, customers, and partners. It is important to follow company guidelines
when sending any correspondence. Often companies have guidelines for font size, type, letterhead, signature
blocks, etc. It is equally important to use professional language, steer clear of text chat short-cuts you may use
with your friends, and ensure a polite and caring tone; after all, you are representing the company.

The Indeed Career Guide offers 20 Best Practices for Email Etiquette in the Workplace 15and includes these
tips:

 1. Use standard fonts and formatting
 2. Include a clear subject line
 3. Email from a professional email address
 4. Use professional greetings
 5. Use an introduction
 6. Know the culture
 7. Be cautious with "Reply All"
 8. Use sentence case
 9. Double-check attachments
10. Proofread
                                           BEING A CSR | 47

11. Don't use emojis
12. Be positive
13. Reply within 24 hours
14. Keep your tone professional
15. Check the recipient's name
16. Shorten URLs
17. Perfect your email signature
18. Use BCC appropriately
19. Think before forwarding
20. Set informative out-of-office replies

Phone

Often you will be responsible for answering incoming phone calls or placing outgoing calls to customers.
Starting each call with a greeting, then stating your purpose, and asking the right questions or providing
insightful answers will be very important. Ending the call on a positive note is also important to maintain
customer goodwill and keep the company image positive. Some companies, especially call centers, provide
employees with scripts to guide their conversations with customers. Learning how to use the script without
sounding robotic is a skill you will develop over time.

Watch the "Proper Telephone Etiquette" YouTube video below to learn about proper telephone etiquette.16
Transcript for "Proper Telephone Etiquette" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on
YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­

bed-7

Texting

For many years now texting has been viewed as a personal communication method and was not used in busi-
ness often. Today, however, texting is used to enhance communication between businesses and their cus-
tomers, employees, and partners. Have you noticed that many service providers, such as dental offices, are
using texting as a way to remind customers/patients of their appointments? Texting is not only used to
remind customers of appointments but also to confirm appointments or change appointments. Companies
often have guidelines for when texting should be used and how it should be used.
48 | BEING A CSR

Social Media

Customer service takes place through many media and social media is one realm. Companies often have Face-
book, X (formerly Twitter), YouTube, and Web Chat platforms through which they communicate with cus-
tomers. This may be one aspect of your job especially when working in a customer contact center. Many
organizations offer customized training for employees to learn how to manage these technology tools in offer-
ing excellent customer service experiences.

Virtual Meetings and Videoconferencing

Online meetings are often used to conduct business meetings when the participants are not physically in the
same location. It is a good idea to practice with these tools before holding a meeting to ensure you can man-
age the settings for participants, audio, camera, etc. It is also a good idea to review best practices for holding
an online meeting.

Ability to Apply Personal Management Skills

As shown in Table 2.2 below, the following personal management skills are identified by the Conference Board
of Canada as skills you need to enter, stay in, and progress in the world of work--whether you work on your
own or as part of a team.17
                                                                                BEING A CSR | 49

                Table 2.2 Personal Management Skills

Demonstrate     · Feel good about yourself and be confident.
Positive        · Deal honestly with people, problems, and situations.
Attitudes and   · Recognize your own and other people's good efforts.
Behaviours      · Take care of your personal health.
                · Show interest, drive, and effort.
                · Think about, anticipate, and respond to the needs of others.

Be Responsible  · Set goals and priorities to balance your work and your
                   personal life.

                · Plan and manage time, money, and other resources to
                   achieve your goals. Measure and manage risk.

                · Be accountable for your actions and the actions of your
                   group.

                · Be socially responsible and contribute to your community.

Be Adaptable    · Work independently or as part of a team.
                · Carry out multiple tasks or projects.
                · Figure out and suggest other ways to achieve goals and get

                   the job done.
                · Be open and respond constructively to change.

Work Safely     · Know and follow health and safety practices and
                   procedures.

Learn           · Be willing to always learn and grow.
Constantly      · Review personal strengths and areas for development.
                · Set your own learning goals.
                · Be proactive about learning new things on your own time.
                · Plan for and achieve your learning goals.
                · Look for hands-on learning opportunities, like co-op work

                   placements or volunteering.
50 | BEING A CSR

Ability to Be Responsible and Professional

"Develop self-awareness. Learn to manage your emotions and gain awareness of your emotional triggers so
you can manage your reactions positively and productively. Accept and reflect on feedback to assist as you
learn and grow."18 Professionalism leads to workplace success, a strong professional reputation, and a high
level of work ethic and excellence. When you demonstrate positive attitudes and behaviours, are reliable and
adaptable, work safely, and follow company policies and procedures you are working in a professional man-
ner. Professionalism may include expert knowledge and skills in a specific area or subject. It may include
your ability to consider customer needs and wants in conjunction with company goals and provide excep-
tional options to customers. Finally, professionalism may include your ability to work as part of a team and
place team goals over personal preferences.

Mindtools describes professionalism as consistently achieving high standards, both in the work you do and
the way you behave, and achieving high-quality results while impressing and inspiring others - and feeling
good about yourself. The eight core characteristics of professionalism are competence, knowledge, conscien-
tiousness, integrity, respect, emotional intelligence, appropriateness, and confidence. By finding ways to
strengthen each of these attributes, you can become confident to act professionally wherever you find yourself
working. These qualities are particularly important when the normal "rules" of professionalism are blurred,
such as when you're working from home.19

Watch "The Five Zones of Professional Etiquette" YouTube video below to learn about professional eti-
quette.20 Transcript for "The Five Zones of Professional Etiquette (Student Version)" Video [PDF-New
Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­
                   bed-3

Ability to Learn Continuously

"To provide the right answers, you must know your product, service, or advocacy issues extremely well. Famil-
iarize yourself with how the product works, special features and other uses, and your company's policies on
warranties, returns and exchanges. If you are discussing a service, know the limitations and mention them in a
positive manner at the appropriate time. There is no substitute for product knowledge when it comes to sell-
ing a product or service."21
                                                                              BEING A CSR | 51

Ability to Maintain a Positive Attitude

A positive attitude is a mindset that helps you see and recognize opportunities. It is not always easy to stay
positive especially when things do not go as planned, or when dealing with angry customers. There are some
practices you can put into place to help you stay positive throughout the day. Of course, being positive does
not mean ignoring problems, it means dealing with whatever comes your way with an open-minded, solution-
seeking, and forward-thinking attitude.

To maintain a positive outlook throughout each day, try these daily rituals:

· Eat a nutritious breakfast. Breakfast can set you up for a happier, more positive day. As well, it can
   boost your metabolism, cognitive functions, and reduce fatigue.22

· Exercise. When you exercise, the brain excretes chemicals that will boost your mood and are proven to
   help relieve both anxiety and depression.23 Most people associate exercise with running, playing a sport,

   or working out in a gym, but exercise might also be doing yoga, dancing, gardening, or washing the car.
· Smile. Smiling can trick your brain into happiness--and boost your health.24

· Listen to music. Music increases happiness, decreases stress, improves sleep, reduces depression, and
   may strengthen learning and memory.25

· Practice gratitude. In positive psychology research, gratitude is strongly and consistently associated

   with greater happiness. Gratitude, focusing on and being thankful for what you have, helps people feel

   positive emotions, relish good experiences, improve their health, deal with adversity, and build strong
   relationships.26

· Positive visualization. To put visualization in a real-life situation, if you have a big assignment or pro-
   ject due, visualize yourself finishing it and handing it in, and feeling that sense of relief and happiness. 27

· Practice one random act of kindness each day. Kindness promotes empathy and compassion; which

   in turn, leads to a sense of interconnectedness with others. It releases positivity: We feel better and the

   recipients of our acts feel better, which then makes them more likely to be kind to other people. Simply

   buying the next person in a line a coffee, or holding the door open for someone with their hands full, or

   letting someone skip ahead of you at the cash check-out can release an enormous chain of positive
   events.28

· Surround yourself with positive people. You cannot have a life of positivity while spending a lot of

   time with people who drag you down. The good news is that there is a simple solution! Surround your-
   self with people who build you up and make you the best version of you.29

· Practice mindfulness/meditation. Perhaps the most widely publicized benefit of meditation is that it

   makes you happier. A Swedish study found that practicing mindfulness was "strongly related" to a posi-
   tive state of mind and reduced stress.30
52 | BEING A CSR

Ability to Manage Stress

Identifying what causes you stress will help you manage
stress. Managing your time will help you reduce stress; so
keeping a calendar and recording when you have appoint-
ments or meetings, etc. will help you reduce stress by not pan-
icking when you forget something that you need to do or
somewhere you need to be.

Many of the rituals you may do to maintain a positive atti-      Two friends enjoying a sunny day
tude will also help you reduce stress. Eating healthy foods and

getting enough rest will help you have the strength you need to deal with stressful situations. Exercising regu-

larly, and doing yoga or meditation will also help you deal with stress. Seek out social or professional support

when needed and do not rely on drugs or alcohol to relieve stress as this may lead to bigger issues.

When dealing with difficult customers you can take a deep breath, count to three silently, then address the
customer in a calm and professional manner. Remember when a customer is angry, they are frustrated and
upset about some interaction they had with the company. Ignore any personal attacks and exaggerations
because a very angry, upset customer may not be acting rationally. Call your manager if the situation escalates
and remember not to take it personally. Often upset customers are really nice people underneath it all, and
once you fix the issue, they will probably thank you profusely. "Uncovering their expectations will help defuse
the emotion, help you keep cool, and keep the conversation focused on problem solving. Keep focusing on
what you can do to close the gap between their unmet expectations and their experience of your company's
services and products. When customers are dealt with sincerely and professionally, they are more open to
alternative solutions."31

Try to keep a positive attitude and, in your personal life, surround yourself with others who think positively.
Accept that there are events that you cannot control. Be assertive instead of aggressive by asserting your feel-
ings, opinions, or beliefs instead of becoming angry, defensive, or passive. Do something every day that brings
you joy.

Ability to Manage Time

Managing your time will make you more productive and reduce stress. Use a calendar or schedule book,
whether paper or electronic, to keep track of tasks you need to complete. Make a list, assess the value of each
task, prioritize tasks, and allow for flexibility.

Watch the "Time Management Techniques for Stress Free Productivity" YouTube video below for some time
                                                                                                                                              BEING A CSR | 53

management tips for stress-free productivity.32 Transcript for "Time Management Techniques for Stress Free
Productivity" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

           One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
           them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#oem­

bed-8

Ability to Work in Teams Effectively

As shown in Table 2.3 below, the following teamwork skills are identified by the Conference Board of Canada
as skills you need to enter, stay in, and progress in the world of work--whether you work on your own or as
part of a team.33

                                                     Table 2.3 Teamwork Skills

Work with       · Understand and work within the roles of a group.
Others          · Make sure that a team's purpose and aims are clear.
                · Respect and support the thoughts, opinions, and

                   contributions of others.
                · Recognize and respect people's diversity and perspectives.
                · Accept and provide feedback in a useful and kind manner.
                · Add to a team by sharing information and skills.
                · Lead or support when it's appropriate.
                · Understand the role of conflict in a group in reaching

                   solutions.
                · Manage and settle conflict.

Participate in  · Design or carry out a project with well-defined outcomes.
Projects and    · Develop a plan, ask for feedback, and apply it.
Tasks           · Work to shared standards of quality.
                · Choose and use the right tools for a task or project.
                · Adapt to changing information and conditions.
                · Keep an eye on the success of a project or task throughout

                   and find ways to improve.

Characteristics of an Effective Team Member

  · Shows commitment to the team and its goals
54 | BEING A CSR

  · Works for consensus on decisions
  · Shares openly and authentically with others
  · Demonstrates reliability to complete tasks
  · Involves others in the decision-making process
  · Treats others in a respectful and supportive manner
  · "Owns" problems rather than blaming them on others
  · Listens actively, and attempts to see other's points of view
  · Encourages the development of other team members
  · Cooperates and pitches in to help
  · Acknowledges and works through conflict constructively
  · Considers and uses new ideas and suggestions from others
  · Encourages and accepts feedback on their own behavior
  · Works toward win-win results

Ability to Contribute to Team Performance

To be a good contributor you must make an effort to support your team members and show interest in work-
ing toward team goals. You should learn to compromise and understand things may not always be done as
you suggest. You need to be able to negotiate with your team members to settle disputes and make sure every-
one is happy with the team's choices.

Clearly communicating in a timely fashion with team members, and making sure your tone is always profes-
sional but friendly, is key to being a positive team contributor.

The bigger the project, the more linked and interdependent are the people and the tasks. Often one task must
be done before another one can be completed. This means relying on each other and trusting each other to do
what needs to be done in the time given. Your quality of work and ability to meet milestones (intermittent
deadlines) are critical to everyone getting their part of the project done on time and with quality results.

Ability to Participate in Team Presentations

To present as a team, you must know each person's part of the presentation so that should someone need help
or become ill the day of the presentation you can step up and present their portion of the overall presenta-
tion. You should introduce each member of your team when you begin the presentation and have an intro-
duction. Then as each member presents you use a transition between members; which is simply a sentence to
transition from one member's part to the next.

Each member will accept a task and complete their portion of the presentation but also help the whole team
finalize and make a professional final presentation. When using slides ensure there are no spelling errors and
                                                                                                                                              BEING A CSR | 55

that each slide does not contain too much text. If giving presentations is a part of your job role then it would
be wise to review a course or lesson on how to deliver a presentation.

Ability to Participate in Team Meetings

Team meetings are crucial for sharing ideas, disseminating data to everyone at the same time, allowing for dis-
cussions, and making decisions. It is important to create an agenda for the meeting and send it out to all
members prior to the meeting along with any accompanying documents that may be reviewed during the
meeting. This will help keep the meeting discussion on track and moving forward. Often people complain
that meetings are a waste of time because nothing gets accomplished. Using an agenda will help the meeting
planner get through the tasks intended.

Ability to Participate in Projects and Tasks

Ability is what you're capable of doing. Motivation determines what you do. Attitude determines how well
you do it. It is important to participate in projects and tasks contributing to the team effort even when you
are not that interested in your job or the project itself; otherwise, your colleagues and managers may get a neg-
ative impression of you which will only hurt your ability to get promotions, bonuses, recognition or work on
interesting projects you may wish to be included on. Even if you plan to switch jobs in the near future you
may need references from your manager and possibly colleagues so you certainly do not want anyone to see
you as non-participative, difficult to get along with, lacking in team spirit, or providing a low quality of work.

    Key Takeaways

         1. Internal customers are the company employees who need support, information or action
             from another employee. These internal customers may work just down the hall, in another
             building, or in another country, but they are still part of the company and working to help
             satisfy external customers.

         2. External customers are the customers who purchase products or services from the com-
             pany.

         3. There are many skills customer service professionals need to be excellent in their jobs, these
             include the ability to communicate clearly, use positive language, use positive body language,
             serve diverse customers, be persuasive, use active listening, interact positively in a team,
56 | BEING A CSR

             learn continuously, manage time, and manage stress.
         4. Customer Service Orientation means that as an employee you are able to display positive

             attitudes and behaviours, and demonstrate an awareness of the importance of meeting or
             exceeding customer needs and expectations.
         5. Service culture in an organization means putting customers at the center of the business
             model and developing policies, procedures, values, norms, and beliefs that are centered
             around focusing on customer satisfaction and understanding their needs and wants.
         6. Employees, companies, and customers receive benefits from excellent customer service.
         7. Verbal communication refers to the ability of a customer service representative to think of
             the right words in order to appease a customer and provide a solution
        8. Non-verbal communication refers to gestures, facial expressions, eye contact, body lan-
             guage, posture, and other ways people can communicate without using language.
         9. Positive language is the art of using words and phrases to communicate a positive, sup-
             portive tone to your customers (or anyone else for that matter).
       10. Active listening means that you focus on what your customer is saying.
        11. Service breakdowns occur daily in all types of organizations. They happen whenever the
             product or service delivered fails to meet customer needs, wants, and expectations.
        12. Service recovery is a company's resolution of a problem from a dissatisfied customer, con-
             verting them into a loyal customer. It is the action a service provider takes in response to ser-
             vice failure.
        13. A problem-solving model provides you with concrete, easy to remember steps you can
             work through when faced with any issue, customer service related or other.
       14. Information management (IM) is the appropriate and optimized capture, storage, retrieval,
             and use of information.
        15. A positive attitude is a mindset that helps you see and recognize opportunities. It is not
             always easy to stay positive especially when things do not go as planned, or when dealing
             with angry customers.
        16. To be a valued team member you should make a commitment to the team goals, create a
             collaborative working environment, and support team decisions.
        17. Identifying what causes you stress will help you manage stress.
       18. Managing your time will help you reduce stress; so keeping a calendar and recording when
             you have appointments or meetings, etc. will help you reduce stress by not panicking when
             you forget something that you need to do or somewhere you need to be.
        19. To be a good contributor you must make an effort to support your team members and
             show interest in working toward team goals.
                                                                                                                                       BEING A CSR | 57

  20. It is important to participate in projects and tasks contributing to the team effort even
        when you are not that interested in your job or the project itself; otherwise, your colleagues
        and managers may get a negative impression of you which will only hurt your ability to get
        promotions, bonuses, recognition or work on interesting projects you may wish to be
        included on.

End-of-Chapter Exercises

    1. Cultural Diversity. Understanding cultural diversity in customer service. Search the Inter-
        net for differences between cultures and how these differences might affect working rela-
        tionships between colleagues, interactions with customers, or even interactions with your
        manager. Searching for power distance, high and low cultural context, individualistic versus
        communitarian, deductive versus inductive persuasion, time scheduling, and neutral versus
        emotional cultures will provide you with several starting points.

   2. Cultural Intelligence Quiz. You may know your IQ (Intelligence Quotient), or even your EQ
        (Emotional Quotient), but do you know your CQ (Cultural Quotient)? Take this cultural intelli-
        gence quiz to determine your cultural quotient.

   3. Jobs. Search the Internet for "customer service jobs in Toronto" or whatever city you live in.
        You will probably get many websites in the results. Click on a few and review the job
        responsibilities, the hourly pay, and the skills you need to perform these jobs. Do any of
        them interest you? Why or why not? You may find some of these jobs have perks. They
        offer training and sometimes career paths to a management position. It is a good idea to
        research the company websites offering these jobs and read more about their mission and
        values to determine if you would be a good fit.

   4. Practice Pleasantries. Give yourself a challenge. For the next four people you interact with
        practice saying, "please" and "thank you," and smiling while you do so. Do these at the right
        times, not too much, and not insincerely. Did these small pleasantries enhance your commu-
        nication? Will you try this more often? Hopefully, you will try this when serving customers.

   5. Angry Customers. Search the Internet for information on "providing customer service to
58 | BEING A CSR

             irate customers." You might try rewording the search criteria using the following topics: con-
             flict resolution, handling difficult customers, and handling angry customers. Share your find-
             ings with your class and/or professor.
         6. Service Breakdowns. Based on your personal experience, why do you think service recov-
             ery efforts are often limited in small companies as compared to large organizations? What
             can be done to better prepare employees of a small company to better handle service break-
             downs?
         7. Negative Phrases. Consider negative phrases. What else could you say to a customer
             besides, "It's not my department." "It's not my fault." "She's away and won't be back for two
             weeks and she's the only one who does that so you will have to wait." "That's not our pol-
             icy." Discuss these with a partner and see if you can devise some alternative statements that
             are more positive in tone and bring more value to the customer. Share your examples with
             the class and/or professor.
        8. Roleplay Difficult Situation. Roleplay a Difficult Customer Situation. How would you han-
             dle this difficult customer situation? Assume you work as a cashier at Loblaws Super Store
             and as you are scanning a customer's products for purchase a second customer squeezes up
             through the line of customers waiting and says, "I am in a hurry and I just have this loaf of
             bread. Can you just tell me how much it costs and I'll leave the money right here on the reg-
             ister?" Work with a partner and role-play this scenario, practice how you would handle this
             situation if you were the employee. Discuss strategies with the class and/or professor.
         9. Gestures. Gesture Meanings Around the World. Common gestures take on different mean-
             ings around the world. As a customer service representative, you may think giving the
             "thumbs up" to your customer means great, good, OK, but depending on where you are in
             the world or the culture your customer comes from, you may actually be offending them.
              Explore the Internet to discover what these gestures mean in different countries. Some
             countries to compare include Canada, China, Russia, Mexico, Turkey, India, Greece, and Aus-
             tralia.
                                                            BEING A CSR | 59

                       Common Gestures

Photo by  Photo by     Photo by         Photo by  Photo by
Robin     Andrea       kytrangho        Charles   Robin
Higgins   Piacquadio   from             Wundengb  Higgins
from      from Pexels  Pixabay          a from    from
Pixabay                                 Pexels    Pixabay

Self-Check Exercise - Change Negative to a Positive

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                   here:
                   https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=49#h5p-2
60 | BEING A CSR

   Additional Resources

         1. LinkedIn Learning Customer Service Training
         2. I was Seduced by Exceptional Customer Service, John Boccuzzi, TedX Bryant U
         3. 20 Customer Service Training Ideas and Activities for Busy Teams
         4. 17 Hand Gestures That Can Cause Offense Around the World
         5. How to Get a Job in Customer Service
         6. 5 Important Reasons Why Teamwork Matters
         7. 15 Time Management Tips for Achieving Your Goals
        8. Stress Management by Mayo Clinic Staff
         9. Cultural Intelligence Center

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Media Attributions

  · Illustration of three people communicating © Image by storyset on Freepik is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license

  · Illustration of person reading chart © Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Illustration of a person doing math on a board © Image by storyset on Freepik is licensed under a CC0

      (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Illustration of person thinking © Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Illustration of person using a laptop © Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero)

      license
  · Problem Solving Model © Kerri Shields is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · Illustration of two people holding happy signs © Image by storyset on Freepik is licensed under a CC0

      (Creative Commons Zero) license
                                                                                                                                                BEING A CSR | 61

    · Illustration of a person checking off tasks done © Image by Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
       Commons Zero) license

    · Illustration of two people adapting to the situation © Image by pch.vector on Freepik is licensed under a
       CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

    · Illustration of two people with hard hats © Image by storyset on Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Cre-
       ative Commons Zero) license

    · Illustration of person studying © Image by storyset on Freepik is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Com-
       mons Zero) license

    · Two friends enjoying a sunny day © Photo by Klimkin from Pixabay is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
       Commons Zero) license

    · Illustration of people having a meeting © Image by Peggy und Marco Lachmann-Anke from Pixabay is
       licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

    · Illustration of two people working together © Image by Peggy und Marco Lachmann-Anke from Pix-
       abay is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

Notes

        1. Career Guide. (2020, March 11). Customer service skills: Definitions and 17 examples. Indeed.
             https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/resumes-cover-letters/customer-service-skills

        2. Lucas, Robert W. Customer service skills for success. McGraw Hill Education: New York, USA, 2015.
        3. Mike (2016, February 13). Why it's absolutely OK to send customers to competitors. Digital Spark Marketing. https://dig-

             italsparkmarketing.com/send-customers-to-competitors/
        4. Conference Board of Canada. (n.d.). Employability skills. https://www.conferenceboard.ca/wp-content/uploads/

             woocommerce_uploads/reports/11752_employability-skills_brochure.pdf
        5. Dev, K. (2017, September 26). 10 tips for effective communication with customers. Customer Think. https://customer-

             think.com/10-tips-for-effective-communication-with-customers/#:~:text=10%20Tips%20for%20Effective%20Com-
             munication%20with%20Customers%201,your%20mes-
             sage%20across.%2010%20Don%E2%80%99t%20take%20short%20cuts
        6. O'Donoghue, D. (2023, March 1). What is cross-cultural communication and why it matters? https://www.g2.com/
             articles/what-is-cross-cultural-communication
        7. MBM. (n.d.). 8 tips for effective cross-cultural communication. https://www.makingbusinessmatter.co.uk/cross-cultural-
             communication/
        8. Ober, K. (2015, December 22). Positive body language. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/6vT6sqjBFrs
        9. Gilbert-Jamison, T. (2018, April 26). Service recovery - Do say/Don't say. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
             U2rooZp4SDA
       10. Bovee, C. & Thill, J. (2017, September 20). Student version: Sharing negative information without being negative.
             [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/ewIKhqK0ySQ[/
       11. Toister, J. (2016, January 30). Customer service fundamentals - Actively listening to customers. [Video]. YouTube.
             https://youtu.be/rccne8eevxE
       12. Lucas, R. (n.d.). What is a service breakdown? [Blog]. Customer Service Skills. http://www.customerserviceskills-
62 | BEING A CSR

           book.com/wordpress/what-is-a-service-breakdown/#:~:text=Service%20break-
           downs%20occur%20daily%20in%20all%20types%20of,fails%20to%20meet%20cus-
           tomer%20needs%2C%20wants%20and%20expectations

     13. JMC The Director. (2016, February 10). Dealing with an Angry Customer Training. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://youtu.be/T20hV4ynU7o

     14. Solomon, M. (2017, November 19). Thanks a latte: How to fix a customer service failure per Starbucks, Marriott, and
           Me. https://www.forbes.com/sites/micahsolomon/2017/11/19/thanks-a-latte-how-to-fix-a-customer-service-failure-
           per-starbucks-marriott-and-me/?sh=4bb0ea84462a

     15. Indeed Career Guide (2020, January 27). 20 Best practices for email etiquette in the workplace.
           https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/email-etiquette#:~:text=20%20Best%20Prac-
           tices%20for%20Email%20Etiquette%20in%20the,email%20address%20if%20possible.%20...%20More%20items...%20

     16. Gilbert-Jamison, T. (2020, July 13). Proper Telephone Etiquette. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/1KtKNkg4j3s

     17. Conference Board of Canada. (n.d.). Employability skills. https://www.conferenceboard.ca/wp-content/uploads/
           woocommerce_uploads/reports/11752_employability-skills_brochure.pdf

     18. Virginia Tech. (n.d.) Professionalism. https://career.vt.edu/develop/professionalism.html

     19. Mindtools. (n.d.). Professionalism. Meeting the standards that matter. https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/pro-
           fessionalism.htm

     20. Bovee, C. & Thill, J. (2020, January 18). The five zones of professional etiquette. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
           A9Q20hZ5ZX4

     21. Best Hospitality Degrees. (n.d.) What skills does a customer representative need? Best Hospitality Degrees.
           https://www.besthospitalitydegrees.com/faq/what-skills-does-a-customer-service-representative-need/

     22. Steen, J. (2016, July 15). Breakfast can set you up for a happier, positive day. Huffpost. https://www.huffington-
           post.com.au/2016/07/10/breakfast-can-set-you-up-for-a-happier-positive-day_a_21429436/

     23. Australian Fitness Academy. (2018, March 7). How exercise makes you happy. Australian Fitness Academy.
           https://www.fitnesseducation.edu.au/blog/health/how-exercise-makes-you-happy/

     24. Spector, N. (2018, January 9). A smile can trick your brain into happiness--and boost your health. Better.
           https://www.nbcnews.com/better/health/smiling-can-trick-your-brain-happiness-boost-your-health-ncna822591

     25. Deflin, K. (2016, February 16). 10 Positive benefits of listening to music, according to science. Live for Live Music.
           https://liveforlivemusic.com/features/10-positive-benefits-of-listening-to-music-according-to-science/

     26. Harvard Health Publishing. (n.d.). Giving thanks can make you happier. Harvard Medical School.
           https://www.health.harvard.edu/healthbeat/giving-thanks-can-make-you-happier

     27. Steen, J. (2016, July 15). Breakfast can set you up for a happier, positive day. Huffpost. https://www.huffington-
           post.com.au/2016/07/10/breakfast-can-set-you-up-for-a-happier-positive-day_a_21429436/

     28. Srennivasan, S, Ph.D., and Weinberger, L., Ph.D. (2017, November 16). Why random acts of kindness matter to your
           well-being. Psychology Today. https://www.psychologytoday.com/ca/blog/emotional-nourishment/201711/why-ran-
           dom-acts-kindness-matter-your-well-being

     29. Stoneking, T. (n.d.). 8 Amazing things will happen when you surround yourself with positivity. Lifehack.
           https://www.lifehack.org/338213/8-amazing-things-will-happen-when-you-surround-yourself-with-positivity

     30. Webb, A. (2017, January 12). Can meditation make you happier and more productive? Policygenius. https://www.poli-
           cygenius.com/blog/can-meditation-make-happier-productive/

     31. Earl, D. (n.d.). Stress management tips for customer service professionals. Donna Earl Training. https://www.donnaearl-
           training.com/articles-quizzes/stress-management-tips-for-customer-service-professionals/

     32. Young Entrepreneurs Forum. (2016, August 15). Time management techniques for stress free productivity. [Video].
           YouTube. https://youtu.be/IGVQPU-L7cQ
                                                                                                                                       BEING A CSR | 63

33. Conference Board of Canada. (n.d.). Employability skills. https://www.conferenceboard.ca/wp-content/uploads/
     woocommerce_uploads/reports/11752_employability-skills_brochure.pdf
64 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

CHAPTER 3: MANAGING A CUSTOMER
SERVICE TEAM

   Chapter 3 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. Describe how to create a customer service philosophy for your company, department, or
             team.
         2. Explain the purpose of having service standards and goals.
         3. Describe why it is important to set SMART goals for customer service teams.
         4. Explain why it is important to measure service quality.
         5. Identify obstacles to outstanding service.
         6. Describe what service recovery looks, sounds, and feels like.
         7. Suggest ways in which to improve service quality.
        8. Identify the costs of poor customer service.

Customer Service Philosophy

"If you're looking to improve your customer experience, start by creating a customer service philosophy for
your support team. Having a shared philosophy keeps everyone focused on the same goal and helps them
understand the holistic approach to achieving that goal."1
                                                       MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 65

In an environment in which front-line staff deal

with an endless stream of unpredictable scenarios,

having a strong philosophy helps empower team

members, provides a coherent story to help employ-

ees understand company values, and sets the foun-

dation for a customer-first strategy that's proactive

rather than reactive. No matter which employee a

customer interacts with, they will experience the

same delightful service that epitomizes the com-

pany's values.

                                                       A customer paying a cashier

"A customer service philosophy is a shared mis-

sion for your support team, a set of guiding principles that ensure you're upholding your core values with
every customer interaction."2

Generally, a customer service philosophy is composed of two parts: vision and values.

Customer Service Vision

The first section of a customer service philosophy is a customer service vision statement. A customer service
vision statement provides meaning and direction for employees. It is the statement that outlines the type of
service that agents are expected to provide to customers. It tends to be quite idealistic and `big picture' think-
ing, needs to be clear and unambiguous, and it should be easily understood by both employees and customers
alike.3

When your vision applies to everybody, it also embodies natural accountability and training opportunities for
every person. New hires automatically understand what's expected of them, leadership is expected to practice
what it preaches, and agents can be coached on their customer-facing interactions using your statement as an
observable benchmark.4

Customer Service Values

Your vision statement is followed by customer service values, which impact the experience the customer
receives and help to define the personality and attitude the business is trying to put forth. Often, companies
offer training to employees on how to uphold these values. The values can be conceptual, offering an explana-
tion for why adhering to the vision is important, or more tactical, like Apple's guidance for support represen-
tatives in their retail stores:5
66 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

Approach customers with a personalized, warm welcome.
Politely try to understand all the customer's needs.
Present a solution for the customer to take home today.
Listen for and resolve any issues or concerns.
End with a fond farewell and an invitation to return.

Creating a Customer Service Philosophy for Your Team

Careful contemplation is the first step. Ask yourself some key questions. What is the purpose of your com-
pany? What is the role of customer service within your company? What experience should the customer have
for your company to fulfill this role? What does this look like for your customer service representatives? What
are your company's core values, and how are they prioritized? What are the principles that should guide your
employees who interact with customers daily? How will employees easily remember these principles?

There's no fixed format to a customer service philosophy. But having it down on paper -- preferably a
digestible one-pager -- will allow your service reps to reread and internalize it. Take your answers from above
and integrate them into a coherent piece.6

Although good customer service philosophies have a few things in common, no two should be the same. For a
philosophy to succeed, it needs to align with your team's specific values, goals, and long-term vision for your
relationship with customers.

Develop Service Standards

Service standards are guidelines for employees to follow when interacting with customers. Do not make
them too rigid or strict as not all standards will apply to every customer situation. This gives employees the
flexibility to adapt to each customer's unique needs within a standard framework. Customer service guide-
lines should align with the company's brand.

Standards may be as simple as:

 1. Make the customer feel welcome (e.g., greetings, body language)
 2. Efficiently serve customers' needs (e.g., listen actively, ask probing questions, offer suggestions, take

      action)
 3. Look for additional ways to serve the customer (e.g., ask if there is anything else you can do, share pro-

      motions or new opportunities)
 4. End the customer interaction (e.g., thank the customer, follow up if needed, summarize what you have

      done if necessary)
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 67

As the Canada Revenue Agency puts it, "Service standards publicly state the level of performance that citizens
can reasonably expect to encounter from the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) under normal circumstances.
The CRA is committed to developing, monitoring, and reporting on a full suite of service standards in areas
of importance to taxpayers and benefit recipients. Service standards support the CRA`s commitment to
Canadians for transparency, management accountability, and citizen-focused service."7

"Starbucks strongly believes in meeting customer service standards. For example, employees are taught to put

effort into the visual look of each drink. When you order a caramel macchiato at Starbucks, it has a precise

pattern of caramel sauce. It has a lattice of seven vertical and horizontal lines with two full circles around
it. They also pay attention to every detail in the store -- from the lighting to the furniture, they're on point!"8

The customer service team should be provided with           A restaurant server taking an order
clear documentation regarding how to handle common
customer service complaints, what language to use and
to avoid, how to document service issues, guidelines for
escalation, the lengths employees can go for customers,
and where to go with any questions or problems. Using
documented processes and procedures will make it eas-
ier for the team to understand how to act in a given situ-
ation.9 With that said, you do not want the company
processes and procedures to be overly cumbersome or
complicated; otherwise, employees may have difficulty
following them.

Develop Customer Service Goals

Setting customer service goals can serve an important role in managing service teams. Set SMART goals as
described in Table 3.1 below. Good goals focus attention on the right things, while poorly shaped goals focus
attention on other things.

The service provided to customers, at every touchpoint, must be excellent and demand little effort from the
customer in order to foster their loyalty. Customer service should make an extra effort to ensure customer
happiness and satisfaction. Customer interactions need to be pleasant experiences, customer problems must
be resolved quickly, and customers need to be totally confident in the services provided. Having a broad
understanding of what excellent customer service looks like is a good step toward defining specific goals along
with a plan that will lead to their attainment.10
68 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

                Table 3.1 SMART Goals                                                                   For example, a manager may set a
                                                                                                        goal for the service team to

S = Specific    Make your goals specific and narrow for more effective                                  "increase customer satisfaction",
                planning                                                                                but this goal does not inform the

M = Measurable Determine what evidence will prove you are making progress. Re-evaluate when necessary.  team of how to obtain this goal or
                                                                                                        the specific amount of increase the
A = Attainable  Ensure you can reasonably accomplish your goal                                          manager is expecting. We might do
                within a certain time frame given available resources.                                  better by saying, "increase customer
                Stakeholders agree it is achievable.

R = Relevant    Goals should align with your values and long-term                                       satisfaction by 10% over the next
                objectives.                                                                             month". The manager and staff

T = Timebound Set a realistic end date. This will help with task prioritization and motivation.         should know how customer satis-
                                                                                                        faction is measured and that a 10%

                                                                                                        increase is a realistic expectation.

The manager would then provide strategies on how this might be done. As well, incentives might be set for

the service team to encourage their best performance.

Customer service goals are targets for your customer experience and are part of strategic planning and perfor-
mance management. Figure 3.1 below shows a list of 25 company goals for customer service.11

                25 Goals for Customer Service
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 69

Figure 3.1 25 goals for customer service. All Rights Reserved.

Watch the "What are SMART Goals? Quick Overview with 21 SMART Goals Examples" YouTube video
below to learn about SMART goals.12 Transcript for "What are SMART Goals? Quick Overview with 21
SMART Goals Examples" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#oem­
                   bed-1

We cannot blame a wait staff who fails to increase the number of customers served in a given week if we later
discover that, due to having live entertainment all week, customers were sitting longer at their tables, which
resulted in fewer table changeovers, meaning staff were serving the existing customers longer rather than serv-
ing new ones. The goals managers set for staff will impact how the staff perform and what they choose to
focus on. So if speed is the objective, then customer care may suffer as staff become obsessed with serving
each customer quickly rather than serving each customer exceptionally. There must be a balance between effi-
70 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

cient service and quality, effective service, and set goals that must drive employees in that performance direc-
tion.

"Profit-focused goals can hurt the customer relationship, and unrealistic goals demotivate and burn out
employees. The goal structure should be set in a way that if your customer support representatives achieve
their goals, it will propel the support manager closer to meeting his or her goals. Which in turn moves the
director of support closer to meeting their goals. Typically, the goals of the director will be broad and align
with specific company objectives. The customer support manager's goals will be positioned more towards
operational objectives - to make sure everything is running smoothly and efficiently. Customer support rep-
resentatives will have more direct customer-centric goals like reducing response times and improving resolu-
tion rates."13

Train Your Team

Investing time and money in customer service training can prove to be an invaluable investment for busi-
nesses of diverse sectors and sizes. Teaching members of staff the competencies, knowledge, and skills required
to increase customer satisfaction and therefore customer retention is a shrewd way for businesses to ulti-
mately increase their sales performance. Offering workplace training can provide staff with the necessary skills
to strengthen their customer service skills, including communication, empathy, patience, and consistency, as
well as adaptability. No matter the industry a business operates within, if it deals with customers, strong cus-
tomer service skills are essential in ensuring customers remain loyal and a high level of customer retention is
achieved. Workplace training that is focused on customer care will give employees valuable insight into how
to develop and fine-tune customer service abilities. Such training will empower course participants to have the
knowledge and confidence to provide effective solutions when they are faced with problems or difficult cus-
tomers.14

First off, hire the right people. During an interview,
tell potential employees what your customer service
philosophy is and share your company's missions, val-
ues, and goals. Then test applicants to see if they are a
good fit.

Once hired, orient your new hire to the company and

to the team of employees they will work with. Let

them observe how things are done and how customer

issues are resolved. Provide information on the com-       A person being hired
pany's mission, vision, values, and goals, and explain

how your department/area fits into the overall company goals.
                                                                                                      MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 71

Provide specific training on how to serve customers, even the difficult ones. Many service representatives do
not know how to recover from a bad service situation with an upset or angry customer. A new employee can
work alongside an experienced employee for a while and learn how to do things that will delight customers as
well as support company goals. Such programs are often termed coaching, mentoring, on-the-job training, or
job shadowing. Training may entail a more structured form such as classes teaching new employees how to
use customer relationship management software, use phone systems; deal with service breakdown and service
recovery; learn how to provide value to customers to encourage long-term loyalty, learn how to upsell or cross-
sell in a way that customers will value; learn about the company vision, mission and goals; or manage social
media platforms to serve and interact with customers.

Watch the "Service Recovery - Look, Sound, Feel" YouTube video below to learn about effective service
recovery.15 Transcript for "Service Recovery - Look, Sound, Feel" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning
is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#oem­
                   bed-2

The Disney Institute does a great job at training Disney employees, so much so, that they offer on-demand
online training to other companies that may wish to provide customer service training to their own employ-
ees. Disney's website states, "In this on-demand course, our team will highlight how excellent service is the
result of truly understanding your customer expectations and how to put the right service standards in place
to exceed them. Begin to learn not only how to start to differentiate your organization from competitors, but
also how to build customer loyalty through quality service. In this on-demand course, you will learn to:

  · Assess and improve your organization's commitment to quality service
  · Differentiate and elevate your service to become a provider of choice
  · Design standards for quality service and create a consistent service experience
  · Gauge the needs, wants, stereotypes, and emotions of your customers at an individual level
  · Understand the processes necessary to develop a workplace culture that consistently delivers exceptional

      service
  · Recover effectively from a service failure and turn it into an opportunity to strengthen customer rela-

      tions"16

Of course, there are many other training programs a company may utilize, such as those offered in LinkedIn
72 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

Learning or those created in-house that are customized to the way your particular company goes about per-
forming operations and serving customers.

Evaluate Service Quality

As a service manager, you continually need to be evaluating the quality of customer care your team provides.
Key performance indicators (KPIs) measure how effectively a company is achieving its goals against a set of
targets, objectives, or industry peers. Organizations use KPIs at multiple levels to evaluate their success in
reaching targets.

Listed below are some of the ways in which you might measure service quality.

Net Promoter Score

The Net Promoter Score (NPS) is a customer loyalty metric that businesses use to gauge how their cus-
tomers feel about them. It measures your customers' willingness to recommend your company, product, or
service to others. Companies with a high NPS are more likely to achieve long-term profitable growth.

Customer Retention Rate

Customer retention rate is another way to evaluate service quality. Why is it important to keep existing cus-
tomers? Here are a few reasons:17

  · Boosting customer retention by 5% increases profits by 25-95%.
  · Companies have a 60-70% chance of selling to an existing customer vs. a 5-20% chance of selling to a new

      customer.
  · 65% of a company's business comes from existing customers.
  · It costs 6x to 7x more to acquire new customers than to retain existing ones.
  · 72% of customers switch to a competitor after one bad experience with a brand.
  · Businesses lose over $75 billion each year to lost customers due to poor customer service.

Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT)

Obtaining customer feedback through customer satisfaction surveys is one way to gain customer insights.
Surveying employees and asking for suggestions on customer service processes and procedures may lead to
customer service improvements. Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT) is a customer loyalty metric used by
companies to gauge how satisfied a customer is with a particular interaction or overall experience.
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 73

Watch the "How to Use the Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT) Metric" YouTube video below to learn how
to use customer satisfaction scores.18 Transcript for "How to Use the Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT)
Metric" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#oem­

bed-3

Mystery Shoppers and Observation

Simply observing your team in action can help you identify common issues. Having a mystery shopper expe-
rience the service and processes your company provides and then reporting this experience back to you can
help you understand where service breakdowns may occur.

Customer Engagement Metrics

Customer engagement starts from the first touch point and incorporates subsequent interactions, including
the time customers spend with your brand and the actions they take throughout their journey. Customer
engagement metrics are effective in measuring service accessibility and the quality of customer experience.19

Social Media Monitoring

Social media monitoring tools help understand what people are saying about you on social media. Insights
like this paint a richer picture than simply relying on traditional media. Available in the market are the likes of
Keyhole, Addict-o-Matic, CyberAlert, Sysomos among others.20

Identify Obstacles to Outstanding Service

There can be many obstacles creating barriers to your ability to provide excellent customer service. Some of
these include the following.

Ineffective Employee Incentives

As a manager, you must ensure that incentives focus employees on the right performance. Incentives can be
74 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

an obstacle to good performance when employees take action to gain incentives at the expense of doing what
is right or good for the customer. Have you ever wondered about the motivation of an auto mechanic when
they tell you your car needs more work than you anticipated? What about when the salesperson sounds very
convincing as they try to sell you more than you think you need? Employees may be tempted to bend the
rules, working against the concepts of good quality service, in order to win incentives. Ensure incentives are
set up to encourage better service and not encourage unethical behaviour.

Inefficient or Ineffective Service Systems

Sometimes service systems, due to cumbersome processes customers must follow, unreliable service (works
intermittently), poor quality products, or procedures, just don't work! Often customer service representa-
tives get blamed by customers for these things, but in reality, these things are beyond the scope of the service
representatives' control. With that said, certainly, service representatives should alert their managers when
they observe such issues. For example, if several customers have complained about the same issue, then it
might be time to fix the issue. As a manager, if your employees have informed you of processes that are not
working you should examine them and consider how to make improvements.

Ineffective Policies, Processes, or Procedures

A lack of policies, processes, or procedures can also be an obstacle to providing great customer service. If
these are missing or lacking in structure, customer service agents will not be guided in providing exceptional
service. If the company does not clearly communicate its customer service vision and provide the tools for
employees to do their job, then the lack of processes and procedures will become an obstacle. On the other
hand, if there are too many policies, processes, or procedures, agents may be restricted in offering the best ser-
vice they can. In either of these cases, customer service managers should work with the cross-functional man-
agement team to develop clear guidelines for policies, processes, and procedures and communicate those to
employees.

Watch the "How to Avoid Roadblocks to Great Customer Service" YouTube video below to learn about
avoiding roadblocks to great customer service.21 Transcript for "How to Avoid Roadblocks to Great Cus-
tomer Service" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#oem­

bed-4
                         MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 75

Lack of Communication

A lack of communication or support from other departments can be an obstacle to providing great customer
service. Often, the front-line employees, those facing the customer, need support from other departments
within an organization. This means depending on others within the company to do their jobs and to do a
quality job; yet, not every employee is dedicated to the company or performs quality work. As a manager, if
your employees are having difficulty getting what they need from other departments, you should step in and
connect with the other department's manager to discuss what can be done to make working together easier
and more effective. Managers in other areas may not care about what is happening with your team, but they
should care about fixing a problem that is costing the company money and customers.

Unanticipated Customer Demand

Customer demand can exceed what was expected or the number of customers can be far greater than antici-
pated, which can create an obstacle to providing excellent customer service. If customer demand is so great
that your company runs out of products or not everyone can be served efficiently, then customers may
become dissatisfied. If your company gets far more customers than anticipated, there may not be enough staff
on hand to serve each customer; again, this can lead to customer loss and dissatisfaction. Managers need to
schedule enough employees to serve all customers and serve them through various channels. Managers may
forecast demand by reviewing past trends or patterns in sales and service. They may anticipate demand by
analyzing the environment, for example, if there is an event in town bringing in vacationers, then maybe the
company will require additional staff on hand that week. Managers may also hire contingent workers, or
workers they can hire when short-staffed on an ad-hoc basis, but having them trained may be an issue.

Improve Service Quality

       There is only one boss. The customer - and he can fire everybody in the company from the
       chairman on down, simply by spending his money somewhere else. -Sam Walton22

Great customer service is just the first stage, but by making sure you build in analytics and other ways of mea-
suring this success, your customer support team's hard work and effort can be quantified, and their progress
can be measured.23
76 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

In the Future of CX report, PwC surveyed 15,000 consumers and found that 1 in 3 customers will leave a
brand they love after just one bad experience, while 92% would completely abandon a company after two or
three negative interactions.24

Companies should ensure that customers are able to find answers to their questions using a wide range of self-
service options. Today, 67% of customers prefer self-service over speaking to a company representative. Further-
more, 91% of customers would use an online knowledge base if it were available and tailored to their needs.25

Do you know that 50% of customers will stop visiting a company's website if it isn't mobile-friendly?26

Forecast Customer Demand

Understanding and anticipating customer demand is critical for effective management. By forecasting demand,
managers can plan staffing, order the right amount of supplies, and ensure consistent service during busy and
slow periods. Accurate forecasting reduces costs, minimizes waste, maximizes revenue, and improves customer
satisfaction. Without it, businesses risk overstaffing during slow times or running out of popular products or
services during peak periods.

Managers typically rely on historical sales data, trend analysis, and observations of the business environment
to forecast demand. For example, analyzing past sales patterns, seasonal trends, and local events helps predict
when customer activity will rise. This information allows managers to align staff schedules, manage inventory,
and plan promotions to meet anticipated demand.

Factors that can increase demand include promotions or loyalty programs, changes in the local environment
such as new offices or schools, and emerging consumer trends. Conversely, demand may decrease due to price
increases, negative reviews, poor product or service quality, increased competition, economic downturns, or
seasonal lulls. Understanding these drivers enables managers to make proactive decisions that maintain service
quality, optimize costs, and enhance overall customer satisfaction.

Practical Example: Forecasting in Action

Imagine a small retail store that sells a mix of groceries and household items. During the summer, the manager
notices that sales of cold drinks, ice cream, and barbecue supplies spike, while other products remain steady. By
analyzing historical sales data from previous summers, combined with observations of local events like festivals
or nearby school holidays, the manager can forecast a rise in demand for these seasonal items.

Using this forecast, the manager increases staff during peak hours, orders extra inventory of high-demand prod-
ucts, and sets up promotions to attract more customers. At the same time, they avoid overstocking less popular
items to reduce waste. Conversely, the manager also anticipates slower periods, such as early winter, and adjusts
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 77

staffing and inventory accordingly. By proactively managing demand, the store maintains high customer satis-
faction, reduces costs, and maximizes revenue throughout the year.

Make Doing Business Easy

Make it easy for customers to do business with your company by keeping processes simple, clear, and efficient.
If interactions are too cumbersome or complicated, customers are likely to go elsewhere. Customers who feel
they are wasting time standing in lines, being transferred between staff members, waiting for answers, or navi-
gating confusing websites and paperwork for returns are likely to become frustrated--and may take both their
business and their recommendations elsewhere.

To meet customer expectations, businesses should focus on removing barriers that make transactions difficult.
This can include offering multiple delivery options, online ordering, self-service kiosks, and accepting a variety
of payment methods. Clear, straightforward instructions for returns or exchanges, efficient and knowledgeable
staff, and an easy-to-navigate website or app also contribute to a smooth customer experience.

Customers also value perks and conveniences that make interactions more rewarding. Loyalty programs that
are simple to understand and redeem, personalized promotions, and fast checkout options enhance satis-
faction. Automated updates, such as email or text notifications on order status, keep customers informed
without extra effort. By anticipating customer needs and designing processes that reduce wait times and fric-
tion--whether online, in-store, or over the phone--businesses can improve customer satisfaction, encourage
repeat purchases, and drive positive referrals. Ultimately, the easier it is for customers to engage with a business,
the more likely they are to remain loyal and share positive recommendations.

Empower Your Employees

One way to improve service quality is to empower your        Employee Empowerment
employees. Empowering employees means giving them
the authority to make certain decisions without needing
approval from management. This allows front-line staff
to resolve customer issues quickly, eliminating the "let me
ask my boss" barrier and reducing wait times. To
empower employees effectively, companies must provide
access to the data, tools, and systems necessary to address
customer problems. Boundaries should be clearly
defined--for example, an employee might be authorized
to correct a customer issue up to a certain dollar amount.
78 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

Supervisors play a critical role in this process. They need training to understand how much power to grant
employees and in which areas, and they must coach their teams to make decisions that benefit both the cus-
tomer and the company. When employees are empowered, customers receive faster, more efficient, and more
effective service, which helps meet or exceed expectations. Satisfied customers are more likely to remain loyal
and may even refer new business.

Employee empowerment can also have significant benefits for staff. It builds trust in leadership, boosts motiva-
tion, encourages creativity, and can improve employee retention. However, without proper training on com-
pany standards and guidelines, empowerment can increase business risks.

Some companies are hesitant to empower employees to handle customer service failures for valid reasons. Man-
agement may fear inconsistent decisions that confuse or frustrate customers if similar issues are handled differ-
ently. There may also be concerns about costs, as on-the-spot refunds, replacements, or complimentary services
can become expensive. Additionally, companies may worry that employees lack the necessary training or expe-
rience to make sound decisions, potentially worsening customer issues. For example, an employee attempting
to resolve a technical complaint without fully understanding the product could inadvertently create more frus-
tration. While empowerment can greatly improve responsiveness and customer satisfaction, it requires careful
planning, clear guidelines, and ongoing oversight to succeed.

Provide Employees with Feedback and Training

Train employees as needed and provide meaningful feedback in a constructive manner on a regular basis.
Feedback should be thoughtful, whether you are providing encouragement on a job well done or providing
constructive feedback for a performance correction. You may need to offer specialized training when you
observe your team is lacking skills in a particular area, and this lack of skill is negatively affecting the quality of
service being delivered. Orientation training or onboarding is not the only time you need to train your
employees; when systems or procedures are updated, employees should be trained so they are able to offer the
best customer service possible. Communication between management and employees is key in ensuring
employees understand what is expected of them, what the company policies and procedures are, and how to
serve customers in a way the company wants them to.

Implement an Effective Rewards System

Reward your team for providing excellent service. A customer service incentive program can improve
employee morale and job satisfaction, but there are some drawbacks you need to steer clear of. Focusing on
monetary rewards won't necessarily have the results you expect. It might look good initially, but it often ends
up creating a competitive environment and a team pitted against each other. Implementing a reward system
that aligns with clearly defined goals is the best approach. For example, if you reward the person who sells the
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 79

most product, then only one person on the team wins. This sets up the team to work against each other,
which has negative effects on team collaboration. Instead, you might have a threshold that, when met, you
reward your employees; in this type of system, several employees might meet the threshold. You also need to
make the threshold attainable; something so difficult that no one can attain the reward will only have negative
effects on employee motivation.

From 2020 onwards, there are officially 5 generations that have been working together in the workplace. This
statistic is mind-boggling. Different age groups naturally desire different rewards- for example; senior execu-
tives may be looking at household-related items, whereas employees in their early 20s may value virtual learning
experiences more. Besides, Generation Z- the latest one to enter the workforce- not only demand rewards for
their hard work but also want a say in the `how' and `what' of rewards.27

In a consumerist world full of personalized experiences, rewards need to be tailored to an individual's prefer-
ence. Ideally, employees should be able to decide how they want to be recognized for their good work. Be it
through a personal note or public recognition, through movie tickets, or shopping vouchers- top firms across
the globe already offer an extensive range of rewards and experiences that can be redeemed instantly.28

"One reason that businesses cite not implementing a reward system for employee performance is temporary
compliance. An employee-of-the-month program may increase productivity in the first month, but interest
quickly dwindles. All the work of creating that program provides only short-term benefits. To avoid employ-
ees lapsing back into pre-reward productivity, it's important for employers to keep the incentive programs
new and exciting. Change up employee reward systems quarterly or yearly to reignite excitement about the
plan."29

Evaluate Your Personal Management Skills

You need to develop and improve your managerial skills on an ongoing basis as your career develops and as
you meet new managerial challenges. Whether you manage a department or a project team, it is important to
know how to get the work done right. You must develop not only your technical skills but your management
skills as well. Delegating, motivating, communicating, and understanding team dynamics are some of the key
skills needed. With those skills, along with patience and a strong sense of balance, you can become a very effec-
tive manager.30
80 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

A good manager sets their employees up for success. They

provide the time and tools to accomplish tasks. They often

have experience in the field of work they are supervising.

They are capable of solving problems, managing time and

money, and inspiring employees to perform optimally. A

manager is responsible for the effective and efficient opera-

tions within a company, department, or team. A manager

who is not able to create efficient schedules, keep employ-

ees motivated, or manage time and money will not per-          A team meeting in the office
form optimally and may impede the ability of their

subordinates to do the same. A poor manager may be

someone who gives employees directives without any explanation, tools, or context. A good manager sup-

ports employees, chooses appropriate projects, and allocates resources (people, time, money, materials, and

equipment) where needed and when needed in a reasonable manner to support the company's goals. Man-

agement skills are important to lead a team and move the organization in the right direction. If the manager

has weak management skills, customer service quality may suffer. To be a good manager, it is important to

have skills such as planning, organizing, leading, and controlling. Managers need to create effective strategies,

have good communication skills, be able to make decisions responsibly, be able to solve problems whenever

they arise, be able to manage time effectively, be able to manage projects effectively, have conceptual skills, be

able to motivate employees to lead their team, etc.

Some new managers are coached or mentored for the first few months on the job. Others take training
courses in managing people and projects, negotiation, handling difficult people, sales, management, and emo-
tional intelligence.
Table 3.2 Comparison of High EQ to Low EQ                            MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 81
                        Traits
                                             Emotional intelligence is the ability to understand, inter-
People with  · Are aware of their personal   pret, and manage your emotions, as well as those of other
High EQ         strengths and weaknesses     people. If you have high EQ, you're able to communicate
                                             with others, show empathy when needed, and overcome
             · Stay calm under pressure      emotionally charged situations.31 Emotional intelligence is
             · Are creative thinkers         widely recognized as a valuable skill that helps improve
             · Listen, reflect, and respond  communication, management, problem-solving, and rela-
                                             tionships within the workplace. It is also a skill that
                to constructive feedback     researchers believe can be improved with training and prac-
                                             tice. Refer to Table 3.2 for a comparison of the traits peo-
People with  · Always have to be `right'     ple with high EQ have compared to those with low EQ.
Low EQ       · Are oblivious to other
                                             Although emotional skills come naturally to some people,
                people's feelings            anyone can improve their ability to understand and reason.
             · Blame others for their        This can be particularly helpful in the workplace, where
                                             relationships and business decisions are often based on
                problems                     interpersonal understanding, teamwork, and communica-
             · Have emotional outbursts

tion.32

To be a manager who is great at their job, you will need to:

· Learn about the company's vision, mission, goals, and values, and understand how your specific depart-
   ment/area supports the overall company goals.

· Learn what is expected of you and your department/area in terms of output, results, interactions with
   customers, and daily, weekly, and monthly reporting.

· Learn how to communicate well in all situations, including when you have to deliver negative informa-
   tion to an employee or customer, when you need to negotiate a contract, or when you need to persuade
   someone to do something. There are many books and courses on these subjects.

· Learn how to motivate others. What does it take to make employees want to work to their best ability?
   Often, recognition, rewards, involvement, and knowing that their manager cares about them and sup-
   ports them in their jobs is enough.

· Learn how to manage projects. Everything that gets done in the workplace is a project, small or large.

Optimize Service Delivery

In a highly competitive market, service-based businesses need to set themselves apart from their competitors.
Listed below are a few ways to drive growth in your company by committing to exceptional service delivery:
82 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

Communicate with Customers

When it comes to customers, there's no such thing as over-communication -- your clients feel more comfort-
able when they know what's going on. That being said, the amount of communication is not as imperative as
the timeliness, context, and ability to clearly identify the value added to the client. In a world of constant con-
nectivity, your ability to cut through the flood of subpar information with quality and timely answers can go
a long way.33

Set Customer Expectations

Define for customers what level of service they can expect from your company. Keep your message consistent
across channels and train staff to deliver service to meet the expectations the company has set. One example
might be turnaround time. If you promise to get back to a customer within 24 hours, make sure you do; even
when you don't have the answer, you can follow up to let the customer know you are still working on the
problem. Under-promise and over-deliver is one way to exceed customer expectations. Do not promise to do
something if you are not sure you can; this may result in a dissatisfied customer. You might say, "We will
make every attempt to deliver by Friday, but I cannot promise it will arrive on time. I will try my best." Then,
if the package arrives on Thursday or Friday, you have delighted the customer.

Automate When Possible

Offer customers a choice of full-serve or self-serve processes. Today, we see online shopping, self-checkouts at
retailers and grocery stores, and online accounts such as Amazon, which allow customers to customize their
options and subscriptions. Automation, when working optimally, can increase customer satisfaction, stream-
line processes and services, and reduce the workload on employees. Ensure automated systems are not diffi-
cult to use and are working optimally, otherwise, your customers may become dissatisfied and may decide to
do business with your competitor instead. Shipping processes may be automated as well, and it is important
to ensure speedy delivery because if your customers can get the item from your competitor faster, they just
might. Implementing automated systems may reduce costs for a company in the long run, but there will
always be some customers who prefer personalized service provided by a real, live person. Automation comes
with a high upfront cost but usually increases productivity, so in the long ru, itn saves money and increases
revenue.34

Schedule Employees Effectively

Service organizations need to schedule employees in accordance with forecasted customer demand. For exam-
ple, during holidays, stores might anticipate an influx of customers and plan to have additional cashiers and
                                                                                                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 83

customer service employees on the schedule. The company does not want too many employees working at
one time, as it leads to some employees standing around with nothing much to do. This is a waste of
resources and costs the company money; it may also lower employee morale and motivation to do their best
work. The company also does not want too few employees scheduled if they are so busy that customer service
wanes due to being rushed, exhausted, and frustrated. Situations such as these may lead to higher turnover
rates (employees quitting), increased customer dissatisfaction, lower employee morale, and a negative corpo-
rate culture. Managers should schedule resources (employees, equipment, raw materials) in accordance with
current projects and sales forecasts, and ensure that no resource is over- or under-utilized.

Foster a Strong Culture

After establishing a feasible service concept, there is no other factor so instrumental to the success of a service
organization as its culture. Employees should be aligned when it comes to a specific set of overarching princi-
ples -- and, while methodology is crucial to service delivery, this should feel more like a philosophy. Don't
take it for granted that your culture is strictly internal -- it shows up in your service delivery, your methodol-
ogy, and your relationships and interactions with customers. The better employees understand the com-
pany's service vision, the better it translates to customers. More often than not, your customers will know if
you and your employees aren't on the same page.35

Costs of Poor Customer Service

Bad customer service costs businesses $338 billion in revenue every year, globally. That's the real cost of bad
customer service.36

Not listening to customers is one of the biggest mistakes companies can make. It may lead to angry customers,
lost business, and a damaged company reputation. In order to satisfy customers, companies must keep up with
the latest technological advances and train their staff to meet or exceed customer expectations. Social media is
growing in popularity, and customers increasingly use it to share their experiences--both positive and negative.
Often, disgruntled customers do not communicate their complaints directly to a business. Instead, they voice
concerns to friends, family, coworkers, or on social media platforms, which can amplify the negative impact.

Why Customers Might Not Voice Complaints

There are several reasons why customers may choose not to complain directly. Some may feel that their con-
cerns will be ignored or dismissed, especially if they have experienced poor responses in the past. Others may
not want to invest the time and effort required to contact the business, particularly if the complaint seems
small or they perceive the process as cumbersome. Some customers may fear confrontation or feel uncomfort-
84 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

able speaking up, preferring to avoid conflict altogether. Additionally, in today's digital age, it is often easier for
customers to post a quick social media comment or review than to navigate customer service channels such as
phone lines, email, or in-person visits.

Understanding why customers may withhold feedback is essential for businesses. By creating multiple, acces-
sible channels for communication--such as online chat, social media messaging, feedback forms, and in-store
kiosks--companies can make it easier for customers to voice concerns. Prompt, empathetic responses demon-
strate that the business values customer input, increasing the likelihood that dissatisfied customers will share
their concerns directly rather than venting elsewhere. Proactively listening to and addressing complaints helps
businesses resolve issues quickly, maintain customer loyalty, and protect their reputation.

Why Employees Might Not Share Customer Complaints

Employees are often the first point of contact with customers, yet they may hesitate to relay complaints to
management. One common reason is fear of blame or reprisal. If employees feel that reporting a customer
issue will result in criticism, disciplinary action, or a negative performance review, they may choose to keep the
complaint to themselves. Additionally, some employees may perceive management as unresponsive or unsup-
portive, believing that raising concerns will not lead to meaningful change. This perception can discourage
employees from escalating issues, even when they recognize that doing so could benefit the customer and the
company.

Another factor is workload and time pressure. Frontline employees often handle multiple tasks simultaneously,
from serving customers to completing administrative duties. In the midst of a busy shift, taking extra time to
document and communicate a complaint may feel burdensome. Some employees may also assume that minor
complaints are not worth reporting, or that management already knows about recurring issues. Without clear
processes, support, and encouragement from leadership, valuable feedback can be lost, leaving customer prob-
lems unresolved and opportunities for improvement unrealized.

Watch the "How Poor Customer Service Can Lead to Big Losses!" YouTube video below to learn how bad
customer service can cost a company money.37 Transcript for "How Poor Customer Service Can Lead to Big
Losses!" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#oem­
                   bed-5
               MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 85

Key Takeaways

 1. A customer service philosophy is a shared mission for your support team, a set of guiding
     principles that ensure you're upholding your core values with every customer interaction.

 2. The first section of a customer service philosophy is a customer service vision statement,
     which Jeff Toister defines as "a statement that clearly defines the type of customer service
     employees are expected to provide".

 3. Your vision statement is followed by your team's values. Customer service values impact
     the experience the customer receives, and they help to define the personality and attitude
     the business is trying to put forth. Often, companies offer training to employees on how to
     uphold these values.

 4. Service standards are guidelines for employees to follow when interacting with cus-
     tomers. Do not make them too rigid or strict, as not all standards will apply to every cus-
     tomer situation. This gives employees the flexibility to adapt to each customer's unique
     needs within a standard framework. Customer service guidelines should align with the com-
     pany's brand.

 5. Setting customer service goals can serve an important role in managing service teams.
     Set SMART goals. Good goals focus attention on the right things, while poorly shaped goals
     focus attention on other things.

 6. Investing time and money in customer service training can prove to be an invaluable
     investment for businesses of diverse sectors and sizes.

 7. Key performance indicators (KPIs) measure how effectively a company is achieving its
     goals against a set of targets, objectives, or industry peers. Some indicators include Net Pro-
     moter Score, Customer Retention Rate, Customer Satisfaction Score, Mystery Shoppers,
     Observation, Customer Engagement Metrics, and Social Media Monitoring.

8. Obstacles to outstanding service include employee incentives; inefficient or ineffective
     service systems; ineffective policies, processes, or procedures; lack of communication; and,
     unanticipated customer demand.

 9. Improve service quality by forecasting customer demand, making doing business easy for
     your customers, empowering employees, providing employees with feedback and training,
     implementing an effective rewards system, and evaluating your personal management skills.

10. Optimize service delivery by communicating with customers, setting customer expecta-
86 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

             tions, automating when possible, scheduling employees effectively, and fostering a strong
             culture.
        11. Bad customer service costs businesses $338 billion in revenue every year, globally.

   End-of-Chapter Exercises

         1. Service Philosophy. Search the Internet for "customer service philosophy" or "Examples of
             customer service philosophy" or visit a specific company website and locate their customer
             service philosophy. Compare a few examples and identify things they may have in common.
             What are three of the most prevalent concepts in organizations' customer service philoso-
             phies? Share your findings with the class and/or your professor.

         2. SMART Goals. Practice setting a SMART goal. Maybe you want to lose weight, quit smok-
             ing, get a part-time job, or make the people close to you happier. Set a SMART goal to help
             you get started.

         3. Management Skills Quiz. Take a quiz from MindTools to see if you have good manage-
             ment skills.

         4. Emotional Intelligence Quiz. How emotionally intelligent are you? Take this quiz to find
             out.

         5. Jobs. Visit Best Job Interview to learn more about the tasks, duties, responsibilities, educa-
             tion, experience, skills, and competencies one must have in order to obtain a customer ser-
             vice management position. Consider how you might grow and develop your own skills so
             that one day you may become a team manager. Are you taking courses currently in college
             or university that may help you develop some of the required skills and abilities to be a team
             manager? Where else might you develop some of these skills?

         6. Obstacles. Consider the obstacles to outstanding customer service discussed in this chapter.
             Can you think of, or research, three additional service obstacles you might encounter? What
             could a service manager do to overcome those obstacles? Discuss with the class and/or pro-
             fessor.

         7. Training. Assume you are the customer service manager in a large retail store such as Wal-
                                                                                               MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 87

        mart or Loblaws. You will be developing a training program for your customer service
        employees. Conduct a bit of research about employee training methods and jot down some
        notes on how you will train your team. Will you offer in-person training? If so, how many
        days? Will you offer online courses? Will you offer mentoring or coaching programs? What
        are three concepts you will teach your team? Discuss with the class and/or your professor.
   8. Incentive Programs. Search the Internet for "employee incentive program" and review a
        few. Assume you are a manager for a mobile phone service provider, Koodo, Fido, or such.
        What type of employee incentive program would you set up? Why? Discuss your rationale
        with the class and/or your professor.
   9. Write a Customer Service Vision. Assume you are managing a customer service team
        within a Gym similar to Fit4Life, Planet Fitness, or GoodLife, and you need to create a cus-
        tomer service vision statement. Use the Internet to gather some tips, advice, and examples
        for writing this statement, then create one. Share it with your class and/or professor. Discuss
        the considerations you made while developing your company's customer service vision.

Self-Check Exercise - SMART Goals

                   An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                   here:
        https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=61#h5p-3
88 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

   Additional Resources

         1. LinkedIn Learning Customer Service Training
         2. I was Seduced by Exceptional Customer Service
         3. 7 Management Practices That Can Improve Employee Productivity
         4. 10 Barriers to Outstanding Customer Service
         5. How to Write a Customer Service Vision Statement
         6. How to Evaluate Customer Service
         7. 10 Phrases to Avoid in Customer Service, YouTube Video
        8. 7 Customer Service KPIs to Evaluate Your Team
         9. 22 Goals for Customer Service Teams to Strive for in 2022
       10. Improve Your Customer Experience with Customer Journey Mapping, YouTube Video

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Media Attributions

  · A customer at Checkout © Photo by Blake Wisz from UnSplash is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
      Commons Zero) license

  · Restaurant server taking an order © Photo by Andrea Piacquadio from Pexels is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license

  · 25goals © Simplicable adapted by Kerri Shields is licensed under a All Rights Reserved license
  · A person being hired © Photo by Sora Shimazaki from Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Com-

      mons Zero) license
  · Employee Empowerment © Igor Link | Pixabay
  · A team meeting in the office © Photo by Smartworks Coworking from UnSplash is licensed under a

      CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
       MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM | 89

Notes

 1. Wellington, E. (2022, July 14). How to create an inspiring customer service philosophy. Help Scout. https://www.help-
     scout.com/blog/customer-service-philosophy/

 2. Wellington, E. (2022, July 14). How to create an inspiring customer service philosophy. Help Scout. https://www.help-
     scout.com/blog/customer-service-philosophy/

 3. Callcenter Helper. (n.d.). What should you put in a customer service vision statement?https://www.callcentre-
     helper.com/what-should-you-put-in-a-customer-service-vision-statement-204455.htm

 4. Callcenter Helper. (n.d.). What should you put in a customer service vision statement?https://www.callcentre-
     helper.com/what-should-you-put-in-a-customer-service-vision-statement-204455.htm

 5. Wellington, E. (2022, July 14). How to create an inspiring customer service philosophy. https://www.helpscout.com/
     blog/customer-service-philosophy/

 6. Pascal (2016, October 20). How to create a strong customer service philosophy. Userlike. https://www.userlike.com/en/
     blog/customer-service-philosophy

 7. Government of Canada. (n.d.) Service standards in the CRA. CRA. https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/ser-
     vices/about-canada-revenue-agency-cra/service-standards-cra.html

 8. Dinardi, G. (2020). The 10 best customer service examples for 2020. nextiva. https://www.nextiva.com/blog/customer-
     service-examples.html

 9. Landsman, I. (2021, August 24). How to create realistic customer service guidelines. helpspot.
     https://www.helpspot.com/blog/customer-service-guidelines

10. Customer Thermometer. (n.d.). Measurable customer service goals with examples. https://www.customerthermome-
     ter.com/customer-service/measurable-customer-service-goals-with-examples/

11. Spacey, J. (2020, January 19). 25 examples of customer service goals. https://simplicable.com/en/customer-service-goals

12. Develop Good Habits. (2020, October 5). SMART goals quick overview with 21 SMART goals examples. [Video].
     YouTube. https://youtu.be/elJcG83m-qg

13. Richards, R. (2020, August 7). How to set measurable customer support goals that drive growth. Jitbit. https://www.jit-
     bit.com/news/customer-support-goals/

14. Luke, H. (2016, August 1). How customer service training can improve customer service skills and ultimately sales perfor­
     mance. [Blog]. https://www.mycustomer.com/community/blogs/hadyn-luke/how-workplace-training-can-improve-
     customer-service-skills-and-ultimately

15. Gilbert-Jamison, T. (2020, July 28). Service recovery - Look, sound, feel. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
     AeC5nNYhlA8

16. Disney Institute. (n.d.). On-Demand: Disney's approach to quality service. https://www.disneyinstitute.com/disneys-
     approach-quality-service-
     online/?ef_id=eff625c563ad159d6b7b7a600e68d939:G:s&s_kwcid=AL!5052!10!80745491051194!80745603288295
     &CMP=KNC-
     FY21_DI_INS_CAN_PDI_LGN_DIQS_Course_QualityService%7CB%7C1165729.DI.SM.01.04%7CMALWT9Z
     %7CNB%7C80745491051194&msclkid=eff625c563ad159d6b7b7a600e68d939

17. McCain, A. (2023, January 16). 28 critical customer retention statistics [2023]: Average customer retention rate by
     industry. https://www.zippia.com/advice/customer-retention-statistics/

18. SurveyMonkey. (2020, June 26). How to use the customer satisfaction score (CSAT) metric. [Video]. YouTube.
     https://youtu.be/8ANkDCHkjew

19. Dhangal, A. (2020, June 19). How do you measure customer service performance and success? With 10 useful KPIs.
90 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER SERVICE TEAM

           Acquire. https://acquire.io/blog/measure-customer-service-success/

     20. Dhangal, A. (2020, June 19). How do you measure customer service performance and success? With 10 useful KPIs.
           Acquire. https://acquire.io/blog/measure-customer-service-success/

     21. Hyken, S. (2020, September 17). How to avoid roadblocks to great customer service. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://youtu.be/A5YhrLnxOTQ[/

     22. commbox. (n.d.). Best customer support strategies, evaluate and reward your team. https://www.commbox.io/best-
           customer-support-strategies-evaluate-and-reward-your-team/

     23. commbox. (2019, October 21). Best customer support strategies, evaluate and reward your team. https://www.comm-
           box.io/best-customer-support-strategies-evaluate-and-reward-your-team/

     24. SuperOffice. (2023, September 1). 32 customer experience statistics you need to know for 2024. https://www.superof-
           fice.com/blog/customer-experience-statistics/

     25. SuperOffice. (2023, September 1). 32 customer experience statistics you need to know for 2024. https://www.superof-
           fice.com/blog/customer-experience-statistics/

     26. SuperOffice. (2023, September 1). 32 customer experience statistics you need to know for 2024. https://www.superof-
           fice.com/blog/customer-experience-statistics/

     27. Gratifi. (2021, September 14). Why a one-size-fits-all employee rewards program won't work. https://www.gratifi.com/
           blog/importance-of-a-flexible-employee-rewards-program/

     28. Gratifi. (2021, September 14). Why a one-size-fits-all employee rewards program won't work. https://www.gratifi.com/
           blog/importance-of-a-flexible-employee-rewards-program/

     29. Team Synerion. (2015, April 3). Building a reward system for employee performance. Synerion. https://blog.syner-
           ion.com/building-a-reward-system-for-employee-performance

     30. Mindtools. (n.d.). How good are your management skills? https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/
           newTMM_28.htm

     31. PsychCentral. (n.d.). Emotional intelligence test. https://psychcentral.com/quizzes/emotional-intelligence-test

     32. Cherry, K. (2022, December 11). Utilizing emotional intelligence in the workplace. https://www.verywellmind.com/uti-
           lizing-emotional-intelligence-in-the-workplace-4164713

     33. Mullen, R. (2022, June 7). 5 ways to improve service quality in your organization. https://www.replicon.com/blog/
           5-ways-improve-service-delivery-organization/

     34. Mullen, R. (2022, June 7). 5 ways to improve service quality in your organization. https://www.replicon.com/blog/
           5-ways-improve-service-delivery-organization/

     35. Mullen, R. (2022, June 7). 5 ways to improve service quality in your organization. https://www.replicon.com/blog/
           5-ways-improve-service-delivery-organization/

     36. Widmer, B. (2022, June 7). The real cost of bad customer service (and how to avoid it). formilla.
           https://www.formilla.com/blog/the-real-cost-of-bad-customer-service-and-how-to-avoid-it/

     37. Hyken, S. (2018, July 5). How poor customer service can lead to big losses! [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
           5T_Wme6pres
                                                                                              WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 91

CHAPTER 4: WORKING IN A CUSTOMER
CONTACT CENTER

Chapter 4 Learning Outcomes

After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:

    1. Describe the difference between the traditional call center and the modern contact center.
   2. List five duties a contact center representative performs.
   3. List five issues a contact center representative may deal with.
   4. List three things a contact center representative may do to provide quality customer service.

Call Center Versus Contact Center

A traditional call center is an office that is designed to      Call center workers working
handle a large volume of phone calls, especially for taking
orders and providing customer service. It is focused on
voice calls. Even if a call center provides some multi-chan-
nel customer service, the interactions are siloed in the indi-
vidual channels. This does not provide a clear view of the
full customer journey. On the other hand, a modern con­
tact center, as the name indicates, allows customers to
contact a company not just via phone calls, but across
whatever channel they choose.1

"A contact center is the central point from which all customer contacts are managed. This requires the coordi-

nation and integration of people, processes, and technology across the business. Contact center agents, for
instance, need to be trained in the best practices of each channel for engaging customers." 2
92 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

Watch the "Contact Center vs Call Center: What's the difference?" YouTube video below to learn the differ-
ence between contact centers and call centers.3 Transcript for "Contact Center vs Call Center: What's the dif-
ference?" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=74#oem­

bed-1

Contact Center Agent

"A Customer Service Representative (CSR) - also called an agent - is a person who works in a call or con­
tact center and helps customers with their issues. They may do this using a variety of channels, including vir­
tual or in-person meetings; phone, chat, or email conversations; and by using social media. Customer service
representatives (CSRs) play an important role in influencing the customer experience."4 The role of the cus­
tomer service representative (CSR) is to offer outstanding service to customers in order to maintain satisfac­
tion by meeting or exceeding customer expectations. A CSR must have many skills, including good
communication skills, excellent problem-solving skills, and strong interpersonal skills.

Customer Service Representatives have the ability to help retain existing customers, as well as, help obtain
new customers, so it is a highly valuable position for any company. You may be wondering if a position as a
contact center representative is the right job to begin your career.

Most likely, you have interacted with a contact center at some point in your life, but you may wonder what a
day in the life of a customer service representative may include. "To work in a call center, you'll need to be
motivated by customer success. Call center agents are tenacious problem-solvers who are committed to
enhancing customers' experience with a company or brand. A call center agent's workday is typically fast-
paced and requires them to manage a handful of different responsibilities. Oftentimes, agents need to be flexi­
ble with their workflow and capable of handling unexpected roadblocks. While this causes their workday to
look different each day, agents will still perform the same core call center duties regardless of the task they're
completing."5

Agent Duties

The job of a contact center agent can be quite varied and interesting. Responsibilities may include the follow-
ing.6
                                                                                              WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 93

  · Answering inbound phone calls.
  · Making outbound phone calls.
  · Answering emails.
  · Engaging in live chats.
  · Responding to short SMS queries.
  · Responding to support tickets filled out over a web form.
  · Collecting and reporting on customer feedback.
  · Managing and updating customer databases.
  · Identifying and escalating issues to supervisors.
  · Providing product and service information to customers.
  · Researching, identifying, and resolving customer complaints using applicable software.
  · Processing orders, forms, and applications using applicable software.
  · Documenting all call information according to standard operating procedures.
  · Recognizing, documenting, and alerting the management team of trends in customer calls.
  · Following up on customer calls where necessary.
  · Upselling or cross-selling products and services.
  · Working with colleagues when necessary to resolve customer complaints.
  · Learning about the company's products to be able to answer any questions from customers.
  · Training and onboarding new call center agents.

Agents may have to deal with a wide variety of issues including the following.

  · Pre-sales
  · Inbound sales and service
  · Outbound sales and service
  · General account queries
  · Bill payments
  · Complaints
  · Technical support
  · Warranty claims
  · Product returns
  · Account upgrades
  · Account closures
  · Appointment bookings or reminders

Agents must make sure that they do the following.
94 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

  · Answer calls within a specific period of time.
  · Answer the call correctly, usually giving their name, the company they represent, and the department.
  · Resolve most calls on the first contact or refer them to the correct department.
  · Ensure that the customer is happy and that they do not have any other queries.
  · Log the nature of the call accurately against the customer's account.
  · Handle an appropriate number of calls per day (or at the very least be in the `ready' state to accept calls

      for the right amount of time, if call volumes are low).

Some call center agents work in-house, directly for their employer, while others may be employed by an out-
sourcing company working in a call center that accepts calls for a range of clients. Some agents work from
home (also known as virtual agents), while others work from a central office and commute to work each day.
Some companies operate their own contact centers while others outsource their contact center operations, or
part of it, to an agency.

Depending on the specialization of the agent, they may handle calls falling into several of the above categories,
or they may be focused on one or two specific areas. Some companies, such as financial companies, may
assign high-value clients a designated "account advisor" agent who will answer the majority of their calls. This
helpful customer retention strategy ensures that the customer interacts with someone who knows the status
of their account and who can answer their questions promptly. For complex issues and high-value accounts,
this kind of continuity is essential.7

All companies benefit from contact center computerized systems that pull together customer information
into a reporting system (usually a customer relationship management (CRM) database) which makes it easy
for any agent on the team to locate the customer's history with the company, orders pending and filled, inter-
actions such as complaints, and notes left by other agents before and during an interaction with the cus-
tomer. This makes for a positive customer experience and aids in customer retention.

Agent Training

Most organizations train their contact center representatives during the first few weeks on the job. Represen-
tatives need to become familiar with the company's mission and vision and specifics around the image the
company wishes to portray to customers. After a few weeks of training, the manager will often coach and
monitor new representatives on the job, correcting any service issues they observe. As new technology is intro-
duced into the call center, customer procedures change, trends in service change, or legal or company policies
change, representatives may need to be trained on the changes. Once an agent is trained, they may be offered
additional training to grow their skills and knowledge so as to work in multiple departments, for multiple cus-
tomers, or learn more about selling or servicing various products.
                                                                                              WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 95

Watch the "How to Survive Your Call Center Training" YouTube video below for information call center
trainees will want to know.8 Transcript for "How to Survive Your Call Center Training" Video [PDF-New
Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=74#oem­

bed-2

Agent Workload

Contact center agents may be working in very busy environments and be expected to answer 50 or more calls
per day. An agent may be working in an inbound center or an outbound center. Inbound centers are usually
for customer service calls coming into the company from customers seeking information, looking for product
support, returning products, or paying bills. Outbound centers are usually for calls initiated by the company
going out to customers either attempting to make a sale, provide information about a promotion, improve
customer relationships, or solicit new business.

An agent not only takes phone calls but also works with various channels, responding to customer inquiries
and solving customer issues. Some issues take time and must be researched, reviewed with a manager, or col-
laborated on with other department,s so an agent must set aside time for these tasks and follow up with the
customer later in the day or the next day (as agreed upon). Even if there is no resolution to the problem, the
agent should contact the customer at the agreed-upon time to provide a status update and let them know the
problem is still being worked on.

"Depending on the nature of the calls, working in a call center can be quite repetitive. Agents who work in
departments doing bill payments or inbound sales need to be good typists since they must record addresses
and card details quickly and accurately. Those working in support roles need to be able to complete ticket
information accurately, demonstrate good listening skills, and communicate instructions clearly."9

Being flexible and adaptable may help an agent overcome the boredom of the repetition of similar calls.
Agents may be asked to work in both inbound and outbound centers, offer support on more than one prod-
uct, answer bilingual calls, or swap between different communication channels. Having agents who can work
in different areas and on different systems is a benefit for the employer too as it means less agent downtime.

"Call center work can be stressful if the callers become hostile, but it can also be quite rewarding if the callers
are polite and are grateful for the help that they are given. Outbound sales agents and those who do outbound
96 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

surveys can sometimes face hostile responses from call recipients. A good call center agent will handle it grace-
fully and remove the recipient from the database so they don't get called again."10

Watch the "Mock Call Sample Recording With Call Flow Guide" YouTube video below for examples of cus-
tomer calls in the call center.11 Transcript for "Mock Call Sample Recording With Call Flow Guide" Video
[PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=74#oem­

bed-3

Agent Wages

Many contact center agents earn minimum wage, but agents with multiple skills or who speak multiple lan-
guages often earn higher pay rates than those who handle only one type of customer call. Agents working in
technical support, medical, or financial areas often receive higher pay rates. Agents working in sales roles will
usually earn a commission on top of their regular salary.12

"Because of the relatively low rate of pay for the entry-level positions, the turnover rate for office-based call
center work is high. Virtual call center agents usually enjoy better job satisfaction and a better pay rate in real
terms, since they do not have to commute to work and don't have to worry about packed lunches, eating out,
or buying work clothes. Since they work from home, their work day feels shorter and they may enjoy more
leisure time while still getting the same rate of pay for the hours they work."13

Quality Service

No matter how experienced you are, never assume you know more about the customer's needs than they do.
These types of assumptions can lead to miscommunication and frustration for both of you. Instead, commu­
nicate thoughtful, personalized solutions. No two customers are alike. Each one has their own unique needs
and goals that are specific to their situation. Recognizing these differences and adapting your communication
to align with each customer is a great way to build rapport.14

To stand out from competitors, you need to do more than just provide the right answer. Exceeding customer
expectations and providing positive, memorable experiences help retain customers and make them loyal advo­
cates, which means more revenue for the company. When customers have questions, they want answers
                                                                                              WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 97

quickly. That means you need to be organized and capable of thinking on your feet. It also means that you
need to be proficient with call center technology. Most agents will receive training during onboarding or ori-
entation on how to use the computerized systems. You need to document and respond to tickets (issues to
respond to) efficiently.

Observe recurring patterns or customer roadblocks. If several customers complain about the same thing, then
this may be a significant problem, and you should report these issues to management. The company can then
correct the issue, whether it be a processing problem or a product flaw. Resolving the issue promptly helps
prevent future customer frustration and enhances the overall customer experience. This also makes the
agent's role smoother and more manageable.

It's tempting to provide a customer with an easy, short-term solution; however, it's important to solve the cus-
tomer's long-term needs, and not for your own convenience. Customers will recognize the difference and will
remain loyal to your business if you truly go above and beyond for them.15

Stay calm under pressure, especially when dealing with angry customers. Your professionalism may be tested
when dealing with angry customers, but doing a quality job means actively listening to complaints, calming
the situation, and resolving the issue as effectively and efficiently as possible. This may mean following up
with the customer after you have done some research on their problem. Sometimes you need to transfer the
customer to a manager when you do not have the authority needed to solve the issue. Other times, it may
mean working with another department to get the customer issue resolved. All you can do is remain calm,
work diligently, and reassure the customer that you are working in their best interest and trying to solve their
issue quickly and effectively.

Watch the "How to Deal With Angry Customers" YouTube video below to learn some tips for dealing with
angry customers.16 Transcript for "How to Deal With Angry Customers" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed
captioning is available on YouTube.

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=74#oem­

bed-4
98 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

   Key Takeaways

         1. A Customer Service Representative (CSR) - also called an agent - is a person who works
             in a call or contact center and helps customers with their issues. They may do this using a
             variety of channels, including phone, chat, email, and social media. Customer service repre-
             sentatives (CSRs) play an important role in influencing the customer experience.

         2. A traditional call center, as the name suggests, is focused on voice calls. Even if a call cen-
             ter provides some multi-channel customer service, the interactions are siloed in the individual
             channels. This does not provide a clear view of the full customer journey.

         3. A modern contact center, as the name indicates, allows customers to contact a company
             not just via calls, but across whatever channel they choose.

         4. A contact center representative has many responsibilities, some of which include answer-
             ing inbound phone calls. answering emails, responding to support tickets filled out over a
             web form, engaging in live chats., and making outbound phone calls.

         5. Contact center agents may deal with a variety of issues, some of which include inbound
             sales and service, outbound sales and service, general account queries, bill payments, and
             complaints. An agent not only takes phone calls but also works with various channels
             responding to customer inquiries and solving customer issues.

         6. Many contact center agents earn minimum wage, but agents with multiple skills or who
             speak multiple languages often earn higher pay rates than those who handle only one type
             of customer call. Agents working in technical support, medical, or financial areas often
             receive higher pay rates. Agents working in sales roles will usually earn a commission on top
             of their regular salary.

         7. To provide quality service, a contact center representative should communicate thought­
             ful, personalized solutions, be organized and capable of thinking on their feet, be proficient
             with call center technology, observe recurring patterns or customer roadblocks and report
             them to management, solve customer issues for the customer's long-term needs and not for
             their own convenience, and stay calm under pressure, especially when dealing with angry
             customers so as to maintain their professionalism.
                          WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 99

End-of-Chapter Exercises

1. Jobs. Search the Internet to locate three job advertisements for a contact center representa-
    tive (or agent) and compare the duties to those listed in this chapter. The job titles may dif-
    fer, for example, a job advertisement posted on the Coca-Cola Company website is entitled
    "Customer Resolution Specialist" working in the "Customer Care Center" while the job duties
    are those of a contact center representative. Try searching company websites for jobs at
    companies you might like to work for one day. Starting out in a contact center is a great way
    to get hired and work your way up the proverbial ladder within your desired organization.

2. Contact Center Software. Search the Internet to locate information on contact center soft-
    ware. Contact center software allows companies to manage a high volume of inbound and
    outbound customer communications across a range of channels. Select one specific software,
    such as Talkdesk, LeadDesk, Bitrix24, VICIdial, Five9, Nice, or another, to further research.
    Take note of the features and benefits of the software as well as the price. You may also
    wish to look at some user reviews to see how people liked using the software. Is there a
    demo or free trial? Share this information with your professor or classmates. Your professor
    may wish to take advantage of a free trial and have you practice using some contact center
    technology.

3. Salesforce Service Cloud. Many companies use Customer Relationship Management
    (CRM) software to track interactions with customers so that contact center agents can view
    the issues customers may have had in the past. A very popular example of CRM software is
    Salesforce Service Cloud which is contact center software, built on a SaaS model, that
    empowers the company to manage customer service in the cloud. Salesforce provides cus-
    tomer relationship management service and also provides a complementary suite of enter-
    prise applications focused on customer service, marketing automation, analytics, and
    application development. You can learn more about using Salesforce at the Trailhead free
    training website. Go ahead and sign up for free then take a quick 10-minute tutorial on using
    Salesforce Service Cloud.

4. Hootsuite. Search the Internet to discover the most popular social media used by companies
    today to interact with customers. Many companies use software tools to manage their social
    media accounts in one place. Hootsuite is a popular social media management dashboard.
    Hootsuite also offers a free trial. Research Hootsuite and take note of the features and bene-
100 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

             fits of using such software. Share this information with your professor and/or class.
         5. Call Center Quiz. Take a quiz to see if you are a good candidate for a call center position.
         6. Common Phrases Role-Play. Review some common phrases agents use when serving

             customers then roleplay with a partner various customer phone calls. Some angry customer
             calls, some inquiries about products or services, and some billing questions or complaints. If
             you are not sure how to answer the customer, do some research to find some example calls
             to learn how to provide the best service possible. The customer can provide you with feed-
             back on how well you represented the company and how well you resolved their problem or
             provided exceptional customer care.

   Self-Check Exercise - Dealing with Angry Customers

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
                          https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=74#h5p-5
                      WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 101

Additional Resources

           1. Best Contact Center Software
           2. Gartner Ranks Five9 Highest for Agile Contact Center and North America Use Cases
           3. Salesforce Trailhead - Learn new skills in Salesforce CRM software
          4. Top 15 Call Center Quality Assurance Best Practices
           5. 8 Most Important Qualities of a Call Center Agent
          6. Monster Call Center Agent Job Description Sample
           7. Social Media Customer Service

 References

 (Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
 therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

 Media Attributions

    · Call center workers working © Photo by Tima Miroshnichenko from Pexels is licensed under a CC0
       (Creative Commons Zero) license

Notes

        1. Aquino, J. (2020, February 18). Contact center vs. call center: 6 key differences and why it matters. TTEC.
             https://www.ttec.com/blog/contact-center-vs-call-center-6-key-differences-and-why-it-matters

        2. Aquino, J. (2020, February 18). Contact center vs. call center: 6 key differences and why it matters. TTEC.
             https://www.ttec.com/blog/contact-center-vs-call-center-6-key-differences-and-why-it-matters

        3. Nextiva. (2020, November 23). Contact center vs call center: What's the difference? [Video]. YouTube.
             https://youtu.be/HJtuLLY3gZk

        4. Nice. (2021). What is a customer service representative (CSR)? https://www.niceincontact.com/call-center-software-
             company/glossary/what-is-contact-center-customer-service-representative-csr
102 | WORKING IN A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

      5. Glassdoor Team. (2019, April 30). Working in a call center: Here's what you need to know. https://www.glass-
           door.com/blog/working-in-a-call-center/

      6. LiveAgent. (n.d.) Call center duties. https://www.liveagent.com/academy/call-center-duties/

      7. McMahon, K. (2021, January 22). What does a contact center agent do? Intrado. https://www.intrado.com/en/blog/
           cloud-collaboration/what-does-contact-center-agent-do

      8. Kwestyon. (2020, August 31). How to survive your call center training. [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
           watch?v=6FLgVBEHR14

      9. McMahon, K. (2021, January 22). What does a contact center agent do? Intrado. https://www.intrado.com/en/blog/
           cloud-collaboration/what-does-contact-center-agent-do

     10. McMahon, K. (2021, January 22). What does a contact center agent do? Intrado. https://www.intrado.com/en/blog/
           cloud-collaboration/what-does-contact-center-agent-do

     11. Kwestyon. (2020, July 18). Mock call sample recording with call flow guide. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=seQ5RRI6H4c

     12. McMahon, K. (2021, January 22). What does a contact center agent do? Intrado. https://www.intrado.com/en/blog/
           cloud-collaboration/what-does-contact-center-agent-do

     13. McMahon, K. (2021, January 22). What does a contact center agent do? Intrado. https://www.intrado.com/en/blog/
           cloud-collaboration/what-does-contact-center-agent-do

     14. Saboo, N. (2019). Working in a call center: Everything you need to know. [Blog]. Hubspot. https://blog.hubspot.com/
           service/working-call-center

     15. Saboo, N. (2019). Working in a call center: Everything you need to know. [Blog]. Hubspot. https://blog.hubspot.com/
           service/working-call-center

     16. Userlike. (2020, March 3). How to deal with angry customers. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/8K19oXZyAAU
                                                                                              MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 103

CHAPTER 5: MANAGING A CUSTOMER
CONTACT CENTER

   Chapter 5 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. Describe the role and responsibilities of the contact center manager.
         2. List five challenges contact center managers face.
         3. Provide two ways in which a manager can optimize the contact center workforce.
         4. Discuss three metrics contact centers use to measure the quality of customer service.
         5. List six best practices for effective contact center management.

The Role of the Contact Center Manager

The contact center manager sets objectives in service quality and analyzes metrics to see if the objectives
have been met. The manager provides feedback to staff and arranges training as needed to ensure reliable, effi-
cient support for customers. Very often someone starts out as a contact center representative and then pro-
gresses into a contact center manager role after they have gained experience in customer service and the
technologies used in contact centers. Below is a list of key responsibilities of a Contact Center Supervisor
position posted at Indeed.1
Key Responsibilities/Accountabilities:

  · Provides leadership and guidance to the Contact Center team
  · Plans, organizes, and supervises the activities of the operational unit including daily activities and Qual-

      ity Assurance
  · Reviews and analyzes department reports on a daily, weekly, and monthly basis
104 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

  · Plans staff scheduling and workforce resource utilization
  · Manages key customer service metrics
  · Responds to escalated customer concerns (call queue, e-mail, online inquiries, chat social media, etc.)
  · Communicates any changes to policies and procedures to Contact Center staff
  · Evaluates and recommends various technological changes to improve the customer service process
  · Provides coaching, development, performance management, technical guidance, and advice
  · Provides input into department goals and objectives
  · Leads and/or participates in department projects and key initiatives to ensure quality and timely comple-

      tion within budget
  · Researches, recommends, and implements new or enhanced policies, procedures, and processes to

      improve operational effectiveness
  · Ensures compliance with legislative, regulatory, and health and safety policies, procedures, and standards

Watch the "5 Qualities of Great Customer Service" YouTube video below for great service tips.2 Transcript
for "5 Qualities of Great Customer Service: Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on
YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=82#oem­
                   bed-1

Challenges Contact Center Managers Face

As a call center manager, you will face challenges from management, customers, employees, and technology.
Some of these challenges are described below.

Absenteeism

Since a call center is so dependent on people being available to answer phone calls and resolve customer issues
when workers are absent their absence increases the workloads for other agents who may already have lots of
work to deal with. This creates extra stress for the agents working and may cause them to feel overworked and
underappreciated or underpaid, thereby creating low morale. Managers should develop a policy for absences.
Encourage employees to provide notice or make arrangements in the event of a scheduled absence. Once a
                                                                                              MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 105

policy is enacted then managers must enforce it and hold employees accountable for being at work on time
and as scheduled.

Accurate Reporting and Analytics

Call centers are a repository for customer data and typically use reporting and analytics software to analyze
data and create reports that benefit organizational performance. Call center managers are mostly responsible
for providing reports on various aspects to other departments. Sales and marketing require reports on out-
bound sales performance, finance requires reports on the operational cost of the call center, and the informa-
tion technology team wants reports on the operational performance of the call center. With so many separate
reports and systems jumbled together, getting accurate and consistent reporting becomes a colossal problem
for call center managers.3

Attrition

When a call center loses an employee, it loses all the time, effort, and training that went into developing that
employee. Finding and hiring quality agents is difficult and retaining them can be just as difficult. To help
reduce call center turnover rates be more selective when hiring and hire candidates who have shown longevity
and loyalty to past employers. Offer competitive pay and rewards, sometimes just offering a bit higher pay can
make for more reliable, productive employees. Provide employees with the software tools they need to excel at
their job, like multiple communication channels, call analytics, computer telephony integration (CTI), inter­
active voice response (IVR), call recording, and call monitoring.4

Top Factors That Lead to High Attrition5

  · Improper training
  · No upward mobility
  · Low wages
  · Micromanagement
  · Low morale

Call Center Turnover Rates by Job Title6

  · 27% for entry-level
  · 20% for intermediate level
  · 12% for senior agents
  · 11% for team leads
106 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

  · 7% for supervisors
  · 6% for managers

Attrition Rates by Country7

  · India - in-house call centers, 28%, and subcontractor call centers, 38%
  · USA - in-house call centers, 26%, and subcontractor call centers, 36%
  · Canada - in-house call centers, 22%, and subcontractor call centers, 29%
  · Brazil - in-house call centers, 20%, and subcontractor call centers, 30%
  · South Korea - in-house call centers, 20%, and subcontractor call centers, 18%
  · Spain - in-house call centers, 15%, and subcontractor call centers, 24%

Bad Customer Experiences are Magnified

When customers have bad experiences with companies they often post their stories, feedback, and reviews on
social media. This becomes a big problem for companies as they fear their company image will be damaged
which may result in a loss of current customers or difficulty attracting new ones. A post on Facebook or a
tweet on X (formerly Twitter) can be read by thousands of people in a matter of minutes. Call center man-
agers should train customer service agents to be social-media savvy so as to respond appropriately and in a
timely fashion to complaints, bad publicity, or angry customers sharing their stories in the public eye.

Collaborating Across Departments

Like any business, call centers require the support of multiple departments. When it comes to problems
beyond answering phones--like shopping issues or defective products--your employees can only do so much.
In those situations, it helps to recognize your employees' limits but to also look for opportunities to improve
relationships between departments. One way to accomplish this is to integrate databases across departments
so every employee has a comprehensive view of your call center's interactions with a customer.8

Employee Engagement

Maintaining employee enthusiasm in a contact center is difficult because the work is stressful and monoto-
nous, and it's easy for employees to become demoralized, which leads to absenteeism and turnover. Managers
need to empower employees to help customers. Agents need to feel they have the authority to efficiently help
customers. Automation can help by assisting agents in offering excellent service, often reducing the time
needed to deal with each customer. Providing incentives for excellent service and meeting performance goals
                                                                                               MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 107

will help engage employees. Delivering timely feedback by letting employees know how they are doing on a
regular basis and providing coaching and training as needed is also a way to engage employees.

First Contact Resolution

Most contact centers strive to resolve customer issues on the first call (contact) as this is the most efficient
approach and customers prefer not to have to call back several times or be transferred to several employees to
resolve their issues. As customer issues become more complex, it gets harder to solve them during the first
touchpoint and may take several follow-up calls or additional contact to resolve.

Some ways to help agents solve issues on the first customer contact include:

 1. Building a common knowledge base for agents to refer to when they need answers to common customer
      questions or specifications about specific products.

 2. Engaging in root-cause analysis to identify why customers call the contact center, and then using that
      information to populate the knowledge base.

 3. Assessing key performance indicators (KPIs) by reviewing metrics often and determining whether or not
      the metrics are providing the insights needed to improve customer service.

Increasing Customer Expectations

Due to increasing business competition, along with digital and social channels reshaping customer expecta-
tions, it has become harder for call centers to meet customer expectations. Evolving customer expectations
may result in increased customer attrition. Customers expect immediate service through the channel of their
preference.9

Many customers prefer to use self-service channels because they find it more convenient, faster, and more flex-
ible with respect to customers' unique needs. It is important to make it easy and efficient for customers to
serve themselves. Increasing the number of opportunities for customers to serve themselves frees up agents to
handle more complicated customer issues, and it may increase customer satisfaction as well. This may be as
simple as providing a section on the company website, such as an FAQ or Knowledge database, that helps cus-
tomers solve common product issues and answer simple service questions. While self-service options can
deflect customer contact with your contact center, it is important to ensure that customers can contact your
team when they need to, otherwise, they may become frustrated or annoyed.

Software Integration

Much of an agent's day-to-day operations entail continuously switching between multiple software systems
108 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

and databases. This is only a problem if many failed first-call resolutions are because of an inability of agents
to access data. Managers should integrate systems as much as possible to increase efficiency and training time.
It is also important to buy from vendors who support their software, have user-friendly interfaces (GUI), and
integrate their various systems into one system.

Workforce Optimization

Contact center workforce optimization is a consolidated environment of technology, strategies, and
processes to maximize agent efficiency, productivity, and quality to enable the contact center to perform at the
highest level. Key components of workforce optimization in a contact center include:10

 1. Workforce management which serves as a forecasting call volume and scheduling agent shifts accord-
      ingly, as well as managing breaks and overtime. Improve agent productivity across the contact center,
      and consider virtual agents who work from various locations.

 2. Training sessions enable better agent-customer interactions.
 3. Quality management ensures that agents are providing high-quality service and helps to identify areas

      where agents can improve their performance for better customer satisfaction. Metrics are often used to
      measure quality service delivery.
 4. Performance dashboards provide real-time performance feedback for agents and supervisors. These
      can help motivate agents to achieve goals and identify where agents can improve.
 5. Coaching sessions help agents improve their skills, stay updated with product and service knowledge,
      and enhance overall agent performance. These sessions also give managers an idea of where additional
      training is needed, and to gauge agent well-being.
 6. Gamification incorporates game elements into non-game contexts, such as a contact center. Gamifica-
      tion ties into incentive management, using leaderboards, levels, badges, points, rewards and recognition,
      and more to motivate agents and increase engagement. This improves overall performance - which ulti-
      mately helps boost the customer experience.
                                                        MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 109

Agent Productivity

To calculate agent productivity take the total time
the agent is working (answering calls, doing adminis-
trative work, doing after-call work) and divide by the
time the agent was scheduled to work, then multiply
by 100. Formula = (Total Output / Total Input) x
100 = Labour Productivity

Using automated workforce management tools and

agent scheduling software help to collect accurate

data that will help a manager forecast labour needs     A person with many arms multi-tasking
accurately. Analyzing records will help identify busy

times and slack times in customer service needs so

that under-staffing and over-staffing do not become big problems costing the company money and customers.

By precisely predicting the number of agents required at a given point in time, call centers can optimize sched-

uling to keep costs as low as possible while providing the best customer service possible. Automated work-

force management tools also help track an agent's non-productive hours and take the necessary steps to

remedy the problem; thus, increasing the agent's productivity. Managers do need to recognize that some cus-

tomer issues require additional time and after-call work which would be measured in the productive time for

the agent.

Work-From-Home Agents

While many companies have inbound and outbound contact centers some also have work-from-home
agents. Companies benefit from the work-from-home agent setup as it makes it easier for them to provide
customer service across multiple time zones. Since the customer service team is working from various loca-
tions, businesses with remote call centers can provide coverage during off-hours without having to put
employees on different shifts. This makes employee scheduling significantly easier for companies that provide
24/7 customer support.11

Some contact centers not only offer support online, on the phone, or through social media they also offer in-
person support. Some companies outsource their contact center needs either locally or globally and pay to
have trained agents answering calls from company customers, or to have trained agents calling potential cus-
tomers to make sales.
110 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

Contact Center Metrics

How does a contact center know it's consistently          People working in a contact center
delivering high-quality service? It begins with setting
metrics. Metrics is a method of measuring some-
thing or the results obtained from this. The right
metrics or key performance indicators (KPIs) should
effectively measure a business's specific capacities.
Call center managers rely on historical and real-time
data to make decisions. Traditional call center met-
rics include first-call resolution, speed to answer, and
average handling time.12

Here's a list of the most crucial metrics that inbound
call centers must measure.13

· Service Level
· First Contact Resolution (FCR)
· Abandoned Call Rate (ACR)
· Average Speed of Answer (ASA)
· Average Handle Time (AHT)
· Average Call Transfer Rate
· Cost Per Contact
· Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)
· Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT)
· Customer Retention and Churn

Service Level Metric

Service level is the percentage of calls that are answered within a given time period. To calculate the Service
Level divide the total number of calls answered within the time period by the total number of calls and the
total number of abandoned calls. A Service Level Agreement (SLA) documents the agreed-upon level of ser-
vice between a vendor and a client. Numerical metrics are often assigned to determine the success or failure of
the agreement, along with clear repercussions for failing to meet the service level standards. It's most com-
monly used by technology and customer service providers.14 Then multiply the result by one hundred. It's
imperative for companies to enable customers to help themselves. This is achieved by maintaining a compre-
hensive knowledge base (FAQs) that customers can use as the first line of support.
                                       MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 111

First Contact Resolution (FCR) Metric

The First Contact Resolution (FCR) metric shows how many customer requests were solved during the
first contact. The industry standard is around 70-75%. First Contact Resolution (FCR) is an essential part of
managing your company's relationship with your customers.15 It is a direct reflection of an agent's and a cen-
ter's capacity to solve problems, answer questions, and provide support the very first time a customer calls.
Simply put, it's getting it right the first time and reducing customer effort.

Watch the "First Contact Resolution: Managing Metrics" YouTube video below to learn how to handle cus-
tomer inquiries the first time you connect with them.16 Transcript for "First Contact Resolution: Managing

Metrics" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=82#oem­
bed-2

Abandoned Call Rate (ACR) Metric

In an inbound call center setting, the rate of abandoned calls refers to the total number of calls where a
caller hangs up before an agent answers. The most common factors that lead to abandoned calls are lengthy
wait times and unnecessary hold times. An inefficient Interactive Voice Response (IVR) system may also
cause callers to abandon the queue. It may be that to ensure compliance with the Service Level Agreement
(SLA), a 5% or lower abandoned call rate needs to be maintained. To compute the ACR, divide the total
number of abandoned calls by the total number of inbound calls.

Below is a list of a few ways to prevent abandoned customer calls.17

  · Inform customers of estimated wait times. Callers tend to wait longer when they know exactly how
      long they need to wait.

  · Offer virtual queues. Virtual queues allow customers to maintain their place in line, hang up, and
      receive a call back from a customer representative at a specific time. This is similar to the customer leav-
      ing a voice message and receiving a call back at a later time.

  · Incorporate omnichannel routing. This technology is also capable of determining agent capacity and
      assigning interactions to the appropriate type of channel, including text messages, social media messages,
      chat, and email. Contact centers that support multiple channels of communication can not only
      improve customer satisfaction but can also minimize queue wait times by spreading the interactions over
112 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

      various platforms.
  · Provide self-service options. For instance, customers can track a package by inputting a tracking num-

      ber on an online portal or make a payment via an automated system. Self-service options can free up a
      lot of time that would otherwise be spent waiting for a live agent to become available. Not only does this
      shorten and even eliminate wait times entirely, but it also helps to cut costs for contact centers by reduc-
      ing the need for extra agents.
  · Assign overflow teams. Overflow teams or contact centers can take over calls that are in queue for
      longer than a specific threshold. This strategy will require appropriate staff levels to accommodate these
      overflow calls.
  · Have customers complete tasks while waiting. Giving customers something to do while they're
      waiting to speak to a live agent will help make the time pass more quickly. For instance, customers can be
      prompted to gather all the pertinent information needed for the call while waiting in the queue, such as
      account numbers or information to confirm their identity. At the same time, all this prepping before
      being connected to an agent will help streamline the call.
  · Redial abandoned calls during slower times. Redialing abandoned calls in this way will help cus-
      tomers feel important while ensuring that agents are not bombarded with calls.

Average Speed of Answer (ASA) Metric

The Average Speed of Answer (ASA) refers to the average amount of time wherein a call to be answered.
It's an essential part of the Service Level Agreement (SLA) where the service vendor promises to answer a X
number of calls within a X amount of time. Generally, a contact center's ASA should not exceed 28 seconds.

To calculate ASA, divide the total amount of waiting time by the total number of calls received within a cer-
tain period. For example, the total wait time is 30 minutes for 20 calls received; therefore, the ASA in this
instance is 1.5 minutes.

The lower the ASA score, the fewer times customers spend waiting for their calls to get answered. A higher
number indicates inefficiency and poor customer service. This metric affects Customer Satisfaction, as today's
customers tend to lean toward immediate resolutions to be delighted. In fact, 82% of customers decide to dis-
continue doing business with a company that provides substandard customer service.18

Not only is this crucial to achieving a high Customer Satisfaction score (CSAT), but a lower ASA lowers the
occurrence of abandoned calls while increasing the First Call Resolution rate.

Reducing the number of abandoned calls improves a contact center's ASA score. Also, a contact center can
easily improve its ASA by having streamlined call routing in place. Getting ahold of the right person the first
time also ultimately improves the customer experience.19
                                  MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 113

Average Handle Time (AHT) Metric

Average handling time (AHT) is the average time spent by an agent in handling customer issues or transac-
tions. This also includes the amount of time a customer is placed on hold within the duration of the call, as
well as the after-call work time that the agent spends doing back-office tasks. The AHT is calculated by
adding the agent's total talk time, the total hold time, plus the total after-call work time. This is then divided
by the total number of calls.

Watch the "Average Handle Time: Managing Metrics" YouTube video below to learn about call center met-
rics.20 Transcript for "Average Handle Time: Managing Metrics" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning

is available on YouTube.

One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=82#oem­
bed-3

Average Call Transfer Rate Metric

The Average Call Transfer Rate is a metric that monitors the number of calls transferred to another depart-
ment, a supervisor, or a different queue. Customers can become frustrated when repeating the same issue to
different representatives, so it is important to monitor this metric.

Cost Per Contact Metric

The Cost Per Contact metric refers to the expenses related to running a contact center (i.e., operational
costs, wages, benefits). To calculate the average cost per contact, the total cost associated with operating the
business is divided by the total number of contacts handled. Whenever an agent picks up the phone, it costs a
contact center money--salary, software, hardware, electricity, etc. This metric helps determine which chan-
nels are the most effective including phone, email, live chat, SMS, and social media.

Customer Lifetime Value (CLV) Metric

Customer lifetime value (CLV) is one of the key statistics to track as part of a customer experience program.
CLV is a measurement of how valuable a customer is to your company, not just on a purchase-by-purchase
basis but across the whole relationship. CLV is often used by marketing managers to determine who the com-
pany's best customers are and target these customers for specific promotions, services, or perks. The CLV
114 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

may be used in a contact center to prioritize callers. For example, customers with higher CLV to more experi-
enced contact center representatives or specific segment representatives to ensure the best service, while cus-
tomers with lower CLV may be directed to the general representatives or less senior representatives. To
measure CLV take Customer revenue per year x Duration of the relationship in years - (Total costs of acquiring
the customer + total cost of serving the customer) = CLV "CLV is distinct from the Net Promoter Score (NPS)
that measures customer loyalty, and CSAT that measures customer satisfaction because it is tangibly linked to
revenue rather than a somewhat intangible promise of loyalty and satisfaction." 21

Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT) Metric

The goal of every inbound contact center is to keep customers happy. The customer's happiness equates to
the organization's profitability. A great indicator of customer happiness is the Customer Satisfaction Score
(CSAT). This metric is calculated by asking a question that pertains to the customer's feedback on a particu-
lar interaction with an agent, "How pleased were you with your experience?" or "Was the agent able to handle
your concern satisfactorily?"22 CSAT scores can be improved through personalized coaching and training as
well as ensuring that the best practices are observed for all other metrics.

Customer Retention & Churn Rate Metric

Customer Retention (CRR) and Customer Churn (CCR) rates go hand in hand. Customer retention rate
refers to the percentage of existing customers or users that are still part of the organization's pool of con-
sumers over a certain period of time. To calculate the CRR, you would need the total number of active cus-
tomers you have in a given period (30 days, 60 days, 360 days, etc.), and subtract the newly acquired
customers during the same period. The result would be the total number of customers an organization has
retained. For example, the number of customers you began with 2800, during a 60-day period you acquired
300 more, and ended with 2600, therefore, ((2600-300) / 2800) x 100 = 82% retention rate.23

Customer churn rate refers to the percentage of customers you have lost over a certain period of time. The
churn rate can be determined by dividing the number of customers who left by the number of customers you
had started with and multiplying it by one hundred. For example, in a span of 30 days, the client has lost 150
customers while you started with 1,500. The formula would look like this: (150/1500) x 100 = 10% churn
rate.24

These metrics determine whether an inbound contact center is capable enough to retain customers by provid-
ing excellent customer service. Generally, a 5-7% churn rate annually is a healthy average. This means an orga-
nization's monthly churn rate should only be .5% or lower.25

To help increase retention rates and reduce churn, it's important for an inbound contact center to have a Cus-
                                                                                               MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 115

tomer Retention team or department that handles complicated issues and cases that could possibly lead to
customers churning.

Best Practices for Contact Center Managers

Strategies for effective contact center management:

 1. Hire the most suitable employees, provide a solid onboarding program, and continually coach
      and train."Train your employees to work with different communication channels-webchats, email, and
      messaging apps. It will allow them to develop new skills and make their work more diversified. Also,
      your customer service department will be able to deliver higher quality service, increasing customer satis-
      faction. A more diversified daily routine can have a positive impact on your employees' sense of fulfill-
      ment and their productivity as a result."26 Practice constant coaching and monitor calls regularly.
      Managers can monitor calls and create scorecards for agents' performance, provide feedback to agents,
      and provide coaching and mentoring or training whenever necessary. Managers can share calls to sup-
      port new hires during the onboarding process by giving them some tips during the conversation, provid-
      ing them with feedback right after a call, or jumping into the conversation if necessary.27

 2. Create an employee-friendly and customer-centric environment. Low levels of happiness in the
      workplace lead to high agent attrition rates, poor performance, and decreased productivity. Companies
      that take care of their employees, through compensation, benefits, work perks, and friendly environ-
      ments, see their employees giving more commitment and effort in the workplace. At Zappos for
      instance, employees get free healthcare, free coffee and vending machines, and on-site fitness classes and
      other wellness activities. In turn, employees give back to the company by providing positive customer
      experiences.28

 3. Set goals and create a game plan. Contact centers deal with huge contracts, and losing one might be
      detrimental to the health of the organization. As a manager of a contact center, it is a good idea to create
      a list of challenges you have faced over the last year, as well as a list of accomplishments over the past
      year. This will help you see where you need to focus your attention. Once you know what you need to
      focus on for improvements, you can make a plan identifying what needs to be done to eliminate the
      causes of issues and improve processes that have contributed to the problems. It is important to offer
      transparency in how an agent's performance is being measured and to provide attainable benchmarks for
      success. By defining these benchmarks and revisiting them periodically, managers can provide a struc-
      tured growth path, catering to agent satisfaction and ensuring they understand their roles and responsi-
      bilities.29

 4. Improve your self-service strategy. Self-service makes it possible to help large numbers of customers
      at a significantly lower cost. It will reduce your agents' workload and make them more productive. Inter-
      active Voice Response (IVR) systems and chatbots allow customers to access services without speaking
116 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

      to an agent. They are good for simple queries such as checking reservations or account statuses. If your
      product is complex or difficult to use, providing pre-recorded classes and tutorials can be a great resource
      for helping customers get up to speed. Building a public forum or community may make sense when
      your company has many products that are free or when your company is growing rapidly and you're
      either struggling to keep up with your support queue or don't have time to create knowledge base arti-
      cles for all of your frequently asked questions. It is also important to regularly update the FAQ page or
      knowledge database on your website because it can reduce the number of repetitive queries. If you
      already have these self-service options, you should continue to ensure your customers do not experience
      difficulties while interacting with them.30
 5. Prioritize effective agent scheduling. To make sure your scheduling method is effective and beneficial
      for the team, take note of each agent's availability. Figure out shifts that have gaps and fill them. Some-
      times it is not productive to provide too much overtime to agents as they become exhausted and their
      productivity decreases, understandably, but paying for a tired agent who is less productive than a fresh,
      new agent is not the best choice. Putting forecasting reports to good use also helps contact center man-
      agers gain better insight into staffing requirements, inbound traffic, and KPIs.31
 6. Use the right technology. Leverage your customer relationship management (CRM) with a customer
      telephony integration (CTI), and your employees will then have access to a 360-degree view of the cus-
      tomer across different channels within one simple interface. Embracing current technologies is integral
      to the modern strategies for success in contact center management.
 7. Balance efficiency with quality service. One of the most important responsibilities of a contact cen-
      ter manager is to ensure that efficiency and cost controls do not come at the expense of high-quality cus-
      tomer service. For example, Average Handle Time (AHT) is a key metric. Reducing AHT can increase
      capacity, shorten wait times, and lower costs per contact. However, if agents are pressured to shorten
      calls without proper support, customer satisfaction can decline. Managers should aim to lower AHT in
      ways that preserve service quality. Seven effective strategies include:

          Strengthen knowledge bases and scripts so agents can quickly access accurate information.
          Provide call-flow and soft skills training to help agents resolve issues efficiently while maintaining

            empathy.
          Give agents customer context upfront by integrating CRM tools, reducing time spent searching

            for details.
          Streamline after-call work by minimizing duplicate entries and providing templates for notes.
          Use intelligent call routing and IVR systems to connect customers with the right agent the first

            time.
          Coach and share best practices by reviewing calls and highlighting efficient, high-quality

            approaches.
          Empower agents with decision-making authority so they can resolve issues quickly without unnec-
                     MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 117

essary escalations.

When applied effectively, these practices reduce wasted time, improve customer experiences, and enhance over-
all productivity--helping the contact center deliver both cost savings and customer satisfaction.

Key Takeaways

1. The contact center manager sets objectives for service quality and analyzes metrics to see
    if the objectives have been met. The manager provides feedback to staff and arranges train-
    ing as needed to ensure reliable, efficient support for customers.

2. As a call center manager, you will face challenges from management, customers, employ-
    ees, and technology. Some of these include absenteeism, accurate reporting and analytics,
    attrition, bad customer experiences being magnified, collaboration across departments,
    employee engagement, first-call resolution, increasing customer expectations, software inte-
    gration, metrics, and workforce optimization.

3. Metrics that call centers use to measure quality customer service include, but are
   not limited to:

          Service level is the percentage of calls that are answered within a given time period. To
            calculate the Service Level, divide the total number of calls answered within the

           threshold by the total number of calls and the total number of abandoned calls. A Ser­
           vice Level Agreement (SLA) documents the agreed-upon level of service
           between a vendor and a client. Numerical metrics are often assigned to deter­
           mine the success or failure of the agreement, along with clear repercussions
           for failing to meet the service level standards. It's most commonly used by
           technology and customer service providers.

          First Contact Resolution (FCR) metric shows how many customer requests were
            solved during the first contact.

          The rate of abandoned calls refers to the total number of calls where a caller hangs up
            before an agent answers.

          The Average Speed of Answer (ASA) refers to the average amount of time wherein a
            call is required to be answered.
118 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

                   Average handling time (AHT) is the average time spent by an agent in handling cus-
                      tomer issues or transactions.

                   The Average Call Transfer Rate is a metric that monitors the number of calls trans-
                      ferred to another department, a supervisor, or a different queue.

                   Customer lifetime value (CLV) is one of the key statistics to track as part of a customer
                      experience program. CLV is a measurement of how valuable a customer is to your
                      company, not just on a purchase-by-purchase basis but across the whole relationship.

                   The Cost Per Contact metric refers to the expenses related to running a contact center
                      (i.e., operational costs, wages, benefits). To calculate the average cost per contact, the
                      total cost associated with operating the business is divided by the total number of
                      contacts handled.

                   A great indicator of customer happiness is the Customer Satisfaction Score
                      (CSAT). This metric is calculated by asking a question that pertains to the customer's
                      feedback on a particular interaction with an agent, "How pleased were you with your
                      experience?" or "Was the agent able to handle your concern satisfactorily?"

                   Customer retention rate refers to the percentage of existing customers or users that
                      are still part of the organization's pool of consumers over a certain period of time.

                   Customer churn rate refers to the percentage of customers you have lost over a cer-
                      tain period of time.

         4. Six strategies for effective contact center management include:

                   Hire the most suitable employees, provide a solid onboarding program, and continually
                      coach and train.

                   Create an employee-friendly and customer-centric environment.
                   Set goals and create a game plan.
                   Improve your self-service strategy.
                   Prioritize effective agent scheduling.
                   Use the right technology.
                   Balance efficiency and quality.
                          MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 119

End-of-Chapter Exercises

1. Contact Center Manager Job. Search the Internet for contact center management job
    advertisements. Review three of these job advertisements and remember the job title may
    differ from "Contact Center Manager" or "Contact Center Supervisor" but should be rather
    similar. Determine which skills or requirements you feel would be most difficult for you to
    perform. Why are these the most difficult? What can you do to improve your skills or
    knowledge so that these difficult things will become easier for you? Is this a job role you
    think you would ever do? Why or why not? Do you see linkages between working as a Con-
    tact Center Manager and working as a Bank Manager or HR Manager or CEO?

2. Improve Customer Lifetime Value. Search the Internet for specific ways in which a com-
    pany can improve customer lifetime value (CLV). Provide three examples.

3. Calculate CLV. Calculate the CLV using the calculation provided in this chapter. Assume you
    have a customer who has been with your company for 5 years with a revenue of $1000 per
    year. The cost to acquire this customer was $50 and the cost to serve this customer is $100
    per year ($500 over 5 years). Do the math. What is the CLV for this customer? Of course,
    customer revenues do not stay the same year after year, so changes that happen across the
    customer's lifetime must be factored into the formula., to do this companies use a formula
    that goes into more detail.

4. Manage Employees. Search the Internet and find advice on how to reprimand or redirect a
    contact center employee when a mistake is made. Contact center representatives are contin-
    uously dealing with new challenges in customer service, sales, and technology so there are
    bound to be times when a representative makes a mistake. Search for two situations, first,
    what should you do as a contact center manager when a new employee makes a mistake,
    and second, what should you do when an experienced representative makes a mistake and
    you feel that they should have known better? Share your findings with your professor and
    classmates.

5. Self-Service. Next time you are shopping either online or in-store observe the ways in
    which the company has improved its self-service options. Make a short list and share that
    with your professor and classmates. Which self-service options do you find useful to use
    from a customer perspective and which do you not find helpful? Why?

6. Contact Center Quiz. Take the Contact Center Managers Quiz posted on YouTube. Don't
120 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

             worry, you may not know all the answers, but this video will provide you with explanations
             for each question so you can learn more about the points you do not understand.

   Self-Check Exercise - Managing Customer Contact -
   Self-Service

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
                          https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=82#h5p-6

   Additional Resources

         1. 9 Call Center Metrics & KPIs you need to know for excellent customer service
         2. The definitive list of 27 Call Center Metrics & KPIs
         3. How to Reduce AHT in a Call Center, YouTube Video
         4. Should you reprimand or redirect?
         5. Sample letters of reprimand
                                                                                                 MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 121

          6. Contact Center Manager jobs at Indeed
           7. Contact Center Manager sample job description
          8. Improve Contact Center Performance - Study your best performers AHT and learn from their

               techniques, YouTube Video
          9. 5 Qualities of Great Customer Service Managers, YouTube Video
         10. Call Center Benchmarks
          11. Contact Center Statistics

 References

 (Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
 therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

 Media Attributions

    · A person with many arms multi-tasking © Image by mohamed Hassan from Pixabay is licensed under a
       CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

    · People working in a contact center © Photo by Arlington Research on Unsplash is licensed under a CC0
       (Creative Commons Zero) license

Notes

        1. Indeed. (2021). Supervisor, contact center. Retrieved July 21, 2021 from https://ca.indeed.com/Contact-Centre-Man-
             ager-jobs?vjk=d31d3a44c32d4e12

        2. Customers That Stick. (2020, March 24). 5 qualities of great customer service. [Video]. YouTube.
             https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fWaw3VosVhg

        3. Indeed. (2021). Supervisor, contact center. Retrieved July 21, 2021 from https://ca.indeed.com/Contact-Centre-Man-
             ager-jobs?vjk=d31d3a44c32d4e12

        4. Indeed. (2021). Supervisor, contact center. Retrieved July 21, 2021 from https://ca.indeed.com/Contact-Centre-Man-
             ager-jobs?vjk=d31d3a44c32d4e12

        5. Avoxi. (n.d.). Call center attrition rates, benchmarks, & industry standards. https://www.avoxi.com/blog/call-center-
             attrition-turnover-rates/

        6. Avoxi. (n.d.). Call center attrition rates, benchmarks, & industry standards. https://www.avoxi.com/blog/call-center-
             attrition-turnover-rates/
122 | MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER

      7. Avoxi. (n.d.). Call center attrition rates, benchmarks, & industry standards. https://www.avoxi.com/blog/call-center-
           attrition-turnover-rates/

      8. Indeed. (2021). Supervisor, contact center. Retrieved July 21, 2021 from https://ca.indeed.com/Contact-Centre-Man-
           ager-jobs?vjk=d31d3a44c32d4e12

      9. Indeed. (2021). Supervisor, contact center. Retrieved July 21, 2021 from https://ca.indeed.com/Contact-Centre-Man-
           ager-jobs?vjk=d31d3a44c32d4e12

     10. centrical. (n.d.). Contact center workforce optimization: Here's what you need to know. https://centrical.com/resources/
           contact-center-workforce-optimization/

     11. Saboo, N. (2022, June 22). Top tips for working in a call center (according to customer service reps). Hubspot.
           https://blog.hubspot.com/service/working-call-center

     12. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     13. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     14. Rosen, M. (n.d.). What is an SLA: Definition, examples, and tips for small businesses. [Blog]. Groove.
           https://www.groovehq.com/blog/what-is-sla-service-level-agreement

     15. voiptime. (2020, October 12). How to calculate productivity in the contact center. https://voiptimecloud.com/blog/
           how-to-calculate-productivity-in-the-contact-center

     16. Benchmark Portal. (2020, August 19). First contact resolution: Managing metrics. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HartFWX83dA

     17. RingCentral. (n.d.). 7 tips to prevent call abandonment. https://www.ringcentral.com/us/en/blog/prevent-call-aban-
           donment/

     18. Heuffner, E. (2020, April 17). What is customer experience? How to deliver great CX. Zendesk. https://www.zen-
           desk.com/blog/why-companies-should-invest-in-the-customer-experience/

     19. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     20. Benchmark Portal. (2020, August 12). Average handle time: Managing metrics. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
           eazdelhvIxs[/

     21. Qualtrics. (n.d.). What is customer lifetime value (CLV) and how do you measure it? https://www.qualtrics.com/experi-
           ence-management/customer/customer-lifetime-value/

     22. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     23. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     24. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     25. tenfold. (n.d.). Top metrics that measure inbound call center performance. https://www.tenfold.com/top-metrics-that-
           measure-inbound-call-center-performance/

     26. voiptime. (2020, October 12). How to calculate productivity in the contact center. https://voiptimecloud.com/blog/
           how-to-calculate-productivity-in-the-contact-center

     27. voiptime. (2020, October 12). How to calculate productivity in the contact center. https://voiptimecloud.com/blog/
           how-to-calculate-productivity-in-the-contact-center

     28. Samual. (2023, January 14). Is Zappos a good company to work for? How I got the job. https://howigotjob.com/work/
           is-zappos-a-good-company-to-work-for/#:~:text=Some%20of%20these%20benefits%20include%3A%201%20Unlim-
                                                                                         MANAGING A CUSTOMER CONTACT CENTER | 123

     ited%20vacation,fitness%20classes%2C%20and%20other%20wellness%20activities.%20More%20items
29. Contacto. (2023, October 6). 10 tips for better contact center management. https://www.contacto.com/blog/tips-for-

     contact-center-management
30. voiptime. (2020, October 12). How to calculate productivity in the contact center. https://voiptimecloud.com/blog/

     how-to-calculate-productivity-in-the-contact-center
31. tenfold. (n.d.). 8 strategies for effective contact center management. https://www.tenfold.com/call-center/contact-cen-

     ter-management-strategies
124 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

CHAPTER 6: USING CONTACT CENTER
TECHNOLOGY TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER
EXPERIENCE

   Chapter 6 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. List five different technologies used within a contact center.
         2. Describe three benefits of customer relationship management software.
         3. Explain two customer benefits from contact centers using technology to improve service.
         4. Explain two employee benefits from contact centers using technology to improve service.
         5. Explain two company benefits from contact centers using technology to improve service.
         6. Discuss the pros and cons of contact centers becoming purely automated.

The Future Digital Contact Center

Watch "The Future Digital Contact Center" YouTube video below to learn about how the technology of the
future is here today, and how this is being used in contact centers to provide customer service.1 Transcript for
"The Future Digital Contact Center" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=67#oem­
                   bed-1
                      USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 125

Contact Center Types

The first step to investing in a contact center is to determine which services and tasks the contact center will
support. That will help management determine the type of structure, technology, and resources needed.

Below is a brief definition of each type of contact center.

1. In-House Contact Center. With in-house, also known as onsite configuration, contact centers are
    owned and operated by the company itself. This means that the company's team takes care of the instal­
    lation, configuration, and maintenance with in-house software and hardware.2 This can be a costly
    choice but offers more control over setup, upgrades, customizable options, and changes when needed.

2. Outsourced Contact Center. Contact center outsourcing refers to handing over customer support
    tasks to an external contact team, which handles calls, surveys, and other customer service operations on
    the company's behalf. The third-party team might be in the same locality as the company or offshore.
    Outsourcing allows businesses to focus their resources on products and services, marketing, sales, and
    other essential business operations. Outsourcing can be less expensive than an in-house contact center,
    and it can improve the customer experience by providing 24/7 service. The disadvantage is that the com-
    pany loses some control over the customer experience and outsourced companies often work for many
    businesses and therefore, may not specialize in your company's industry, which may negatively affect
    how complex calls are handled. Sometimes there are cultural or language barriers when serving cus-
    tomers.

3. Inbound Contact Center. Inbound contact centers primarily deal with incoming customer calls and
    tend to focus on assistance for customers who need instructions, a technician, problems solved, ques-
    tions answered, or other assistance with products, services, and orders. For example, if your internet con-
    nection stops working or if it's too slow, you can call your internet provider's customer service center to
    report the issue and get it fixed. Apart from on-call support, inbound contact center agents often pro-
    vide email responses or chat support.3

4. Outbound Contact Center. Outbound call centers primarily deal with outgoing customer calls
    whereby agents contact potential or existing customers rather than receive incoming calls from them.
    This type of call center is mainly used for sales, fundraising, promotions, and customer surveys, but it's
    not always the case. Some businesses choose to welcome their new clients with the so-called welcome
    call, during which agents provide further information on the company's products or policies.4

5. Blended Contact Center. In a blended call center customer service agents take care of both inbound
    and outbound call operations. Agents can fill in for each other while handling all the calls. This func-
    tionality boosts a call center's productivity.5

6. Virtual Contact Center. Many businesses have opted for virtual or cloud-based contact centers with
    blended services. Cloud-based contact centers can be operated from anywhere, the set-up is very easy and
126 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

      quick and you don't need any special programming skills or equipment. Using cloud-based software, the
      representatives can log in to the company's virtual contact center dashboard and manage their calls from
      anywhere in the world.6 Virtual call centers represent the future of call management software and cus-
      tomer relationship management. Why? Because on-premise systems are a constant trouble for business
      owners. They're usually complex to solve and expensive to maintain. The worst part is that they also
      become obsolete quickly and require frequent hardware and software upgrades.7
 7. Omnichannel Contact Center. A multichannel contact center allows a business to contact or stay in
      touch with customers over a variety of channels. For example, video calls, phone calls, email messages,
      and social media messaging. On the other hand, an omnichannel contact center not only allows the busi-
      ness to interact with customers over various channels but also collates all the data onto a single platform.
 8. Offshore Contact Center. Companies often outsource their customer service management to overseas
      call centers. India and the Philippines are the most prominent countries where offshore call centers are
      located. Overseas call centers typically offer lower rates, because the labor costs in these countries are
      much lower than in the U.S. However, it's important that companies do not lose sight of what's impor-
      tant if they are considering moving their call center operations overseas. Businesses need to make sure the
      provider they choose will not compromise their brand or the customer experience.8
 9. Nearshore Contact Center. Nearshore contact centers are designed to blend the quality of service
      found in domestic contact centers with the cost-effectiveness of offshore contact centers. These contact
      centers are typically located in Central America or the Caribbean and have significant numbers of bilin-
      gual agents as well as native English speakers. Nearshore contact centers also tend to minimize cultural
      barriers because there is more travel back and forth between nearshore countries compared to truly over-
      seas contact centers.9

Call Center Software

Call center software is software that allows businesses to make or receive phone calls to and from customers
for the provision of good customer service. It offers certain features, such as inbound queueing, call routing,
outbound contacting, interactive voice responses (IVR), automatic call distribution (ACD), call scripting,
and call monitoring, to help the agents efficiently manage all the calls.
                                                       USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 127

Contact Center Software

Contact center operations software includes tradi-

tional dedicated telephone-based call center technol-

ogy as well as computer systems integration and

management tools. These products integrate with

customer relationship management (CRM) appli-

cations to access customer information and update

customer records. Contact centers often integrate      Contact Center Software
contact center workforce software, speech analytics

software, and auto-dialer software solutions. Con-

tact center operations features can overlap with telecom services software beyond adding communication

channels-analytics, real-time call guidance for agents, and authentication or permission services, among oth-
ers.10

A contact center is supported by many technologies designed to enhance the customer experience and
improve operating and management efficiency, or lower the overall costs of running a contact center. Listed
below are some of these technologies.

· ACD - Automatic Call Distributor System
· Call Recording
· Call Scripting
· CMS - Campaign Management System
· CTI - Computer Telephony Integration
· CRM - Customer Relationship Management System
· Email Response
· Intelligent Call Routing
· IVR - Interactive Voice Response
· KMS - Knowledge Management System
· Predictive Dialing
· QM - Quality Management
· Social Listening
· Texting Response
· Ticketing Software
· TDM - Time Division Multiplexing & IP - Internet Protocol
· Toll-Free Telephone Service
· Trunk Circuit Networks
128 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

  · TTY/TDD Communications
  · Web Chat
  · WFM - Workforce Management System

Listed below is a description of each of these technologies.

ACD--Automatic Call Distributor: ACD is a telephony system that recognizes, answers, and routes
incoming calls to the terminal or agent that is best suited to handle the caller's needs. Knowing where to send
incoming calls before they are answered is a huge help for companies receiving a large volume of calls. ACDs
help companies meet customer needs more efficiently. It can also create customer call waiting queues, collect
phone system usage data, allow for call monitoring and coaching, and allow for social media and CRM VoIP
integrations. 11

Call Recording: Call recording enables agents and

managers to record inbound and outbound calls.

The recordings can be searched through and heard
later for quality coaching.12

Call Scripting: Call scripting helps agents follow a

dialogue template for easy reference. They can fill

their responses directly into the customer relation­

ship management tool (CRM) to design workflows.       Contact center agent at work
13 Scripting is especially helpful to new agents who

may not know what to say to a customer or to an

experienced agent who may be dealing with a very

difficult customer or complex problem. Scripting helps the company portray a similar image to each customer

and create a positive experience for each customer. While scripting helps agents follow a specific line of ques­

tions and answers, it is important for agents to have the authority to deviate from the script when needed,

otherwise the script may be too rigid or not aligned with specific customers' needs.

CMS--Campaign Management System: A CMS is most helpful for outbound contact centers. The soft­
ware provides the agent with a contact list, or other information needed to reach out to the right people.14

CTI--Computer Telephony Integration: CTI is a type of technology that enables computer and tele­
phone systems to interact together. Contact centers implementing CTI can use computers to manage all tele­
phone calls, which in turn leads to increased efficiency and better results. When agents using CTI receive
incoming notifications, a screen is displayed, showing the caller's account information on the agent's com­
puter screen. This saves time for both parties by giving the agent the customer info they need to lead the call
                                                                                                     USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 129

and solve the problem. CTI screen pop is often used in tandem with a unified desktop, so an agent has com­
plete access to customer data.15

CRM-Customer Relationship Management System: CRM software gives agents the 360° customer
information they need to solve customer issues as quickly as possible. Contact center agents can also use the
servicing application to document customer interactions that can be brought up if the caller needs more help
in the future. Having a record can help agents resolve customer issues more efficiently. It can also help manage
issues that need to be transparent to a sales team leader for further relationship building. CRM systems enable
an organization to provide insight into all customer interactions across business units. Because they provide
visibility into customer interactions with an organization, they also help with case and issue management:
routing customer issues or cases through internal processes and keeping the customer apprised throughout
the entire case lifecycle. The company's call center software should integrate with its CRM solution. This
would help centralize all the data, including the history of communication, agent notes on every interaction,
customer issues, and the offers emailed to customers.16

Email Response: Email response empowers agents to answer customer queries and manage requests across
platforms, such as email, chat, or mobile apps, from a centralized interface.17 An email response management
system is a computerized system that receives, acknowledges, analyzes, and organizes email inquiries submit­
ted by customers and routes the emails to the appropriate resources for response. The system tracks the status
of the inquiries from receipt to completion and provides tools such as auto-responses, auto-suggestions, and
response libraries to help contact center staff respond to inquiries more efficiently.18

Intelligent Call Routing: Call routing is a management process that routes calls as per categories, which are
based on predefined business rules, wait time, and customer value. This allows agents to prioritize calls that
need to be answered first based on their value, urgency, etc. They can also transfer the caller to another queue
and define wait limits for the queues.19 It is also sometimes referred to as an automatic call distribution
(ACD) system.

IVR-Interactive Voice Response: IVR is an automated telephony system that interacts with callers before
routing them to the right agent or department, based on the required expertise. The feature aims to ease the
situation for callers. The IVR greets them first and prompts them to choose from a series of options to talk to
a team member, pay bills, check their account balance, and more.20

KMS-Knowledge Management System: KMS is a computerized system designed to support the creation,
storage, and dissemination of information. Such a system contains a central repository of information that is
well structured and employs a variety of effective and easy-to-use search tools that users can use to find
answers to questions quickly. One of the greatest challenges of running a contact center is making sure that
customers are getting consistent, accurate, and timely information. KMS is developed to help contact center
130 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

operators meet this challenge. By having answers to frequently asked questions in a central repository, agents
and/or customers can search and retrieve the correct answers quickly and consistently.21

Predictive Dialing : A predictive dialer automatically dials from a list of phone numbers. This saves the
agent time as the dialer will detect busy signals, voicemail messages, disconnected phone numbers, and when
there is no answer. Predictive dialing is applicable across channels: mobile, text, social, chat, and email. It
detects a customer's channel of choice and delivers the interaction directly to an agent. It can also be used to
deliver proactive outreach in the case of an emergency or to educate a customer on where their case is in the
queue. This feature automatically connects agents to calls when an agent becomes available. The dialer runs
through the calling lists and dials at the pace at which the calls can be handled to ensure higher contact rates
and lower abandoned call rates. 22

QM--Quality Management: QM applications                  Contact center manager at work
give managers insight into employee performance so
that any areas of weakness can be identified. Man­
agers can also use QM to ensure that agents are
adhering to internal policies and procedures. For
instance, if contact center agents are not taking their
break at the scheduled time, it could offset staff-to-
customer demand levels. Knowing how contact
center agents adhere to scheduling, training, and
workload balance creates a more efficient contact
center.23

Social Listening: Social listening is the process of monitoring social media platforms and online sources to
track mentions of a brand, product, service, industry topics, or competitors. Social listening allows businesses
to quickly address questions, praise, or complaints one-on-one, providing timely support and engagement.
Agents can use predefined keywords and hashtags on social media. Social media posts can be immediately
routed to agents and prioritized so that they can provide immediate resolution to customers. The feature also
allows agents to identify the problem areas based on the online feedback and then use it for improvement.24

Salesforce Social Studio is software that helps marketing, sales, and customer service teams to come together
and manage a brand's social media presence all in one place. Hootsuite Insights is software that also empow­
ers companies with social listening capabilities.

Here are a few benefits of using Social Media Listening:

1. Learn what customers think about the company and its products, and improve the customer experience
    accordingly
                                                                                                     USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 131

 2. Engage with customers and find opportunities for new sales, new customers, and new product develop-
      ment

 3. Listen to customers' complaints and solve their problems or answer their questions
 4. Track the brand's performance as well as competitors' performance, and create social media posts

      accordingly
 5. Connect with influencers and get reviews
 6. Address public relations disasters or crises before they get out of hand

Texting Response: Mobile devices have become indispensable tools of the twenty-first century. Studies show
that two-way text messaging systems offer a more direct and expedient means of contacting call centers.25

Ticketing Software: A ticketing system collects customer support requests from all sources and centralizes
them with customer data about contact history. Integrating ticketing software with a call center system allows
your agents to respond to all queries efficiently.26

TDM--Time Division Multiplexing and IP - Internet Protocol: TDM was developed in 1870 for large
system telegraphy implementation. The technology transports contact center interactions by segmenting
multiple data streams and then putting them in a single signal. IP has replaced TDM as the primary mecha-
nism for transporting contact center transactions. IP offers easy access and value-added services such as instant
messaging, video calling, and making phone calls directly from websites - all while moving through a less
costly network.27

Toll-Free Telephone Service: Toll-free or "800" service lets customers call the company free of charge. The
company or agency pays the phone bill for all incoming calls. There are different levels of service, and depend-
ing on the package selected, it can accommodate callers from the U.S. and Canada. With special arrange-
ments, it can accommodate callers from other countries. The public doesn't want to pay long-distance
charges to obtain government information and services. Toll-free telephone networks can help your agency
manage customer calls more efficiently and effectively. They offer a combination of toll-free telephone service
and call routing services to optimize the operation and management of contact centers. You can serve a wide
geographic region, with multiple locations and staggered hours of operation across time zones.28

Trunk Circuit Networks: Used in the context of contact centers, a basic "trunk circuit" is a telephone line
connecting the phones at the contact center to the telephone network. Each circuit can handle one phone call
at a time. The number of circuits required depends on the number of simultaneous callers the contact center
wishes to accommodate. For smaller contact centers, a special trunk circuit known as T-1 is commonly used
to connect the contact center system to the telephone network. Each T-1 circuit can accommodate up to 24
simultaneous phone calls at a time. For example, if your contact center wishes to accommodate 36 simultane-
ous phone calls, you'll need to put in 2 T-1s.29
132 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

TTY/TDD Communications: A Text telephone is a special device that lets people who are deaf, hard of
hearing, or speech-impaired use the telephone to communicate. The process is similar to chatting on comput-
ers, where one person types text to the other on these devices. Both individuals in the conversation must have
a TTY at each end of the telephone line in order to communicate. Some TTYs can be connected to the phone
line by placing the telephone handset in an acoustic coupler; others can connect directly to the phone line.30

Web Chat: Web chat is a real-time communications system between agents and the company's customers
that uses a simple, Web interface. Users need browser access in order to use the service. It allows agents to han-
dle multiple chat sessions at the same time. Webchat can be implemented as a hosted service provided by a ser-
vice provider or as an application on the organization's server.31

WFM - Workforce Management System: WFM is used to forecast the number of voice and digital chan-
nel interactions service agents will have with customers. Contact center managers can use the forecasts to hire
the optimal number of agents to ensure customer transactions meet a certain standard of service. WFM sys-
tems often tie into other workforce optimization solutions to provide the tools to empower contact center
agents. Integrating this software will help contact center managers better manage agents' productivity. Man-
agers can plan agents' schedules with a clear understanding of the call volume (derived from forecasting
data).32

Salesforce Customer Relationship Management (CRM)
System

Salesforce is one of the most widely used Customer Relationship Management (CRM) tools globally,
renowned for its adaptability, scalability, and extensive feature set. At its core, Salesforce provides businesses
with a centralized platform to manage customer relationships, track sales pipelines, and improve customer
engagement. Its cloud-based nature allows users to access data and collaborate in real time, making it ideal for
teams working remotely or across multiple locations. Additionally, Salesforce integrates seamlessly with various
third-party applications, enhancing productivity and providing a 360-degree view of customer interactions.33

One of Salesforce's standout features is its customization capabilities. Businesses can tailor the platform to meet
their unique needs through custom objects, workflows, and dashboards. This flexibility makes it suitable for
companies of all sizes and industries, from startups to large enterprises. Salesforce also offers industry-specific
solutions, such as Health Cloud and Financial Services Cloud, to address specialized requirements. Further-
more, its AI-powered Einstein Analytics provides predictive insights, enabling businesses to make data-driven
decisions, anticipate customer needs, and personalize interactions.34

Salesforce's ecosystem extends beyond its core CRM functionality with additional tools like Marketing Cloud,
Service Cloud, and Commerce Cloud. These solutions allow businesses to automate marketing campaigns,
                                                                                                     USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 133

provide omnichannel customer support, and manage ecommerce operations effectively. Salesforce also priori-
tizes security and compliance, ensuring that sensitive customer data is protected. Despite its many advantages,
the platform can have a steep learning curve, and implementation costs may be high for smaller businesses.
However, with proper training and strategic use, Salesforce can significantly enhance operational efficiency,
drive revenue growth, and foster stronger customer relationships.35

Salesforce is widely used in contact centers to streamline operations, enhance customer service, and improve
agent productivity. It offers a suite of tools specifically designed to address the needs of contact centers, primar-
ily through Service Cloud and related features. Here's how Salesforce is used in contact centers:

 1. Unified Customer View. A centralized platform where agents can access all customer information. This
      360-degree view helps agents understand customer queries, enabling them to deliver more personalized
      and efficient service.

 2. Omnichannel Support. Enables contact centers to handle customer interactions across multiple chan-
      nels, such as phone, email, chat, social media, and SMS.

 3. Automation and AI Assistance. Features like Einstein AI can predict customer needs, suggest next best
      actions, and provide automated responses to common queries through chatbots. Case management
      workflows automate repetitive tasks, such as case assignment, escalation, and follow-ups, freeing agents
      to focus on complex issues. This reduces operational costs and boosts agent productivity.

 4. Performance Tracking and Analytics. Salesforce offers robust analytics and reporting tools to monitor
      contact center performance. Managers can track metrics like call resolution time, customer satisfaction
      scores, and agent performance in real time. Dashboards and reports provide insights to identify bottle-
      necks, optimize processes, and improve service quality.

 5. Self-Service Options. Salesforce also supports self-service capabilities through its Customer Communi-
      ties and Knowledge Base. Customers can find answers to common questions, submit support tickets, or
      interact with community forums, reducing the volume of inquiries reaching the contact center.

Play the YouTube video below to learn about CRM software and how it works.36 Transcript for "What is
CRM and how does it work?" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=67#oem­
                   bed-2
134 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

Generative AI in Contact Centers

According to Gartner, Worldwide contact center (CC) and CC conversational AI and virtual assistant spend-
ing is projected to total $18.6 billion in 2023, an increase of 16.2% from 2022. This increased investment in
AI-powered call centers points to a growing need for enterprises to digitize their call center services. 37

OpenAI launched ChatGPT near the end of 2022, and companies in every industry are exploring how gen-
erative AI can augment the capabilities of their customer care centers. The large language models (LLMs)
upon which ChatGPT and other text-based generative AI applications are built give these apps the power to
respond to prompts with human-like text and voice, answering complex questions with seeming ease. Once
implemented at scale, it is estimated that generative AI could increase productivity by 30% to 50%--or more.
According to a 2022 BCG survey of global customer service leaders, 95% expect their customers to be served
by an AI bot at some point in their customer service interactions within the next three years.38

Watch the "Improve Customer Service With Generative AI" YouTube video below to see an example of how
generative AI can transform chatbots into customer service assistants that can help troubleshoot problems and
schedule follow-up appointments. To do this, generative AI augments the standard Dialogflow conversational
experience with the ability to perform detailed semantic searches and generate actionable responses. With Gen
App Builder, you can build next-level customer service experience for your customers easily, with out-of-the-
box configurations and integration capabilities.39 Transcript for "Improve Customer Service With Generative
AI" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=67#oem­
                   bed-3

Benefits of Using Contact Center Technologies

Some of the benefits contact center agents receive from using technology to improve customer service
include increased productivity, accuracy, efficiency, better time management, and possible promotions/recog-
nition/perks for a job well done.

Some of the benefits the company receives from using technology in contact centers include increased cus-
tomer spending, referrals, and satisfaction, resulting in increased customer retention; improved employee
retention as technology enables employees to be more efficient and effective; and cost savings.
                                                                                                     USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 135

Some benefits customers receive from contact centers using technology include faster service, fewer errors in
ordering and billing, reduced stress, and loyalty rewards.

Some benefits of using customer relationship management software (CRM) include improved cus-
tomer satisfaction, retention, and spending; better internal communication; more targeted and cost-effective
marketing campaigns; and easier analysis of performance as a whole. The company thereby gains valuable
insights such as revenues generated, leads, and results of marketing campaigns, enabling effective decision-
making, thus improving revenue in the long run. A CRM system can help maximize business performance by
increasing up-sell and cross-sell opportunities.

Watch the "Improve Customer Experience with AI Customer Service Technology" YouTube video below to
learn about how technology can help a company be more customer-centric.40 Transcript for "Improve Cus-
tomer Experience with AI Customer Service Technology" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is avail-
able on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=67#oem­
                   bed-4

Should Contact Centers Be Purely Automated?

"It's unquestionable that automation technology provides significant cost savings. For every second that bots
shave off average handle times, contact centers save about $1 million in annual customer service costs. Busi-
nesses can reduce customer service costs by up to 30 percent by implementing conversational solutions like
virtual associates and chatbots. Automation can, for certain business processes, replace humans (what is usu-
ally known as RPA or unattended automation). But there are many things bots can't do. Bots can't handle
unusual or complex requests. They can't match a human in expressing empathy. This is why enterprises
that have blended automation with humans report that their customer service efforts are more effective at
improving both customer satisfaction (61 percent) and associate satisfaction (69 percent)."41

While automation plays an increasingly important role in customer contact centers, they should not be purely
automated. Automated tools such as chatbots, interactive voice response (IVR) systems, and self-service por-
tals can handle routine inquiries, reduce wait times, and provide customers with quick answers at any time of
day. This efficiency saves costs for businesses and improves convenience for customers. In fact, many customers
prefer automation for simple tasks like checking an account balance, tracking a package, or resetting a pass-
word.
136 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

However, full automation risks creating frustration when customer needs are complex, emotional, or require
empathy and problem-solving. Customers often want to feel understood and valued, which is difficult for
automation alone to achieve. Human agents can listen, adapt to unique situations, and demonstrate care in
ways machines cannot replicate. For this reason, the most effective contact centers combine automation with
human support, allowing customers to seamlessly transition from automated systems to live representatives
when needed. This hybrid approach maximizes efficiency while maintaining the human connection that builds
trust and long-term customer relationships.

   Key Takeaways

         1. In an outbound call center, agents call potential or existing customers rather than receiving
             calls from them. This type of call center is mainly used for sales, fundraising, promotions, and
             customer surveys, but it's not always the case. Some businesses choose to welcome their
             new clients with the so-called welcome call, during which agents provide further information
             on the company's products or policies.

         2. Inbound call centers tend to focus on assistance for customers who need instructions, a
             technician, problems solved, questions answered, or other assistance with products, services,
             and orders.

         3. In a blended call center, customer service agents take care of both inbound and outbound
             call operations.

         4. Many businesses have opted for virtual or cloud-based contact centers with blended
             services. Cloud-based contact centers can be operated from anywhere, the setup is very easy
             and quick, and you don't need any special programming skills or equipment. Using cloud-
             based software, the representatives can log in to the company's virtual contact center dash-
             board and manage their calls from anywhere in the world.

         5. A multichannel contact center allows a business to contact or stay in touch with customers
             over a variety of channels. For example, video calls, phone calls, email messages, and social
             media messaging. On the other hand, an omnichannel contact center not only allows the
             business to interact with customers over various channels but also collates all the data onto
             a single platform.

         6. Contact center operations software includes traditional dedicated telephone-based call
             center technology as well as computer systems integration and management tools.
                                                                                          USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 137

7. There are many technologies used in contact centers today to help improve customer
    service, sales, customer relationships, customer experience, customer retention, and more.
    Listed below are some of these technologies.

          ACD - Automatic Call Distributor System
          Call Recording
          Call Scripting
          CMS - Customer Relationship Management System
          Computer Telephone Integration
          CRM - Contact Center Servicing Application
          CTI - Computer Telephony Integration
          Email Response
          Intelligent Call Routing System
          IVR - Interactive Voice Response
          KMS - Knowledge Management System
          Predictive Dialing
          Quality Management
          Social Listening
          Texting Response
          Ticketing System
          TDM - Time Division Multiplexing & IP - Internet Protocol
          Toll-Free Telephone Service
          Trunk Circuit Networks
          TTY/TDD Communications
          Web Response
          WFM - Workforce Management System

8. Salesforce is one of the most widely used Customer Relationship Management (CRM) tools
    globally, renowned for its adaptability, scalability, and extensive feature set. At its core, Sales-
    force provides businesses with a centralized platform to manage customer relationships,
    track sales pipelines, and improve customer engagement. Its cloud-based nature allows users
    to access data and collaborate in real time, making it ideal for teams working remotely or
    across multiple locations.

9. OpenAI launched ChatGPT near the end of 2022, and companies in every industry are
    exploring how generative AI can augment the capabilities of their customer care centers. The
    large language models (LLMs) upon which ChatGPT and other text-based generative AI
138 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

             applications are built give these apps the power to respond to prompts with human-like text
             and voice, answering complex questions with seeming ease. Once implemented at scale, it is
             estimated that generative AI could increase productivity by 30% to 50%--or more.
       10. Some of the benefits contact center agents receive from using technology to improve
             customer service include increased productivity, accuracy, efficiency, better time manage-
             ment, and possible promotions/recognition/perks for a job well done.
        11. Some of the benefits the company receives from using technology in contact centers
             include increased customer satisfaction, resulting in increased customer retention, increased
             customer spending, increased referrals, and improved employee retention, as technology
             enables employees to be more efficient and effective.
        12. Some benefits customers receive from contact centers using technology include faster ser-
             vice, fewer errors in ordering and billing, and reduced stress.
        13. Some benefits of using customer relationship management software (CRM) include
             improved customer satisfaction, retention, and spending; better internal communication;
             more targeted and cost-effective marketing campaigns; and easier analysis of performance
             as a whole. The company thereby gains valuable insights such as revenues generated, leads,
             and results of marketing campaigns, enabling effective decision making, thus improving rev-
             enue in the long run. A CRM system can help maximize business performance by increasing
             up-sell and cross-sell opportunities.
       14. Businesses can reduce customer service costs by up to 30 percent by implementing con-
             versational solutions like virtual associates and chatbots. Automation can, for certain busi-
             ness processes, replace humans (what is usually known as RPA or unattended automation).
             But there are many things bots can't do. Bots can't handle unusual or complex requests.
             They can't match a human in expressing empathy. This is why enterprises that have blended
             automation with humans report that their customer service efforts are more effective at
             improving both customer satisfaction (61 percent) and associate satisfaction (69 percent).
                          USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 139

End-of-Chapter Exercises

1. Influencers. Search the Internet for how a company might find influencers through social
    listening. Why might a company want to do that? Discuss with your classmates and profes-
    sor.

2. Better Service. Search the Internet to see if you can find an article or story about a com-
    pany that recently reorganized its contact center or adopted some new technology or config-
    uration in order to provide better customer service and build customer relationships. Share
    your findings with your classmates and professor.

3. Quality Management. Search the Internet for best practices in quality management in con-
    tact centers. How do managers ensure quality customer care within contact centers? How
    would an agent be dealt with who may be lacking in quality care? Discuss with your class-
    mates and professor.

4. Outsourcing. Search the Internet for the pros and cons of outsourcing contact centers.
    What are some of the cons of outsourcing contact centers to foreign countries? Discuss with
    your classmates and professor.

5. Automating. Search the Internet for the pros and cons of automating contact center ser-
    vices. Do customers like to use automated systems? Why or why not? Thinking beyond con-
    tact centers, when might customers prefer automated systems rather than interacting with a
    live person/employee? Provide examples. Discuss with your classmates and professor.

6. Social Media. Search the Internet for the most popular social media tools used by compa-
    nies today. Search the customer segments that use each of these tools. Did you discover any
    trends? For example, are there specific customer segments using X (formerly Twitter)? Are
    there more Facebook users in Canada per capita compared to India? Do younger customers
    use Pinterest more than seniors do or vice versa? How might knowing the type of customer
    using each social media platform help a company better serve and sell to customers? Discuss
    with your classmates and professor.

7. Trailhead Training. Visit Trailhead at Trailhead | The fun way to learn (salesforce.com) and
    complete the Social Selling training module for free. It should only take about 20 minutes to
    complete and just think of all the knowledge you will gain. A great thing about Trailhead is
    when you complete a trail you receive a certificate of completion to add to your portfolio. In
    addition to free training on Salesforce, Trailhead assigns badges and rankings making it fun
140 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

             to learn! Discuss with your class the ways in which Social Studio helps provide excellent ser-
             vice to customers.
        8. Trailhead Training. Visit Trailhead at Trailhead | The fun way to learn (salesforce.com) and
             complete the Knowledge Basics for Lightning Experience module for free. It should only take
             you about 30 minutes to complete and just think of all the knowledge you will gain. Discuss
             with your classmates and professor the questions a company might ask when creating a
             knowledge base.
         9. AI in Customer Service. Search the Internet to find the advantages and disadvantages of
             using AI for customer service. Would you like to be chatting with AI as a customer? What are
             some of the limitations of AI in serving customers? Discuss your findings with your class and/
             or professor.

   Self-Check Exercise - Contact Center Automation

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
                          https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=67#h5p-4
                      USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 141

Additional Resources

         1. Top Rated Contact Center Products
         2. Top Customer Experience Management Trends in Telecoms
         3. How does Contact Center AI Work? YouTube Video
         4. Introducing the All-New Webex Contact Center: The technology enabling the future of CX,

             YouTube Video
         5. Disrupting and transforming the contact center experience., YouTube Video
         6. 2021 Customer Experience Strategies, YouTube Video
         7. Hootsuite Platform, Free Training
        8. Social Listening with Hootsuite Streams, Free Training
         9. What is Social Listening, Why it Matters, and 10 Tools to Make it Easier
       10. Hands-on Free Training for Salesforce

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Media Attributions

  · Contact Center Software © Image by Gerd Altmann from Pixabay is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
      Commons Zero) license

  · Contact center agent at work © Photo by Pavel Danilyuk from Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
      Commons Zero) license

  · Contact center manager at work © Photo by Kampus Production from Pexels is licensed under a CC0
      (Creative Commons Zero) license
  142 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

Notes

        1. Delloitte US. (2021, March 31). The future digital contact center. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
             aIbH4gmE7Lk?si=z3tLWH0kyNbc7ziD

        2. Cloudtalk. (2019, May 13). Types of call centers. [Blog]. https://www.cloudtalk.io/blog/types-of-call-cen-
             ters#:~:text=Types%20of%20Call%20Centers%201%20Inbound%20call%20cen-
             ter,calls%20from%20them.%20...%203%20Virtual%20call%20center

        3. Cloudtalk. (2019, May 13). Types of call centers. [Blog]. https://www.cloudtalk.io/blog/types-of-call-cen-
             ters#:~:text=Types%20of%20Call%20Centers%201%20Inbound%20call%20cen-
             ter,calls%20from%20them.%20...%203%20Virtual%20call%20center

        4. Cloudtalk. (2019, May 13). Types of call centers. [Blog]. https://www.cloudtalk.io/blog/types-of-call-cen-
             ters#:~:text=Types%20of%20Call%20Centers%201%20Inbound%20call%20cen-
             ter,calls%20from%20them.%20...%203%20Virtual%20call%20center

        5. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
             call-center-software-industry-trend

        6. Pathangani, V. (2023, March 9). Types of contact centers: Which one is the right one for your business needs? https://just-
             call.io/blog/types-of-contact-centers.html

        7. ringover. (n.d.) Virtual contact center to streamline your business operations. https://www.ringover.com/virtual-contact-
             center

        8. Uzialko, A. (2021, January 26). Pros and cons of outsourcing customer service to an offshore call center. Business News
             Daily. https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/5333-offshore-call-center.html

        9. Uzialko, A. (2021, January 26). Pros and cons of outsourcing customer service to an offshore call center. Business News
             Daily. https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/5333-offshore-call-center.html

       10. Best contact center operations software. (n.d.). https://www.g2.com/categories/contact-center-operations
       11. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-

             ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
             gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20
       12. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
             call-center-software-industry-trend
       13. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
             call-center-software-industry-trend
       14. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
             ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
             gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20
       15. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
             ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
             gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20
       16. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
             ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
             gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20
       17. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
             call-center-software-industry-trend
       18. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
             technologies/
                                                                                               USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY | 143

19. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
     call-center-software-industry-trend

20. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
     call-center-software-industry-trend

21. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
     technologies/

22. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
     ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
     gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20

23. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
     ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
     gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20

24. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
     call-center-software-industry-trend

25. Lemzy, A. (2017, September 18). Texting tools for call centers: Because nobody likes to be left on hold. Text Magic.
     https://www.textmagic.com/blog/texting-tools-for-call-centers/

26. GetApp. (n.d.). Buyers guide call center. https://www.getapp.com/customer-service-support-software/call-center/#key-
     call-center-software-industry-trend

27. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
     ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
     gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20

28. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
     technologies/

29. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
     technologies/

30. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
     technologies/

31. Digital.gov. (n.d.). Contact center technologies. https://digital.gov/resources/contact-center-guidelines/contact-center-
     technologies/

32. ptp. (n.d.). Contact center technology 101. https://www.ptpinc.com/glossary/call-center-technol-
     ogy-101/#:~:text=16%20CONTACT%20Center%20Technolo-
     gies%20You%20Should%20Know%20About,...%203%20Intelligent%20Call-Back.%20...%20More%20items...%20

33. OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (Jan 21 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com

34. OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (Jan 21 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com

35. OpenAI. (2023). ChatGPT (Jan 21 version) [Large language model]. https://chat.openai.com

36. Salesforce. (2021, March 24). What is CRM and how does it work? [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/SlhE-
     SAKF1Tk?si=1hzzHMqXvYTdUzxR

37. Dennis, A. (2023, November 9). 25 best call center software (2024). https://whatfix.com/blog/call-center-software/

38. Bamberger, S., Clark, N., Ramachandran, S., & Sokolova, V. (2023, July 6). How generative AI is already transforming
     customer service. https://www.bcg.com/publications/2023/how-generative-ai-transforms-customer-service

39. Google Cloud. (2023, June 7). Improve customer service with generative AI. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
     62C72x0Y6jA?si=6cpQWP-bsZ7s2Mto

40. Gear Inc. (2025, March 13). Improve customer experience with AI customer service technology. [Video]. YouTube.
     https://youtu.be/x64AEiPtnAI?si=P0wna8Dy37OiHdrb
144 | USING CONTACT CENTER TECHNOLOGY

     41. Aquino, J. (2020, February 18). Contact center vs. call center: Six key differences and why it matters. [Blog].
           https://www.ttec.com/blog/contact-center-vs-call-center-6-key-differences-and-why-it-matters
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 145

CHAPTER 7: DESIGNING PRODUCTS,
SERVICES, AND PROCESSES WITH
CUSTOMERS IN MIND

   Chapter 7 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. List five ways in which an organization can gather customer insights toward product innova-
             tion.
         2. Discuss how a company can make products that are customer-centric.
         3. Discuss how a company can offer services that are customer-centric.
         4. Discuss how a company can develop processes that are customer-centric.

Creating Products with the Customer in Mind

Products are created to address customer needs, solve problems, and deliver delight. In a customer-centric com-
pany, product innovation is guided by the customer rather than internal assumptions. To successfully launch,
manage, and improve products, teams must continuously consider target customers and how their expec-
tations evolve. The most effective product teams partner with their customer experience (CX)[/pb_glos­
sary] counterparts. This ensures that best practice CX strategies are implemented and the [pb_glossary
id="1420"]voice of the customer (VoC) is integrated into each stage in the process.1
Developing products, services, and processes with the customer in mind means placing customer needs and
experiences at the center of decision-making. Organizations gather insights through surveys, social listening,
data analysis, and direct feedback to ensure offerings are relevant, accessible, and user-friendly. Prioritizing the
146 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

customer perspective enables companies to move beyond transactional interactions and toward solutions that
foster satisfaction and long-term loyalty.

This approach aligns closely with design thinking, a methodology emphasizing empathy, creativity, and itera-
tion. By understanding customer perspectives, identifying pain points, and testing innovative solutions, busi-
nesses create products and services that are both functional and deeply resonant with customer needs.

Customer-first thinking also shapes service delivery and process design. Personalization enabled by Customer
Relationship Management (CRM) systems and Artificial Intelligence (AI) allows businesses to tailor rec-
ommendations and support, while consistent experiences across websites, social media, and in-person touch-
points ensure a seamless journey. Anticipating expectations, reducing friction, and emphasizing transparency
demonstrate that a company values its customers' time and trust.

Strong product development also leverages social media insights and social listening to track real-time senti-
ment, identify unmet needs, and anticipate trends. AI-powered analytics and CRM software further provide
data on behaviors and preferences, enabling personalized features, targeted improvements, and smarter go-to-
market strategies.

By combining innovation with customer data, CX insights, and relationship-building tools, businesses create
offerings that are not only functional but meaningful--delivering value that strengthens trust and drives long-
term growth.
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 147

Seven Stages of New Product Development (NPD)

The secret to developing new products is to focus on
product discovery and address the pain points of the
target market. This is why it is essential to gather cus-
tomer insights.

"Unlike product enhancements and upgrades that
modify and improve existing products, new product
development addresses the unique challenges of
designing and delivering brand-new products. New
product development is the end-to-end process of
creating a product that has never been brought to
market--from idea to concept, prototyping, devel-
oping, testing, and launch. It involves building a
product strategy and roadmap to successfully guide
cross-functional teams and stakeholders through the
entire process."2

Depending on which source of information you use,          A bottle of hand cream showing the product's design
you may find that NPD has 5, 6, 7 or 8 stages. The
main idea to take from this is that there is a process
for developing new products and most companies
strive to consider their customer segment when
designing new products.

Below are the seven stages of New Product Development.

1. Generating Ideas. Emphasis is on solving customer problems.
2. Screening Ideas. Conduct a SWOT analysis.
3. Creating a Product Strategy. A good product strategy includes the vision, target market or user, posi-

    tion in the industry, features and benefits, and the value the new product brings to the business. This
    phase involves creating a clear definition of the requirements.
4. Building a Product Roadmap. A product roadmap is an action plan. It outlines product functionality
    and release schedules and helps you manage new product development.
5. Prototyping. Make a prototype and minimum viable product (MVP).
6. Testing. Testing can span both internal quality assurance (QA) teams as well as customers and end users
    engaged in alpha, beta, or user acceptance testing.
148 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

 7. Launching the New Product. You only get one chance to make a good first impression, and launching
      a new product requires careful planning and delivery.

Market Research

When creating products it is imperative today to conduct market research into customer preferences, social
trends, competitor behaviour, and sales patterns. As companies get further into new product ideation, they
must consider what a high-level customer journey might look like; hypothesize their target customer market
segments; and brainstorm what their customer personas might be.3

There are many ways in which companies can ensure they are making products that customers want and will
enjoy using. The list below shares five ways in which companies can gather customer insights before they
invest resources in developing products that customers may not want, like, use, or buy.

 1. Hold focus groups. Ask potential customers to view or use a prototype of the product and gather feed-
      back that can be used to improve the product.

 2. Conduct surveys or interviews. Ask customers if they would use the product, what they like about it,
      and what they might change before spending money on developing the product.

 3. Gather feedback. Listen to your customers and get their feedback before making products they will not
      use or enjoy. Often, they are a source of product ideas as they make suggestions or provide feedback
      about a product to employees. Have employees take notes and share trends, common questions, or ideas
      with the team.

 4. Track clicks or emails about new products from a "coming soon" information landing page or social
      media platform.

 5. Observe trends. What products are selling the most? What are customers talking about on social plat-
      forms? What are competitors selling?

Watch the "How to Do Market Research!" YouTube video below to learn about market research.4 Transcript
for "How to Do Market Research!" Video [PDF--New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=88#oem­
                   bed-1
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 149

Company Examples for Customer-Centric Products

Customers, for the most part, want products that work as advertised, are easy to use, are reliable, and do not
malfunction. The goal of customer-centric product development is to provide customers with a good user
experience (or "UX") with digital products. Apple is known for making products that customers enjoy using,
find easy to use, and have features that delight or exceed their expectations. Making products that delight cus-
tomers helps build customer loyalty and creates customer advocacy. After having purchased their first prod-
uct, many Apple consumers become loyal advocates of the brand because of Apple's exceptional user
experience. People just enjoy using Apple products.

"Amazon is guided by four principles: customer obsession rather than competitor focus, passion for inven-
tion, commitment to operational excellence, and long-term thinking. Amazon strives to be Earth's most cus-
tomer-centric company, Earth's best employer, and Earth's safest place to work. Customer reviews, 1-Click
shopping, personalized recommendations, Prime, Fulfillment by Amazon, AWS, Kindle Direct Publishing,
Kindle, Career Choice, Fire tablets, Fire TV, Amazon Echo, Alexa, Just Walk Out technology, Amazon Stu-
dios, and The Climate Pledge are some of the things pioneered by Amazon."5

LEGO has long seen the value in co-creating products with customers. LEGO IDEAS invites individuals to
submit new, original, and creative ideas in the form of a "Product Idea" that others vote on and then are con-
sidered for potential new brick-based LEGO playsets. The creator gives final product approval, earns a per-
centage of net sales, and is recognized as the LEGO Ideas set creator. This concept celebrates loyal customers
and rewards them for innovation, creativity, and entrepreneurialism."6

Customers today are more concerned with the environment than ever before. Companies need to be envi­
ronmentally sustainable both in the products they offer and in their internal manufacturing systems. Cus-
tomers want to do their part to help the environment and are more likely to support companies that act
responsibly toward the world around them. Modern companies can't truly focus on their customers while
ignoring our planet's many pressing challenges. 7

Disney is working to reduce indirect greenhouse gas emissions through the reduction of electrical consump-
tion. It has zero-net direct greenhouse gas emission policies within all its facilities. Disney also has a zero-waste
policy, meaning that there is nothing that would end up in landfills. The entertainment giant also uses tech-
nology that saves water and is working on lowering the footprint of its product manufacturing and distribu-
tion. This is tied to the company's policy of having a net positive environmental impact, which has made
Disney a leader in environmental responsibility.8
150 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

Creating Services with the Customer in Mind

An amazing customer experience is one of the
biggest competitive advantages a company can have.
Instead of competing on price, more than two-
thirds of companies now compete mostly on the
basis of customer experience. 9

Customer Experience (CX)

CX is all that a customer experiences throughout
the customer journey and includes the service cus-
tomers receive from employees as well as the impres- A person receiving a facial
sion the customer gets from browsing through the
physical store, using the company's website, and using the product. If service is poor, the website is not user-
friendly, or the product does not work as advertised, the customer may have a negative experience.

"Employees are the foundation of a strong customer experience, which means employee experience and culture
are crucial in customer-centric companies. Successful organizations invest in empowering their employees and
providing them with the right tools and culture to succeed."10

   In the Spotlight: Southwest Airlines

     Southwest Airlines11
     Founded in 1967 by Herb Kelleher, Southwest Airlines' mission statement reads "Dedication to the
     highest quality of customer service delivered with a sense of warmth, friendliness, individual pride,
     and company spirit." Everything about the brand, from the napkins that say "I'd be happy to hold
     your drink" to the stock market ticker that is "LUV", talks about the fun-loving and customer-loving
     brand that it is. The company has created a very loyal customer following.
     Here are a few secrets of Southwest:
     Understand that "Happy employees = Happier customers".
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 151

     The airline believes in keeping its employees happy: "Our people are our single greatest strength
     and most enduring long-term competitive advantage." The company empowers its front-line
     employees and backs them to make quick decisions that are critical for a good customer experience.
     Anticipate customer needs.
     In his book High Tech, High Touch Customer Service, Micah Solomon recalls an experience when
     the gate agent of Southwest Airlines booked the tickets to the next flight to his destination when
     the one he was supposed to fly was grounded due to bad weather conditions. All this was even
     before Micah requested it. What a wonderful example of anticipating a customer's need and being
     proactive in helping the customer. An inconvenience turned out to be a moment of pleasant sur-
     prise for the customer.
     Apologize genuinely.
     It's not wrong to apologize when things go wrong at the company's end. Sometimes, just an apol-
     ogy goes a long way and may mean as much or more to the customer than any monetary solution.
     This is the mantra that Southwest Airlines lives by.

Company Examples for Customer-Centric Services

Companies such as Costco, Amazon, Apple, Ritz-Carlton, Starbucks, Lowe's, UPS, Trader Joe's, Zappos, and
Harley-Davidson are known to be customer-centric in everything they do. Innovative companies are always
looking for ways to better serve customers and improve their lives.

"Zappos is an online retail company that is known for 'going extreme' for its customers. Zappos' customer phi-
losophy may even seem risky for some - they offer free shipping for any number of back-and-forth transactions,
offer a 365-day return policy if a customer is not satisfied with the product, and never outsources customer
service so as to capture the local culture and persona in their experience. Tony Hsieh, the CEO of Zappos, says
that this indeed costs them some money. However, the philosophy of Zappos is that most of the money they
might ordinarily spend on advertising is being invested in customer service so that their customers will stay
long-term with them and compensate for the lost marketing with positive word-of-mouth. Is it working for
them? Astronomically!"12

Watch the "How Tony Hsieh Grew Zappos to $1.2 billion value in just 10 years" YouTube video below to
learn about the Zappos customer service strategy.13 Transcript for "How Tony Hsieh Grew Zappos to $1.2
billion value in just 10 years" Video [PDF--New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
152 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=88#oem­

bed-2

Starbucks has a fiercely loyal following, in large part because of its mobile ordering and personalized rewards
program that makes it easy for customers to order exactly what they want and pick it up with a minimal wait.
Starbucks has the most popular app among major restaurants. As a leader in environmentally friendly dining,
Starbucks also set aggressive new sustainability goals, including reducing carbon emissions by 50% by 2030.14

Delta Air Lines is a US-based airline that is known for its commitment to customer satisfaction. In 2023, Delta
and American Express teamed up to allow eligible Delta SkyMiles American Express Card members to take
15% off Award Travel on Delta flights anytime. This collaboration with American Express illustrates Delta's
dedication to improving the SkyMiles program to surpass customer expectations and enable more seamless
travel.15

If you've ever been to IKEA, you know it's not just a furniture store - it's an experience. They constantly
improve to create better customer experiences, including elements in their stores like cafés and children's play
centers. The company even added augmented reality apps for smartphones, allowing customers to virtually
design a room with their furniture.16

To ensure top-quality service at all times, Ritz-Carlton employees are empowered to spend up to $2,000 for
issue resolution per incident, without asking for a manager's approval.17

At Amazon, if a customer receives a damaged or defective item or if a package gets lost in the mail, they will
send a replacement. If Amazon's self-service FAQs or community forums can't solve the problem, callers can
get 24/7 support and are almost never put on hold.18
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 153

Creating Processes with the Customer in Mind

The way in which a company gets things done can
have a positive or negative impact on the customer
experience. If customers must wait in long lines,
can only contact the company through one channel,
or have to fill out many forms before they can get
service or have a problem resolved, then the
processes the company is using probably need to be
reconsidered. Processes should enhance the cus-
tomer experience, not detract from it.

How many times, as a customer, have you become

annoyed when you were asked to take a ticket and

wait in line? How many times have you become

angry with the company while you were waiting on

hold on a call for an extended period of time? How

many times have you become frustrated when you

were trying to use an online system to solve your

problem or get an answer to an issue, only to dis-

cover the online system was not user-friendly and

you could not figure out how to resolve the issue

without having to use another channel to contact

the company? When processes improve the cus-

tomer experience and make the customer journey      A drive-up diner with the meal on the vehicle
easy, fun, or memorable (in a positive way), cus-   window

tomers are more likely to continue their patronage

with the company, increase their spending with the company, post positive online reviews, and refer others.

Business Process Improvement

Watch the "Business Process Improvement" YouTube video below to learn about making process improve-
ments. The presenter, Joe, provides advice for businesses to clean up processes in six areas within their compa-
nies. These include Human Resources, Marketing, Operations, Accounting, Customer Service, and Sales. 19
Transcript for "Business Process Improvement" Video [PDF--New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on
YouTube.
154 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=88#oem­

bed-3

Company Examples for Customer-Centric Processes

"Kaiser Permanente focuses on both employee and customer experience and uses innovative technology like
virtual appointments that allow providers to see more patients more conveniently. It's an example of making
people's lives easier and better, and we'll only see more digital offerings from big brands."20

"KFC is a great example of a brand that uses AI to offer a personalized shopping experience. It collaborated
with the Chinese search engine company, Baidu, to develop facial-recognition technology that can predict what
a customer will order. The system can suggest different menu items based on the person's estimated age and
mood. For example, a 20-year-old male could be offered a meal with a crispy chicken sandwich, roasted chicken
wings, and coke. A 50-year-old female might be offered porridge and soybean milk for breakfast. This not only
speeds up the ordering process but also provides a high level of personalization that many customers enjoy."21

"Acxiom tracks more than 4,4000 health attributes in its patients to proactively connect them with the right
provider and streamline referrals and check-ins."22

"Best Buy, the tech store, went through a digital transformation to evolve with changing trends and stream-
lined its in-store and online experience to provide personalized advice, including visiting customers in their
homes to find their best tech solutions."23

"Amazon, the ecommerce giant (and web host with Amazon Web Services), is constantly innovating with new
customer solutions, including one-day shipping, easy returns, and creative physical locations that integrate for
a truly omnichannel experience."24

"Sephora, the beauty brand, uses technology to create a personalized experience with a comprehensive app,
virtual try-on of makeup products, and a strong online community for a seamless customer experience."25

"TELUS customers have a choice of how they get support, from online tutorials to detailed instructions on
any possible issue."26
                                                                                                        DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 155

Combining Product, Service, and Process Innovation

You may have noticed that in some of the examples above, when a new service was provided, it prompted a new
process as well. This is quite common. For example, if a business decides to offer a new drive-thru or delivery
service option, the company will also need to implement a new process for employees working in the drive-thru
or delivery areas. If a company develops a new product, such as a new cell phone or new vehicle, the business
will probably need to provide a new service for customer support involving the new product.

For more information on types of innovation and combining the various types, refer to the open educational
ebook, Leading Innovation, 2nd edition.

   Key Takeaways

         1. Products are created to address customer needs, solve customer problems, and create cus-
             tomer delight. In a customer-centric company, product innovation is all about the customer.
             Therefore, to launch, manage, and enhance products successfully, product teams must con-
             stantly consider their target customers.

         2. There are seven stages to new product development (NDP):

                  1. Generating Ideas.
                 2. Screen Ideas.
                 3. Creating a Product Strategy.
                 4. Building a Product Roadmap.
                 5. Prototyping.
                 6. Testing
                 7. Launching the New Product.
         3. Companies should conduct market research to gather customer insights before investing in
             producing products customers won't want, like, use, or buy. They can do this in many ways,
             including holding focus groups, conducting surveys, gathering customer feedback, tracking
             website clicks and emails, and observing trends.
         4. Companies need to be environmentally sustainable both in the products they offer and in
             their internal manufacturing systems. Customers want to do their part to help the environ-
156 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

             ment and are more likely to support companies that act responsibly toward the world
             around them.
         5. An amazing customer experience is one of the biggest competitive advantages a company
             can have. Instead of competing on price, more than two-thirds of companies now compete
             mostly on the basis of customer experience.
         6. Employees are the foundation of a strong customer experience, which means employee
             experience and culture are crucial in customer-centric companies. Successful organizations
             invest in empowering their employees and providing them with the right tools and cul-
             ture to succeed.
         7. The way in which a company gets things done can have a positive or negative impact on the
             customer experience. Processes should enhance the customer experience (CX), not detract
             from it. Businesses should clean up processes in six areas within their companies. These
             include Human Resources, Marketing, Operations, Accounting, Customer Service, and Sales.
        8. Often, when companies create new services, it prompts new processes as well. There are
             many types of innovations, and often they are combined.

   End-of-Chapter Exercises

         1. Product Features. Do you have a product you love? Discuss with your classmates what it
             is about the product that makes you like it so much. Is it the product's usefulness, design,
             durability, and features? What you like about the product may not be the same for every
             customer. Consider various customer segments and determine what the product offers that
             might align with the needs and wants of each segment. For example, consider age groups:
             children, seniors, teens, or consider careers: construction worker, office employee, nurse.
             What is it about the product that each of the segments might enjoy? To make it even more
             confusing, consider complex buyer personas such as an office manager who belongs to a
             cycling club and participates in cycling events each weekend, and also is the parent of three
             children. What is it about the product that this person would most like? What value does it
             bring to the customer?
                                                                                             DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 157

2. Customer Advocacy. Search the Internet for information on products produced by Apple
    Inc. and Harley-Davidson. What is it about the products made by these companies that cus-
    tomers love? How do these companies turn their loyal customers into cult-like followers?
    How do they build customer advocacy? Discuss with your professor and classmates.

3. Exceptional Service. Discuss with your classmates a time when you received exceptional
    service. Why was it exceptional? What happened that made it a positive memory for you?
    Would you refer this company to other potential customers? Did you return or buy addi-
    tional products or services from the company? Did the company exceed your expectations?
    If so, how?

4. Poor Service. Discuss with your classmates a time when you received poor service. What
    happened that made this a negative experience? Would you refer this company? What could
    have happened to turn this situation around? Were there things the company could have
    done better to turn the situation from a negative to a positive? What expectations did you
    have going into the situation, and how were your expectations not met? If you had lower
    expectations, would the situation have been acceptable?

5. Efficient/Effective Process. Discuss with classmates a process you feel works well, either
    a process at your current place of employment or a process you encountered as a customer.
    Why do you feel it worked well? What was it about the process that made it effective?
    What was it about the process that made it efficient? What was it about the process that
    made it customer-centric?

6. Design a Process. Work with a partner to design a new process for a college or university.
    Assume there is a process for students to change courses on their timetable. What would
    you do to make this process customer-centric? How would the process flow? Share your
    revised process with your classmates and/or professor.
158 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

   Self-Check Exercise - Products, Services, and Processes

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
              https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=88#h5p-7

   Additional Resources

         1. 5 Trends that will Define Customer Service in 2021
         2. 10 Trends Changing Customer Expectations
         3. 20 Best Companies to Work for in 2021
         4. Canada's Top 100 Employers 2021
         5. 4 Self-service Trends that are Changing Customer Service 2021
         6. 100 Customer Experience (CX) Stats to Prepare for 2023

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).
                    DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND | 159

Media Attributions

· A bottle of hand cream showing the product's design © Image by Valeriia Miller from Pexels is licensed
   under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

· A person receiving a facial © Photo by John Tekeridis from Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative
   Commons Zero) license

· A drive-up diner with the meal on the vehicle window © Photo by Milivoj Kuhar from UnSplash is
   licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

Notes

 1. Inman, V. and Slotten, L. (n.d.). Creating products with customers in mind. The Jabian Journal. https://jour-
     nal.jabian.com/creating-products-with-customers-in-mind/

 2. Atlassian. (n.d.) New product development - The 7-step process explained. https://www.atlassian.com/agile/product-man-
     agement/new-product-development-process

 3. Inman, V. and Slotten, L. (n.d.). Creating products with customers in mind. The Jabian Journal. https://jour-
     nal.jabian.com/creating-products-with-customers-in-mind/

 4. Two Cents. (2019, August 14). How to do market research. [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b-
     hDg7699S0

 5. Amazon. (n.d.). About us. https://www.aboutamazon.com/about-us

 6. LEGO Ideas. (2023). Product idea guidelines. https://ideas.lego.com/guidelines

 7. Inman, V. and Slotten, L. (n.d.). Creating products with customers in mind. The Jabian Journal. https://jour-
     nal.jabian.com/creating-products-with-customers-in-mind/

 8. erichlawson. (n.d.). 9 companies with great environmental initiatives. SmartCitiesDive. https://www.smartcities-
     dive.com/ex/sustainablecitiescollective/9-companies-great-environmental-initiatives/
     1193165/#:~:text=1%20Ford%20Motor%20Company.%20Automotive%20compa-
     nies%20are%20known,green%20supply%20chain%20management%20practices%20and%20environmental%20

 9. Morgan, B. (2019, December 20). The 10 most customer-obsessed companies of 2019. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/
     sites/blakemorgan/2019/12/20/the-10-most-customer-centric-companies-of-2019/?sh=48f9e03f7a58

10. Inman, V. & Slotten, L. (n.d.). Creating products with customers in mind. The Jabian Journal. https://jour-
     nal.jabian.com/creating-products-with-customers-in-mind/

11. Jaiswal, V. (2017, September 4). World's 3 most customer-centric companies: How they do it! https://customerthink.com/
     worlds-3-most-customer-centric-companies-how-do-they-do-
     it/#:~:text=World%E2%80%99s%203%20MOST%20Customer-Centric%20Compa-
     nies%3A%20How%20do%20they,the%20loss%20making%20airlines.%203%20TD%20Bank.%20

12. happyfoxblog. (2022, March 4). 10 best companies in customer service & what you can learn from them. [Blog].
     https://blog.happyfox.com/10-best-companies-customer-service/#:~:text=10%20Best%20Companies%20in%20Cus-
     tomer%20Service%20%26%20What,4.%20Ritz%20Carlton.%205%205.%20Amazon.%20More%20items

13. IWD Agency. (2020, June 8). How Tony Hsieh grew Zappos to $1.2 billion value in just 10 years. [Video]. YouTube.
     https://youtu.be/IZbAD2ANZN4

14. Morgan, B. (2020, December 21). 25 of the most customer-centric companies from 2020. Forbes.
160 | DESIGNING WITH CUSTOMER IN MIND

           https://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/2020/12/21/25-most-customer-centric-compa-
           nies-2020/?sh=6229ea66884b

     15. Khubwani, H. (2023, April 14). World's 21 most customer-centric companies that remain true to great CX in 2023.
           https://www.clootrack.com/blogs/customer-centric-companies

     16. Cortese, C. (2019, July, 3). 20 examples of companies with the best customer service. [Blog]. BlueLeadZ.
           https://www.bluleadz.com/blog/companies-with-the-best-customer-service

     17. Liveagent. (n.d.). What makes customer service great? https://www.liveagent.com/academy/good-customer-service/

     18. Liveagent. (n.d.). What makes customer service great? https://www.liveagent.com/academy/good-customer-service/

     19. Grow by Joe. (2019, June 10). Business process improvement. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/CEAXCCuVBow

     20. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e

     21. Rubkiewicz, A. (2023, October 23). 5 companies using AI for customer service. https://blog.hubspot.com/service/com-
           panies-using-ai-for-customer-service

     22. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e

     23. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e

     24. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e

     25. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e

     26. Morgan, B. (2019, June 30). 100 of the most customer-centric companies. Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blake-
           morgan/2019/06/30/100-of-the-most-customer-centric-companies/?sh=ede3cba63c3e
                                                  CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 161

CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO
IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

   Chapter 8 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. List five general principles of service design.
         2. List the five stages of the Design Thinking process.
         3. Explain what occurs at each of the five stages of the Design Thinking process.
         4. Describe three service prototyping techniques.

Service Design

Service design refers to the planning and organizing of people, infrastructure, communication, and material
elements of a service in order to improve its quality and the interaction between the service provider and their
customers.1 A service design blueprint, or journey map, is used to visually display a user's experience of a ser-
vice, which includes all interactions and touchpoints that both the customers and employees engage with.
Journey maps are useful for visualizing complex or multi-channel service offerings to better understand the
causes of root problems, or areas in need of improvement during a specific customer journey.
Service Design is about three things:

 1. Customer Centricity. Putting the customer at the heart of everything you do.
 2. Co-Creation. Creating services together.
 3. Being Holistic. Building interdependent and interconnected experiences that connect with people on

      an emotional level.
162 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

Exceptional service design is why customers come to your business and not another, and why they keep coming
back.

A few of the general principles of service design are listed below.2

 1. Services should be designed based on a genuine comprehension of the purpose of the service, the
      demand for the service, and the ability of the service provider to deliver that service.

 2. Services should be designed based on customer needs rather than the internal needs of the business.
 3. Services should be designed to deliver a unified and efficient system rather than component-by-compo-

      nent, which can lead to poor overall service performance.
 4. Services should be designed and delivered in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders (both internal

      and external).
 5. Services should be developed as a minimum viable service (MVS) and then deployed. They can then be

      iterated and improved to add additional value based on user/customer feedback.

Create Inclusive Customer Experiences

Inclusivity means to create experiences that reflect and enable people of all backgrounds and abilities to engage
positively with the company brand and achieve their goals. It is important for organizations to consider inclu-
sivity when designing services. The most inclusive brands do this with equity, diversity, and inclusion efforts.
In today's marketplace, there are customers from all around the globe who are from various cultures and have
varied levels of accessibility. Vocabulary, syntax, and idioms vary within a language based on culture and loca-
tion. Customers want to find information in their own language. Review the customers' journey for accessi-
bility, which includes things like high-contrast screen text for easier reading for anyone with limited sight and
ensuring assistive technology will work for customers who use it. There are also important compliance consid-
erations around this type of accessibility. Lack of awareness can lead to exclusionary experiences.

A company may want to ensure that the team designing customer experiences comprises a diverse group of
people so that different voices and perspectives are included. Listening to customer feedback from diverse per-
spectives is also important. Design teams must be aware of their own biases, cultural assumptions, and other
ways that their own perspectives might not be shared with everyone. Teams should consider the content at
the local and cultural levels, and provide several support channels like live chat, video calls, and text-to-speak
options. Teams should ensure the brand is represented through imagery and photos that represent different
ages, backgrounds, cultures, and ethnicities. Organizations could ask customers what they prefer and ask for
their help in designing the customer journey.3
                                                 CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 163

Connect Employee Experience to Customer Experience

Customer experience and employee experience must be aligned to be successful. When employees feel under-
compensated, undervalued, or taken for granted, they sometimes become angry or resentful toward the orga-
nization. When this occurs, their performance may decline, and their interactions with customers may also
become less than what is expected. A customer who visits a fine-dining restaurant for a dinner out may not
feel happy, welcomed, or satisfied with the experience when they are served by a grumpy, unhappy server. This
same principle applies to any organization, whether it's a hospital, bank, hotel, retail store, etc. Employees drive
the experience.

Organizations that invest in employees so they stay longer, and feel more engaged and appreciated, will benefit
from better financial performance overall. Many of the best practices of customer experience management
can be applied and leveraged in employee experience management. Managers can use surveys and other feed-
back tools to gather experiential data from employees. Managers should collaborate with employees to create
an employee journey map to find obstacles and challenges that may be preventing employees from thriving.
When promising customers a low-effort, pleasant experience, the organization should consider whether or not
the employee experience reflects that promise too. The alignment will also help employees feel more connected
and authentic about their work. Employees are the biggest part of the customer experience equation.

Play the YouTube video below for an explanation of Service Design and compare two coffee shops, one that
uses Service Design and one that does not.4 Transcript for "What is Service Design: A Tale of Two Coffee
Shops" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrat­
                   egy2/?p=210#oembed-1

Service Design Versus Design Thinking

Service Design is understood as designing where the outcome is a service. Design Thinking, on the other
hand, is a broad methodology that is focused on the needs of the end-user when designing any type of inno-
vation. Service Design and Design Thinking are similar. Both are human-centered, systematic, and iterative
approaches that observe and interpret the needs of behaviors of users with the aim of creating services that are
useful, usable, desirable, efficient, and effective. However, Design Thinking is unrestricted by the parameters
of a pre-determined solution and can reveal new or different pathways to achieve a goal that might not have
164 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

been explored otherwise. For example, you may learn something new about customer needs during the proto-
type stage, which may lead to a reworking of the concept and a whole new solution. Design Thinking explores
the problem by understanding and empathizing with the user, followed by prototypes of various types of solu-
tions, and bringing the most promising results to test and scale. Design thinking provides a starting point when
the way forward is unclear; it helps the team fully understand a problem and arrive at a common goal. and it
allows the team to find a tailored solution unique to the organization to achieve that goal.5

Design Thinking

As the world is changing at an accelerated rate, organizations look for solutions to grow with their customers
or users, to do new things in better ways, to improve their practices, retain and grow their customers, and
expand their business. Innovation is a must for these organizations.

Design thinking is one of several approaches to innovation and is a process for creative problem-solving.
Design thinking has a human-centered core and can be applied to a wide variety of problems with variable
solutions as outcomes, including products, programs, processes, services, and more. Design Thinking is
widely used in the services industry by companies such as UPS, Airb&b, IBM, Uber, and Intuit.

Design thinking helps improve customer experience by placing the customer at the center of problem-solving.
By emphasizing empathy, businesses gain a deep understanding of customer needs, pain points, and expecta-
tions. Through iterative processes--such as brainstorming, prototyping, and testing--companies can develop
products, services, and processes that are both innovative and user-friendly. This approach ensures that every
touchpoint is thoughtfully designed, reducing friction, enhancing satisfaction, and fostering long-term loyalty.

   In the Spotlight: UberEATS Design Thinking

     UberEATS story sourced from How We Design on the UberEATS Team
     To UberEATS Design Thinking has been a powerful tool to create higher customer satisfaction. Cre-
     ating the future of food delivery takes empathy, innovation, and an appetite for complex logistical
     challenges. Using Design Thinking, UberEATS is on a mission to make eating effortless for every-
     one, everywhere.6
                                           CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 165

"Designers on the UberEATS team love food culture, logistical challenges, and the demands of a
fast-growth startup. They take pride in their ability to move quickly, build empathy with their cus-
tomers, and make complex services run smoothly. The UberEats teams designs reach many differ-
ent types of people with very different needs, but the same design thinking approach guides their
mission to make eating well effortless at any time, for anyone."7

Deeply Immersed

"To understand all our different markets and how our products fit into the physical conditions of
each city, we constantly immerse ourselves in the places where our customers live, work, and eat.
Sitting in our offices in San Francisco or New York, we can't truly understand the experiences of a
person on the streets of Bangkok or London. We need to go there, move about the city, experience
the food culture, and watch how people use the things we've designed."8

     · UberEATS Walkabout Program. Every quarter, designers visit an UberEATS city and learn
        about the city's food culture, transportation, and logistical infrastructures. They interview
        consumers, workers, partners, and restaurants. Each visit helps build a comprehensive
        understanding of the company's target markets.

     · Order Shadowing. UberEATS follows partners on deliveries, visit restaurants during the rush,
        and sit in people's homes while they order dinner. This provides the team a better under-
        standing of customer needs, what works, and what challenges still exist.

     · Fireside Chats. UberEATS invites customers, delivery partners, and restaurant workers into
        its offices to discuss their experiences. These sessions provide a way to empathize with users
        and bridge the gaps between activities like Walkabouts and Order Shadows.9

Iterate Quickly

     · Rapid Field Testing. Researchers and designers take prototypes into restaurants, inside deliv-
        ery vehicles, and into people's homes to test products in the places they will be used.

     · A/B Testing. Simultaneously test multiple versions of a feature and quickly determine which
        performs the best. Often this means completing a specific task like rating an order or choos-
        ing a dish recommendation.

     · Operations Team Experiments. Test concepts and designs in a single city to quickly gauge
        their opportunity. The first versions of features like the "Most Popular Items" category in our
        UberEATS menus started as an operations team experiment in Toronto before later iterations
        were released to all users in all cities.

Innovate Constantly

"We see a huge opportunity to innovate and evolve from the traditional model of food delivery.
166 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

     We've started by providing driver partners the option to do both rides and deliveries so they can
     stay busier and earn more money while online with Uber. We designed a restaurant sales dash-
     board to let chefs monitor the demand of individual dishes and tweak recipes to improve their
     menus. And we created the "Under 30 Minutes" menu for people who want to leverage the speed
     of Uber to get food fast. The design team constantly seeks to generate innovations like these and
     provide new ways for people to eat, for restaurants to run their businesses, and for delivery part-
     ners to earn money."10

The design thinking framework helps inspire creative thinking and strategies that lead designers to create user-
friendly products that solve real problems. There are five stages to the design thinking process, shown below
in Figure 8.1, which include empathizing, defining, ideating, prototyping, and testing. They are not always
completed in a linear fashion. They can be done in any order, and then redone as needed. Different stages
might spark new ideas or showcase new findings in the user journey that will inspire new iterations of phases
that have already been completed.

Figure 8.1 Five Stages of Design Thinking

Empathize

In order to deliver innovative, customer-centric solutions that customers want and will buy, begin with empa-
thy. Put yourself in your customer's shoes and try to imagine what the customer might be thinking or feeling,
what needs they may have, and what their desires are. To do this, you might observe the customer or inter-
view the customer, and create a customer journey map.
You might ask yourself and your customers how they want this product or service to work. As designers (or
design thinkers), we should always do our best to leave our own assumptions and experiences behind when
                                                 CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 167

making observations. Our life experiences create assumptions within us, which we use to explain and make
sense of the world around us. However, this very process affects our ability to empathize in a real way with the
people we observe. Since completely letting go of our assumptions is impossible, we should continuously and
consciously remind ourselves to assume a beginner's mindset. It's helpful if you often remind yourself never
to judge what you observe, but to question everything--even if you think you know the answer--and
to really listen to what others are saying.11

A great way to put yourself in the customer's shoes is to create story maps for the various personas (customer
segments) your company provides services to. A journey map is a detailed visualization that depicts the experi-
ence of a user-based persona as they use a specific product. It depicts the steps your customers take when inter-
acting with your product or service.

A customer journey map specifies three elements:12

 1. The points at which prospective and existing customers interact with your brand.
 2. What the customer seeks at each point.
 3. The path they take from one point to the other, as they move towards buying your products. A map can

      be illustrated for an online experience, retail experience, or a combination of these.

Define

Designers will analyze their observations completed throughout the empathy stage and work on synthesizing
that information. Forming a problem statement that is succinct is an important part of this phase that
ensures a human-centered approach by focusing on the end-user. A problem statement is important to a
Design Thinking project because it will guide you and your team and provide a focus on the specific needs
that you have uncovered. A good problem statement should thus have the following traits. It should be
human-centered, broad enough for creative freedom, and narrow enough to make it manageable.13

Ideate

The solution-finding stage is where the team comes together to brainstorm creative solutions to solve the
defined problem(s). When facilitated in a successful way, Ideation is an exciting process. The goal is to gener-
ate a large number of ideas -- ideas that potentially inspire newer, better ideas -- that the team can then eval-
uate and reduce into the best, most practical, and innovative ones.

Ideation Will Help You:

  · Ask the right questions and innovate.
168 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

  · Step beyond the obvious solutions and therefore increase the innovation potential of your solution.
  · Bring together the perspectives and strengths of team members.
  · Uncover unexpected areas of innovation.
  · Create volume and variety in your innovation options.
  · Get obvious solutions out of your heads, and drive your team beyond them.

In Ideation sessions, it's important to create the right type of environment to help create a creative work cul-
ture with a curious, courageous, and concentrated atmosphere. Instead of using a boardroom with the CEO
sitting at the head of the table, Design Thinking and Ideation sessions require a space in which everyone is
equal. There are hundreds of ideation methods used to spark innovative ideas. Some methods are merely
renamed or slightly adapted versions of more foundational techniques. Here you'll get a brief overview of
some of the best methods:14

  · Brainstorm
  · Braindump
  · Brainwrite
  · Brainwalk
  · Challenge Assumptions
  · SCAMPER
  · Mindmap
  · Sketch or Sketchstorm
  · Storyboard
  · Analogies
  · Provocation
  · Movement
  · Bodystorm
  · Gamestorming
  · Cheatstorm
  · Crowdstorm
  · Co-Creation Workshops
  · Prototype
  · Creative Pause

Prototype

Without testing a new idea, designers would have a tough time actually solving the problem comprehensively.
At this stage, small-scale, inexpensive versions of the product are required. This sets the stage for decision-
                                                 CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 169

making conversations around what works and what doesn't. Prototypes can be sketches, models, or digital
renders of an idea. These scaled-down prototypes can then be used in order to observe, record, judge, and
measure user performance levels based on specific elements, or the users' general behaviour, interactions, and
reactions to the overall design. For instance, when developing software, a design team may produce a number
of paper prototypes that the user can gradually work through in order to demonstrate to the design team or
evaluators how they may tackle certain tasks or problems. When developing tangible devices, such as the com-
puter mouse, designers may use a number of different materials to enable them to test the basic technology
underlying the product. With advances in 3D printing technology, producing prototypes is now often a more
instant and low-cost process, and as a result, this has allowed designers to provide stakeholders with accurate
and testable/useable replica models before settling upon a particular design.15

Test

Gather feedback from real users. Because design thinking is iterative, many designers roll out multiple proto-
types to test different change factors within their idea. Designers should expect to go through a series of
changes, edits, and refinements during the testing stage. It is not uncommon for the testing phase to "restart"
some other design thinking processes, such as ideation or additional testing, or an entirely fresh approach. In
order to achieve the best learning results from each test, here are some areas of a test that you should take into
consideration:16

  · The prototype
      Remember that you are testing the prototype, not the user. Your prototype should be designed with a
      central question in mind -- a question that you will put to the test in the testing stage.

  · Context and scenario
      As much as possible, try to recreate the scenario in which your users are most likely to be using the prod-
      uct. This way, you can learn more about the interaction (or disruptions) between the user, the proto-
      type, and the environment, as well as how problems might arise as a result of that interaction.

  · How you interact with the user
      Make sure your users know what the prototype and test are about, but do not over-explain how the pro-
      totype works.

  · How you observe and capture feedback
      While collecting feedback, make sure you are not disrupting the user's interaction with the prototype.
      Find a way to collect feedback in a way that freely allows you to observe what is happening (for example,
      by having a partner in the test, or by recording an audio or video of the test).

Play the YouTube video below for an explanation of the five stages of the Design Thinking process.17 Tran-
script for "What is Design Thinking?" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
170 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrat­
        egy2/?p=210#oembed-2

Service Prototyping Techniques

The service prototype has the objective of replicating, as much as possible, the final experience of interacting
with the service, in order to test and validate all the design choices. The complexity in the simulation is due to
the fact that the service only exists once it's delivered, and while testing the experience of using a specific touch-
point (such as a mobile app) could be relavant, verifying the whole journey, touching upon different service
components, is always challenging (especially when there are physical places or interactions with service staff
involved). 18

     Prototyping is so powerful because you're aligning the needs of
     the end consumer with the capabilities of the organization.19
     -Ilya Prokopoff, Partner and Managing Director IDEO SF

Below are a few examples of various prototype techniques.

Storyboarding

Service storyboards are sketches/visualizations of future usage scenarios depicted with illustrations and small
texts. They mainly focus on the service concept, but can also illustrate some parts of the service processes and
systems across several instances. Focusing on the value of the service for the target users or situations, story-
boards are typically short and show little detail. They can also be created collaboratively with the users.20

Service Advertisement

Service advertisements are visualizations of the service concept or value proposition through posters, digital
ads, landing pages, videos, etc. Such ad prototypes use short slogans, catchy images, and texts to sell the service
                                                  CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 171

offering from emotional and factual points of view. It is recommended to include specific calls to action in
these prototypes to see how the users interpret them.21

Video Prototype

Videos are usually created to generate interest and demonstrate how exceptional the new product will be. The
purpose of a video prototype can be to get buy-in, potential investment, or validation. Conceptual videos focus
on vision at a high level to create anticipation. This prototype can also be used as a guide while creating detailed
features during the development phase.22

Role-playing Prototype

Role-play prototypes (also called Bodystorming) are enactments of services that allow one to explain a service
or product idea by acting out a scenario of use. The role play typically requires defining some roles (e.g. the
user, the service employee, etc.) and preparing rough prototypes or other materials that can facilitate the per-
formance. While a team is acting out their story, the rest of the audience learns about the idea and understands
the high-level sequence of actions required. After or during the experience, participants can come up with new
ideas and test them by changing the experience.23

Experience Prototype

Experience prototypes (also called Low-Fi prototypes or Mock-ups) allow designers to show and test the
solution through the active participation of the final users, who interact with mock-ups of specific service
touchpoints. There could be one (or more) prototype for each touchpoint, to collect input on that specific
interaction as well as on the overall flow from one touchpoint to the other.24

Service Walkthroughs

Service walkthroughs (or simulations) tend to mimic the environments of the intended service contexts and
can include some props and mock-ups. The service providers and service users role-play as they provide and
receive the services from start to finish to test the cohesiveness of the entire experience.25

Live Prototyping

Live service prototypes are somewhere between early prototypes and pilots. They are set in the intended con-
texts and involve the actual users and providers. In cases of redesign projects, live prototypes can require trans-
formations of the existing services, but the service concepts, processes and systems that are being represented
172 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

should still be rough and subject to iterative adaptations. Users use the prototypes during their regular service
interactions and are typically not aware that they are interacting with a prototype.26

Rough Prototyping

Rough prototypes (also called Paper prototyping or Rapid prototyping) simulate specific service components
with the goal of better explaining a service idea in front of other team members, and start discussing the specific
requirements of each touchpoint. Rough prototypes can be simply built with paper (e.g. a flyer, wayfind-
ing signage, a mobile phone interface, etc.) or with pre-assembled interface elements (e.g. wireframe kits, UI
kits, etc.). They are a powerful tool during co-design sessions, to allow everyone to visually translate specific
thoughts into tangible objects and interfaces, and make design considerations.27

   Key Takeaways

         1. Service Design is understood as designing where the outcome is a service.
         2. Design Thinking is a broad methodology that is focused on the needs of the end-user

             when designing any type of innovation.
         3. Inclusive customer experiences reflect and enable people of all backgrounds and abilities

             to engage positively with the company brand and achieve their goals.
         4. Customer experience and employee experience must be aligned to be successful. Organi-

             zations that invest in employees, so they stay longer, and feel more engaged and appreci-
             ated, will benefit from better financial performance overall.
         5. The Design Thinking Framework has five stages: empathizing, defining, ideating, proto-
             typing, and testing. Empathize means to put yourself in the customer's shoes. Define means
             to for a problem statement. Ideate means to generate a large number of ideas that the team
             can evaluate. Prototype means to create a small-scale or sample of the idea. Test means to
             gather feedback from real users about the prototype of the idea.
         6. The service prototype has the objective of replicating, as much as possible, the final experi-
             ence of interacting with the service, in order to test and validate all the design choices. Some
             prototype techniques include storyboarding, service advertisement, video, role-play, experi-
                                           CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 173

        ence prototyping, service walkthroughs, live prototyping, and rough prototyping.

End-of-Chapter Exercises

    1. Apply Design Thinking for Service. With a partner, step through the five stages of
        Design Thinking to come up with a new or improved service for your college or university.
        Share your final idea and design steps with the class and/or professor. Does your idea meet
        the needs of all stakeholders?

   2. Evaluate Service Design of Past Employer. Discuss, as a class or within groups, your past
        work experiences. Determine if the companies you worked for had applied the Design Think-
        ing methodology when services were being designed. What were the pros and cons of
        either applying Design Thinking or not applying it? Did you notice processes that were not
        good for one or more stakeholders? Did you notice technologies that impaired service?
        Were there other issues that detracted from providing excellent service?

   3. Service Design Learning. Visit the Service Design Network website and either attend a
        conference or review an article (as instructed by your professor) then present a summary of
        what you learned (either in video or in person).

   4. Design Thinking Case Study. Visit the Design Thinking Association and select a case to
        read about. Share a brief summary of the case with the class and professor and provide three
        things that went well and three things that did not go well.

   5. Evaluate Course Design. Visit OpenLearn's free online Design Thinking course. Review the
        user interface, the course materials and content, the lessons available, the layout of the
        screens, and the course reviews. Is this a course you would want to take? What do other
        people say in the reviews? Do you think the course was designed with the customer
        (learner) in mind? Why or why not? Discuss with the class and/or professor.

   6. Hone Your Design Thinking Skills. In a group of 3-5 students assume you are going to
        start a student tutoring service at your college or university. Give your service a name, then
        review the IBM Design Thinking Toolkit. As a team, select one of the activity tools listed on
        the website and do the activity. When you finish submit a brief evaluation of how well it
174 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

             went and what your team learned to your professor.
         7. Storyboard. Create a storyboard for the UberEATS service from the customer's perspective.

             Sketch the steps in the service process. What does the customer do first, second, third, and
             so on? How do they interact with the various touchpoints along the customer journey?
             Before you begin you may wish to review sample storyboards online (or your professor may
             share some with you), you can find many images by just doing a search. You may select a dif-
             ferent service to storyboard (or as instructed by your professor). Share your storyboard with
             your class and/or professor.
        8. Other Types of Prototyping. Search the Internet for information about prototyping tech-
             niques not discussed in this chapter, for example, digital prototyping or concierge prototyp-
             ing. What did you discover? How is this type of prototyping used? Can it be applied to the
             customer experience? Discuss your findings with a partner, the class, and/or your professor.
         9. Minimum Viable Experience. Search the Internet for information on three terms: "mini-
             mum viable service (MVS)," "minimum viable experience (MVE)," and "minimum viable prod-
             uct (MVP)." Summarize the concept of each and make a few notes. What may occur if the
             MVP has too many, or too few features? Discuss your findings with a partner, the class, and/
             or your professor.
       10. Create a Prototype. Together with a partner or team, invent a new service. Think of some-
             thing you might like to have provided to you as a customer, that you don't find often. Create
             a role-play prototype. Share your role-play with the class.

   Self-Check Exercise - Design Thinking in Service Design

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                                                  CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 175

              here:
              https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=210#h5p-10

   Additional Resources

         1. What is Human-Centered Design? YouTube Video
         2. The Principles of Service Design Thinking - Building Better Services
         3. Case Studies and Thought Leadership Articles About Services
         4. The Service Design Network
         5. Tips for How to Prototype a Service Podcast
         6. Customer Journey Mapping: The Windmill Guide to Design Thinking
         7. 5 Common Low-Fidelity Prototypes and Their Best Practices
        8. What is High-Fidelity Prototyping?

Attribution

The section on the Five Stages of Design Thinking is adopted from Chapter 7: Design Thinking in the Leading
Innovation, 2nd edition, OER ebook authored by Kerri Shields and published on eCampus Ontario.

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).
  176 | CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE

Notes

        1. Spring2 Innovation. (2020, August 31). Design thinking versus service design. [Video]. YouTube.
             https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSpCDmY4oSo

        2. Interaction Design Foundation. (2023, June). The principles of service design thinking - building better services.
             https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/the-principles-of-service-design-thinking-building-better-services

        3. LinkedIn Community. (2023). How can you create inclusive customer experiences? https://www.linkedin.com/advice/
             1/how-can-you-create-inclusive-customer-experiences

        4. Morales, D. (2017, August 31). What is service design: A tale of two coffee shops. [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
             HNOY8GLVy_8?si=wxEIwpCf_zSU6QrO

        5. Spring2 Innovation. (2020, August 31). Design thinking versus service design. [Video]. YouTube.
             https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wSpCDmY4oSo

        6. The Design Thinking Association. (n.d.). How we design on the UberEATS team. https://design-thinking-associa-
             tion.org/explore-design-thinking-topics/external-links/how-ubereats-team-uses-design-thinking

        7. The Design Thinking Association. (n.d.). How we design on the UberEATS team. https://design-thinking-associa-
             tion.org/explore-design-thinking-topics/external-links/how-ubereats-team-uses-design-thinking

        8. Smith, Paul C. (2017, June 6). How we design on the UberEATS team. https://medium.com/uber-design/how-we-
             design-on-the-ubereats-team-ff7c41fff b76

        9. Smith, Paul C. (2017, June 6). How we design on the UberEATS team. https://medium.com/uber-design/how-we-
             design-on-the-ubereats-team-ff7c41fff b76

      10. Smith, Paul C. (2017, June 6). How we design on the UberEATS team. https://medium.com/uber-design/
           how-we-design-on-the-ubereats-team-ff7c41fffb76

       11. Mortensen, D. (2020). Stage 1 in the design thinking process: Empathize with your users. https://www.interaction-
             design.org/literature/article/stage-1-in-the-design-thinking-process-empathise-with-your-users

       12. windmill. (n.d.). Customer journey mapping: The windmill guide to design thinking. https://www.windmill.digital/cus-
             tomer-journey-mapping-the-windmill-guide-to-design-thinking/

       13. Dam, R. & Siang, T. (2021). Stage 2 in the design thinking process: Define the problem and interpret the results.
             https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/stage-2-in-the-design-thinking-process-define-the-problem-and-
             interpret-the-results

       14. Dam, R. & Siang T. (2020). Stage 3 of the design thinking process: Ideate. https://www.interaction-design.org/litera-
             ture/article/stage-3-in-the-design-thinking-process-ideate

       15. Dam, R. & Siang T. (2021). Stage 4 of the design thinking process: Prototype. https://www.interaction-design.org/litera-
             ture/article/stage-4-in-the-design-thinking-process-prototype

       16. Dam, R. & Siang, T. (2021). Stage 5 in the design thinking process: Test. https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/
             article/stage-5-in-the-design-thinking-process-test

       17. The Strategy Group. (2017, December 7). What is design thinking? [Video]. YouTube. https://youtu.be/
             TtgegZfk5ZU?si=KGjRkQW0pSKfl6Hc

       18. sdt. (n.d.). Service prototype. https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/service-prototype
       19. Prokopoff, I. (n.d.). 6 tips for prototyping service design experiences. https://www.ideou.com/blogs/inspiration/

             6-tips-for-prototyping-service-design-experiences
       20. Nare, K., (2020, November 29). A brief guide to service prototyping. https://uxplanet.org/a-brief-guide-to-service-proto-

             typing-fc0cdf8a1a8e
       21. Nare, K., (2020, November 29). A brief guide to service prototyping. https://uxplanet.org/a-brief-guide-to-service-proto-
                                           CHAPTER 8: USING DESIGN THINKING TO IMPROVE CUSTOMER EXPERIENCE | 177

     typing-fc0cdf8a1a8e
22. Thakkar, B. (2023, March 8). What is a prototype? Definition, types, and prototyping methods.

     https://blog.logrocket.com/product-management/what-is-a-prototype/
23. sdt. (n.d.). Role playing. https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/role-playing
24. sdt. (n.d.) Experience prototypes. https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/experience-prototypes
25. Nare, K., (2020, November 29). A brief guide to service prototyping. https://uxplanet.org/a-brief-guide-to-service-proto-

     typing-fc0cdf8a1a8e
26. Nare, K., (2020, November 29). A brief guide to service prototyping. https://uxplanet.org/a-brief-guide-to-service-proto-

     typing-fc0cdf8a1a8e
27. sdt. (n.d.). Rough prototyping. https://servicedesigntools.org/tools/rough-prototyping
178 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER
RELATIONSHIPS

   Chapter 9 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. Explain how "customer relations" differs from "customer service."
         2. Explain how offering an exceptional customer experience requires team collaboration.
         3. List three benefits companies receive from developing positive customer relationships.
         4. List three ways companies can build customer loyalty.
         5. Describe two key trends currently shaping the field of customer service.
         6. Describe how companies can use Artificial Intelligence (AI) to personalize customers' experi-
             ences.
         7. Explain how journey mapping can help a business improve the customer experience.
        8. Discuss how social listening and social monitoring help companies build customer relation-
             ships.
         9. Explain how customer relationship management (CRM) software might be used across busi-
             ness departments to build positive customer relationships.

Customer Relations Versus Customer Service

Customer relations refers to the different methods and strategies that a business can use to forge, improve,
and manage all interactions with its customers.1 Customer service refers to the support and assistance given
to a customer before, during, and after a sale. Both are critical and work together to create positive customer
experiences (CX).
The customer service team plays a key role in growing customer relationships, as they are usually the first point
                                                                         CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 179

of contact for customers. In customer service, agents help customers in real time to solve issues and deliver a
positive journey through the sales funnel. Companies can use the valuable data gathered from customer service
interactions to foster customer relations and proactively strive to improve the customer experience and address
problems before they impact customers.2 With that said, building customer relationships is not just a job for
a single customer service team. It is every employee's responsibility to ensure customers receive the best service
and a positive experience when interacting with the company.

Some department employees are considered customer-facing and actually interact very directly with customers
as part of their daily jobs. This includes groups like customer support, sales, and service representatives, but
these are not the only teams that directly impact the customer experience and overall journey. Every team has
an important role to play, and product development teams, human resources staff, supply chain managers, and
maintenance crews (to name a few) need to understand how their daily efforts are connected to the overall cus-
tomer experience.

     High-performing companies view customer service as their
     primary revenue driver, and seventy-three percent of business
     leaders say there is a direct link between customer service and
     business performance.3

A customer experience vision or mission statement and leaders who support and communicate the vision can
help every department see their value and role in providing exceptional customer experiences that build posi-
tive customer relationships. For example, if the customer service team needs to provide information to a cus-
tomer on their account balance, the employee interacting with the customer may require assistance from the
Accounting department personnel. If the assistance is slow or the information provided is inaccurate, the ser-
vice the customer receives will be below their expectations and result in an unhappy customer. It is critical that
all department personnel understand that each has a responsibility to contribute to an overall excellent cus-
tomer experience.

Every touchpoint a customer has with an organization should leave them feeling satisfied, valued, and
impressed with the company. Customers want to feel that they made the right choice when purchasing from
a company; therefore, they have certain expectations around product performance, service levels, warranties,
employee interactions, social media and website interactions, brand, image, community, and more. Businesses
need to ensure that they are supporting what they are promoting. If a product is marketed with a lifetime guar-
antee, then you can believe that customers will expect that to be true.
180 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

Below are a few customer relations activities.

  · Tracking customer behavior and providing personalized customer experiences.
  · Automating customer feedback collection (e.g., surveys).
  · Analyzing customer feedback provided during customer interactions.
  · Making data-driven decisions and marketing strategies.
  · Proposing solutions to frequent issues.
  · Utilizing the right sales and marketing software.
  · Providing omnichannel service and social media presence.
  · Ensuring the customer service experience is consistent across customer touchpoints.
  · Delivering live assistance and boosting customer engagement.
  · Working with IT and technical teams to streamline customer interactions and decrease wait times.

Importance of Building Customer Relationships

It's more important than ever for businesses to create        Creating a Positive Customer Experience
strong customer relationships. Building any long-lasting
relationship requires nurturing and personalized experi-
ences. Customers don't want to feel like their interactions
are transactional. Transactional relationships often attract
customers based on price alone who are looking to fill a
short-term need without building a long-term relationship
with a brand. Businesses that seek to create long-term,
repeat business focus on providing excellent customer
experiences because they understand that retaining cus-
tomers is less expensive than obtaining new ones.

A critical step in establishing these long-term relationships is building trust. Customers are more likely to
remain loyal and engage with a brand when they feel confident that the company is honest, transparent, and
reliable. Trust is earned through consistent, high-quality experiences, clear communication, and by demon-
strating that the business genuinely values the customer's needs and feedback. Without trust, even the most
personalized interactions may fail to create a meaningful connection, as customers are unlikely to commit to a
brand they perceive as unreliable or indifferent.

By prioritizing trust, businesses lay the foundation for deeper engagement and long-term loyalty. Trusted
brands are better positioned to encourage repeat purchases, receive candid feedback, and foster advocacy, where
satisfied customers actively recommend the business to others.
                                                                         CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 181

Below are a few of the benefits companies gain from creating positive customer relationships, supported by
trust and long-term engagement:

  · Higher Customer Retention. Loyal customers continue to return when they trust the brand.
  · More Customer Loyalty. Trust encourages customers to stick with a company even if competitors offer

      lower prices.
  · Better Business Reputation and Brand Credibility. Trusted businesses are viewed more favorably

      and attract new customers through positive word-of-mouth.
  · Ability to Maintain Prices. Customers who value the relationship and trust the brand are less price-

      sensitive.
  · Increased Competitive Advantage. Strong relationships and trust differentiate the business in a

      crowded market.
  · Improved Employee Morale and Attitude. Employees take pride in working for a trusted brand and

      are motivated to provide better customer experiences.

   Explore the Concept: Customer Relations Statistics

     Check out these statistics gathered by Zendesk that strongly show customer relationships are the
     way of the future for company growth and longevity.4

          · The top reason customers leave brands is that they feel unappreciated.
          · Eighty percent of consumers are more likely to do business with a company if it offers per-

             sonalized experiences.
          · Offering high-quality experiences can lower the cost of serving customers by up to thirty-

             three percent.
          · The average cost of customers switching to other companies due to poor service is $1.6 tril-

             lion.
          · Companies that earn $1 billion a year will see an average gain of $700 million within three

             years of investing in the customer experience.
     Explore the Internet to locate additional statistics that support the claim that companies need to
     ensure positive customer relationships in order to thrive and secure business longevity. Can you
182 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

     locate statistics for Canada (or the country in which you reside)? Share your findings with your
     class and/or professor.

Enhance Customer Retention by Building Loyalty

Customer loyalty happens when customers give a company repeat business over time. When a company pro-
vides great value in its products and services, and the customer experience stays consistently good, then the
business will reap the benefits of customer retention.5

Listed below are eight ways businesses can develop meaningful customer relationships and create long-lasting
customer loyalty:6

1. Communicate Company Values

Share values with employees and customers. Create more effective marketing strategies for new products and
services.

2. Know the Customer Journey

Create journey maps to assess the gaps in the current service offerings. Recognize how each customer persona's
service experience differs. Mapping the customer journey for the personas, or target segments, a company
wishes to reach can help the business better understand customers' expectations, and then the business can
tailor customer experiences to fit the customer's needs. Mapping helps businesses measure the progress of opti-
mizing processes against the customer experience desired by customers. The mapping process brings together
sales, marketing, and customer support to define what customers need to know before they buy, what they
need after they buy, and how these interactions can be enhanced. 7
CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 183

Not only can journey mapping help businesses identify       Mapping the Customer Journey
issues that may be negatively affecting a positive cus-
tomer journey, but it can also help businesses identify
new growth opportunities. During the mapping
process, auditing content can reveal areas where the com-
pany may be losing customers so that the business can
strengthen those areas. A journey map can help steer the
team toward company priorities. A journey map that
expresses the needs of the target audience helps to ensure
that the team stays true to what customers need and
want.

When should journey mapping be done? Customer journey mapping can be done whenever the business
wants to do any of the following tasks.8

· Assess the gaps in the current service offering.
· Increase the personalization of customer interactions for each customer profile or segment.
· Create a more effective marketing strategy for new products and services.
· Recognize how each customer persona's service experience differs.
· Develop a new experience while keeping the important moments in mind.
· Compare competitors' journeys to the company's and create better differentiators.

3. Provide Exceptional Customer Service

Train and support employees. Use AI Chatbots to improve service. Have meaningful conversations with cus-
tomers so that each interaction is not purely transactional.

4. Activate Loyalists

Ask brand ambassadors to help spread the word. Connect with brand ambassadors as these are the most ardent
supporters of the company's brand and its values, and are the customers the company should seek out. These
consumers are the ones who mention the company and/or its products and services on Facebook, X (formerly
Twitter), Instagram, and other social media platforms and tell everyone how much they like your brand. These
highly satisfied customers help a company understand who is connecting with the brand and why. It's up to
the company to find these supporters and learn about them, so the company can find others who fit the same
profile. These people will become the company's brand ambassadors out in the world. The business should
engage with them often - and possibly surprise an existing customer with special gifts to thank them for their
184 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

loyalty, a strategy known as "surprise and delight" that can help increase retention and cultivate customer loy-
alty.9

5. Show Customer Appreciation

Develop a Loyalty Program.

6. Connect in a Deeper Way

Create a Community. Increase the personalization of customer interactions for each customer profile or seg-
ment. Offer personalized service. Use video chats and co-browsing (the agent and customer are browsing at the
same time) to engage customers.

7. Ask for Feedback

Conduct Customer Satisfaction Surveys (CSAT) as well as employee surveys, then use analytics to improve ser-
vice.

8. Continually Improve

Businesses should continually strive to improve the customer experience by monitoring customer trends and
preferences, comparing competitor company journeys, and leveraging these insights to develop stronger differ-
entiators. This proactive approach enables companies to stay ahead of market demands, personalize offerings,
and create unique value that strengthens customer loyalty and drives sustainable growth.

Customer Experience Trends

In the Zendesk Customer Experience (CX) Trends Report, the following customer experience trends appear.
Companies need to embrace these trends to meet customer needs and expectations in order to build relation-
ships. There are five trends discussed below.

Trend 1: AI is becoming more evolved and seamless

The retail sector has been experiencing a significant digital transformation over the past few years. One of
the greatest drivers of this transformation is the combination of the Internet of Things and Artificial Intelli-
gence. Amazon widely uses AI in its retail operations, while Walmart and Target follow closely behind. Retail-
                                                                        CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 185

ers are seeking the help of AI-based digital solutions to tackle challenges like changing consumer behavior,
labour shortages, supply chain disruptions, and rising costs. AI is a powerful tool for retailers, enabling them
to quickly analyze large amounts of data and make customer-focused decisions.10

Using artificial intelligence retail solutions, retailers can provide smooth customer support in different scenar-
ios - starting from automated checkouts to customer mood tracking. AI-based retail solutions also provide
customers with personalized and immersive shopping experiences. Several reports suggest that customers
would be a lot more loyal to the brands that added personalization features in their outlets. With retail transac-
tional data, AI, and machine learning, brands can easily track and analyze past purchases, customer behavior,
and loyalty cards to deliver more customized offerings. Customers can now take a photo of an item or product
they like in reality and then utilize the image to search for a retailer selling it online. Utilizing AI calculations,
retail organizations can run focused marketing and advertising campaigns based on customers' location, pref­
erences, gender, and buying habits.11

Here are a few examples of companies that are using AI (artificial intelligence) and ML (machine learning) in
retail to improve the overall user experience and increase sales.12

  · Sephora's Color IQ scans faces to recommend personalized foundation and concealer shades, while Lip
      IQ helps find the perfect lipstick shade, making way for a seamless makeup shopping experience.

  · Lowe's leverages LoweBot, a robot that assists customers in navigating stores. LoweBot asks questions to
      help customers find products, offers directions, shares expertise, and keeps track of inventory.

  · Starbucks streamlines ordering through the My Starbucks Barista app, which enables voice and text-
      based orders, allowing customers to skip lines and pick up orders upon arrival. AI analyzes purchase his-
      tory and preferences via the app and loyalty program, enabling Starbucks to send personalized offers and
      recommendations that enhance the customer experience.

  · Amazon uses AI to personalize product recommendations by analyzing purchase history, browsing
      data, and customer behavior, helping shoppers discover items tailored to their interests.

  · Disney enhances the theme park experience with AI-powered virtual assistants through the My Disney
      Experience app and MagicBand, helping guests plan visits, manage reservations, and receive real-time
      updates.

  · Spotify leverages AI to analyze listening patterns and preferences. Features like Discover Weekly and
      Release Radar provide tailored playlists, keeping users engaged with both new and familiar music.

  · Domino's employs AI-powered chatbots, such as Dom, to simplify ordering via voice or text. AI also
      optimizes delivery routes, ensuring faster and more efficient service.

  · Netflix creates a personalized experience for each subscriber. New users select favorite movies and
      shows, and AI generates recommendations for similar programming. The system continually adapts
      based on viewing habits, watch duration, and device usage to offer a highly tailored experience.13
186 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

Play the YouTube video below to learn how businesses can use AI to personalize customers' experiences.14
Transcript for "How to use AI to personalize your customer's experience" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed
captioning is available on YouTube.

                   One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
                   them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrat­
        egy2/?p=218#oembed-1

According to Vonage's Global Customer Engagement Report 2022 omnichannel, commerce that integrates
the different methods of interaction available to customers (e.g., online, mobile device, physical store),
enhanced by artificial intelligence, will help meet the expectations of customers. Customers expect an efficient
customer experience in the first channel they choose. As seen below in Figure 9.1, the two channels set to
explode the most are video chat and chatbot.15

Figure 9.1: Vonage Expected Usage of Video Chat and Chatbot

Trend 2: Consumers want conversational experiences

Customers want to receive immediate assistance, and it does not matter if it comes from an AI-powered bot or
a real human agent. What does matter is that those interactions feel natural, friendly, and personal. As those
conversations unfold, consumers expect anyone they interact with at the company to have the full context of
their purchase history, previous interactions, and so on. Should a customer decide to stop an interaction and
                                                                        CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 187

resume it later, they want a new support representative to be able to pick up the conversation seamlessly. Sev-
enty percent of consumers purchase more from companies that offer seamless conversational experiences.16

Trend 3: Customers are eager for deeper personalization

Most customers don't want to be lumped into some demographic bucket--they crave experiences in which
they are a segment of one, not thousands. For example, consider the barista who greets you by your name, starts
whipping up your normal order, and then asks a follow-up question about something you talked about during
your last visit. Consumers want that experience, whether it's in a brick-and-mortar store or on an ecommerce
site. Fifty-nine percent of consumers believe businesses should use the data they collect about them to person-
alize their experiences.17 How do you feel about that? Do you agree?

   In the Spotlight: Airbnb Customer Experience

     Airbnb has revolutionized short-stay accommodation since it was founded in August 2008 and has
     disrupted the hospitality industry. When it first began, people might have thought that an idea
     based on inviting strangers to stay in your home would be doomed. However, it isn't doomed, and
     quite the contrary. Per USA Today, Airbnb has more than seven million listings in 100,000 cities as
     of early September 2019, and they plan to go public in 2020. They also reported revenues of over
     one billion dollars in the second quarter of 2019, although there is no report on the profits.18
     Airbnb observed that consumers were looking for ways to travel differently and find better deals.
     They wanted to use their mobile technology to explore the world around them. Airbnb took advan-
     tage of these wants and positioned a solution that is high-tech.19
188 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

Airbnb offers exceptional experiences by pro-

viding a platform for hosts to offer a wide

range of activities. These activities can include

sharing a personal hobby, teaching a language

or cooking class, hosting an art or dance work-
shop, or organizing sports or pub crawls.20

Airbnb also offers a wide range of accommoda-

tion options, from cozy cottages to elegant        Airbnb Kitchen of Rental Property
penthouses.21 Airbnb has also improved the

user experience for guests and hosts by pro-
viding flexibility, easier hosting, and improved service support.22The company collects customer

data to make better recommendations and match the right people together. Airbnb personalization

is the adjustment of search results based on each guest's unique profile. This includes what they
clicked on, what they booked, and more.23

Here's how Airbnb is shaping the future of the travel industry:24

     · It's aspirational.
     · It's built on pure trust.
     · It's price sensible.
     · It's personable.
     · It's innovative.
     · It's memorable.
     · It's responsive.
     · It's beautiful.
     · It's relevant.
     · It's human.

Airbnb is one of the most inspirational and progressive brands in the world, regardless of indus-
try. This is mainly due to its forward-thinking and absolute focus on the customer experience. The
question is, will the Airbnb experience become the future of the travel industry? And what can
travel agents do to start offering their current customers some of what Airbnb has made central to
their overall customer experience?25
                                                                        CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 189

Trend 4: Consumers' well-being and sentiment are reshaping CX

Sixty-six percent of consumers who often interact with sup-
port said a bad interaction with a business can ruin their
day. Sixty percent of consumers have purchased something
from one brand over another based on the service they
expect to receive. On the frontlines of support, agents know
all too well how their company's customer experience
affects consumers. Thirty-seven percent of agents say that
when a customer cannot complete tasks on their own, they
often become noticeably angry, frustrated, or stressed. Fifty-
three percent of agents say that how their organization Customer Sentiment Rating
approaches service leads directly to negative customer
behavior, and because leaders aren't formally tracking sentiment, their organizations fail to remedy these per-
sistent issues--what's out of sight ends up being out of mind.26

Trend 5: CX teams are breaking down silos

For too long, leaders have viewed their customer service organizations as cost centers, not drivers of revenue.
As a result, that mindset has created siloed teams with little connection to their wider organizations, leading to
disastrous side effects: agents lack relevant customer data, which then hampers efforts to provide exceptional
(or even satisfactory) experiences. But as business leaders have begun to discover, customers expect data to be
widely shared so their experiences can be personalized and immersive. Leaders now realize that silos must be
broken down, with true integration between customer service, sales, and marketing. Doing so promises great
returns: increased efficiency, better customer experiences, and finally, more revenue.27

Social Listening, Monitoring, and Selling for Improved
Customer Relationships

Social listening is the process of actively tracking and analyzing online conversations, mentions, and discussions
about a brand, competitors, products, or industry to gain valuable insights into customer sentiment, trends,
and emerging issues. Social monitoring, while closely related, focuses more on observing and responding to
specific brand mentions, comments, or queries in real time, often aiming for immediate engagement or sup-
port.28
190 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

What is Social Listening?

  · Social listening involves gathering and analyzing real-time data from social media platforms, websites,
      forums, and blogs to understand broader public opinion and sentiment.

  · It uncovers patterns, trends, and audience feelings, providing businesses with a strategic overview of
      what people are saying and why they feel that way.

  · The main goal is to inform decision-making by integrating customer feedback and market insights into
      product development, marketing, and customer service strategies.

What is Social Monitoring?

  · Social monitoring is the practice of tracking notified brand mentions, comments, and tags on digital
      channels and responding as appropriate, often focusing on customer service and reputation manage-
      ment.

  · It allows businesses to quickly address questions, praise, or complaints one-on-one, providing timely
      support and engagement.

What is Social Selling?

  · Social selling uses social media to build relationships with potential customers rather than relying on
      cold calls or mass advertising. It emphasizes listening to customer needs, sharing relevant content, and
      providing value, leading to stronger connections and higher conversion rates.

  · Platforms like LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, TikTok, Pinterest, WhatsApp, and YouTube
      each offer unique ways to engage audiences, from professional networking and B2B lead generation to
      visual storytelling and direct product sales.
                                                                         CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 191

Why Do Companies Use Social Listening and Monitoring?

· Customer Understanding: Gain deep insight into

what customers truly think, want, or dislike, helping

to align offerings with audience needs.

· Trend Identification: Detect early trends and

shifts in public sentiment, allowing brands to stay

ahead of competitors and adapt strategies quickly.

· Crisis Management: Spot potential issues or nega-

tive sentiment before they escalate into brand crises,

and act proactively to manage problems and protect

reputation.                                             Social Media Listening and Monitoring

· Product/Service Improvement: Use customer

feedback for continuous improvement, innovation, and evolving offerings that better match market

expectations.

· Competitive Analysis: Monitor competitor performance and public opinion to identify business

opportunities and strategic threats.

· Stronger Engagement: Build better customer relationships through fast, targeted responses and

authentic engagement, increasing loyalty and advocacy.

· Personalized Service: By analyzing social conversations, businesses gain data for personalized propos-

als, marketing campaigns, and support responses, fostering loyalty and repeat business.

· Comprehensive Customer Profiles: Social CRM platforms enrich customer profiles with social data

for more informed decisions and improved relationships.

The difference between social listening and social monitoring can be summarized as follows:

Social monitoring is the reactive process of tracking direct mentions, comments, and interactions about a
brand to respond quickly to customer queries or issues. It focuses on immediate engagement and crisis man-
agement by observing specific keywords and tagged mentions in real time.

In contrast, social listening is proactive and analytical, involving the broader analysis of online conversations,
including those about competitors and industry trends. It seeks to understand customer sentiment, behaviors,
and emerging patterns to inform long-term business strategies, product development, and marketing plans.

While social monitoring answers "what is happening right now" on a micro level, social listening provides
insights into "why it is happening" on a macro level. Both are essential but serve different purposes within a
comprehensive social media strategy.

In summary, social listening and social monitoring significantly enhance customer relationships by enabling
192 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

businesses to understand customer sentiment, respond promptly to feedback, and offer personalized experi-
ences tailored to customer needs. Both practices can be integrated within Salesforce CRM and are supported
by dedicated software tools designed for these tasks. By leveraging social listening and monitoring, companies
can make informed decisions, improve their customer experience, and enhance brand reputation in a rapidly
evolving digital landscape.29

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) Systems

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) is both a business strategy and a technology for managing inter-
actions with customers and prospects. Its primary purpose is to strengthen relationships, improve service deliv-
ery, and drive growth. A CRM system centralizes customer information, streamlines processes, and enhances
profitability by enabling better communication across departments. These systems support customer contact
management, sales tracking, marketing campaigns, and customer service--providing a unified view of the cus-
tomer lifecycle from marketing and sales through digital commerce and service interactions.30

A key function of CRM is building stronger customer relationships. By consolidating customer data, CRM
systems allow companies to better understand customer preferences, track purchase history, and record service
interactions. This insight enables personalization, proactive communication, and more consistent service deliv-
ery--all of which help create trust and loyalty. For example, sales representatives can recommend products that
align with past purchases, while service agents can review previous interactions and address issues with empa-
thy and context. Over time, this consistency and personalization help transform one-time buyers into long-
term customers.

An enterprise-wide approach to CRM allows every department--sales, marketing, customer service, opera-
tions, and beyond--to share information in one system. This collaboration prevents miscommunication and
creates a smoother customer experience. Consider the following scenario: a customer receives an order missing
a part and contacts customer service. The first agent assures them the part will be shipped quickly. Weeks later,
the customer calls back and speaks to a second agent, who apologizes but cannot provide a clear update. Later
that day, a third agent calls with the same information the customer has already received. This repetition leaves
the customer frustrated and doubting the company's reliability.

CRM software eliminates this type of breakdown. With shared access to records, agents can see all prior inter-
actions, check shipping status, and even leave notes for colleagues. In this case, the second agent could have
verified the shipment details, expedited delivery, and scheduled a follow-up call to reassure the customer. CRM
systems can also generate automatic alerts for delays, prompting proactive communication or sending auto-
mated updates with the option to connect to a live representative.

The importance of CRM is underscored by customer expectations. Research shows that 48% of customers
                                                                         CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 193

have switched brands due to poor service, while 94% say good service makes them more likely to purchase
again. Many customers now value the experience a company provides as highly as its products or services. To
meet these expectations, service professionals need visibility into the entire customer journey. Sixty-two percent
of service professionals report that all departments in their organization use the same CRM system, enabling
teams to collaborate effectively and respond empathetically. As customer interactions increasingly shift to digi-
tal channels, CRM-enabled contact centers remain vital for delivering seamless, relationship-focused service.31

Social Listening and Monitoring in Salesforce Social
Studio

Salesforce CRM uses Social Studio (part of Salesforce Marketing Cloud) for social listening and monitoring,

offering businesses a unified, data-driven approach to understand, engage, and respond to their audiences on
social media.32

Salesforce: Social Listening

· Social CRM in Salesforce enables teams to respond

to social inquiries in real time, track sentiment,

manage leads, and analyze campaign effectiveness

through built-in dashboards and connectors.

· Many enterprise-grade tools (Sprinklr, Sprout

Social, Hootsuite, Salesforce Social Studio) inte-

grate directly with Salesforce CRM, while other

affordable options (Metricool, Agorapulse, Status-

brew) are available for standalone monitoring and    Social Media
listening needs.33

· Social Studio provides real-time tracking of key-

words, hashtags, brand mentions, competitor names, and industry terms across multiple social plat-

forms.

· Built-in sentiment analysis tools allow teams to assess the mood around the brand, helping quickly iden-

tify and react to negative sentiment or capitalize on positive trends.

· The system identifies trends and emerging topics, offering insights so organizations can adapt their strat-

egy and remain relevant to customer conversations.

· Social Studio facilitates seamless data sharing between CRM and social platforms, linking social interac-

tions with customer records for unified management and personalized follow-ups.
194 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

Salesforce: Social Monitoring and Engagement

  · Salesforce Social Studio consolidates social interactions, enabling organizations to monitor and respond
      promptly to customer mentions, inquiries, and feedback, all from one integrated dashboard.

  · Users can organize and tag interactions, creating workflows that allow teams (marketing, sales, service) to
      follow up efficiently and ensure that no customer engagement goes unnoticed.

  · Engagement activities, such as responding to social posts and tracking conversation history, are automat-
      ically recorded in the CRM, giving full visibility into each customer's social engagement journey.

Salesforce: Analytics, Reporting, and Integration

  · Analytics dashboards provide detailed reports on engagement, brand sentiment, key metrics, and cam-
      paign performance for continuous improvement.

  · Seamless integration between Social Studio and Salesforce CRM enables unified customer records,
      allowing social engagement data to enhance contact and lead profiles for more targeted sales and service
      actions.

  · Social media insights can be combined with other marketing, sales, and service data, providing a com-
      plete 360-degree view of the customer and supporting personalized outreach.

Salesforce CRM, through Social Studio, empowers organizations to listen, monitor, and react to social conver-
sations in ways that drive better relationships and business outcomes. In summary, using social listening and
monitoring -- especially with powerful integrations in Salesforce CRM -- allows brands to deliver more per-
sonalized, empathetic, and effective customer experiences, thereby strengthening customer relationships and
brand loyalty.

Social Listening and Monitoring in Hootsuite Insights

Hootsuite Insights is the analytics and social listening component built into the Hootsuite platform. It enables
users to track, measure, and analyze social media conversations across multiple networks from a single dash-
board. Hootsuite supports real-time monitoring, reporting, and analysis of online mentions and social interac-
tions, helping organizations manage brand reputation, uncover customer insights, and respond proactively to
strengthen customer relationships. Both Hootsuite and Hootsuite Insights can integrate with other platforms,
such as Salesforce, to enhance social media management, analytics, and overall customer engagement.34

Hootsuite: Social Listening

  · Hootsuite enables real-time monitoring of brand mentions, competitor activities, and industry key-
                                                                        CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 195

      words across 30+ social channels, news sites, blogs, forums, and more.
  · It uses AI-powered tools (like Blue SilkTM AI and integration with Talkwalker) for advanced sentiment

      analysis, trend detection, and identification of emerging topics, providing deep insights that help organi-
      zations understand audience mood and behavior.
  · Custom dashboards, widgets, and summarized analytics let users visualize important metrics such as sen-
      timent, demographics, and engagement, making it easier to recognize recurring themes and adapt strat-
      egy accordingly.
  · Hootsuite offers historical data analysis, allowing users to benchmark metrics, compare periods, and
      forecast social trends to guide future decisions.

Hootsuite: Social Monitoring Capabilities

  · Users can create and customize streams to follow mentions, conversations, reviews, and hashtags in real
      time, enabling quick responses and active engagement with audiences.

  · Instant alerts and notifications are provided for significant shifts in sentiment or conversation spikes,
      allowing brands to react quickly to both opportunities and crises.

  · All plans come with basic listening and monitoring capabilities, but advanced tools (like Hootsuite Lis-
      tening powered by Talkwalker) are available for enterprise users, offering broader coverage, deeper ana-
      lytics, and longer historical data access.

Hootsuite: Integration and Accessibility

  · Hootsuite integrates with a wide range of additional social listening platforms and third-party analytics
      tools, providing flexibility for users to extend their listening capabilities as needed.

  · Permissions and roles allow teams to manage, organize, and tag mentions for workflow efficiency and
      accurate reporting.

Hootsuite's robust toolset allows businesses to monitor, analyze, and act on social media data efficiently, creat-
ing a competitive advantage through rapid, data-driven responses and improved customer understanding.

Social Media Strategy

A strategy ensures social media efforts align with business goals and customer expectations. Key steps include:

 1. Research: Understand target customers, behaviors, and preferences.
 2. Customer Personas: Represent the ideal audience to guide messaging.
 3. Brand Positioning: Communicate brand identity consistently across platforms.
196 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

 4. Content Planning: Share content that builds trust, provides value, and engages your audience.
 5. Standards and Monitoring: Use quality standards and social monitoring to maintain a positive brand

      image.

Social media is not just for marketing--it's a powerful ecosystem for building relationships, monitoring senti-
ment, and driving sales. Tools like Hootsuite, Salesforce, LinkedIn, and AI-powered analytics help businesses
listen, engage, and act strategically, creating stronger customer connections and measurable business growth.

   Key Takeaways

         1. Customer relations refers to the different methods and strategies that a business can use
             to forge, improve, and manage all interactions with its customers. Building customer relation-
             ships is not just a job for a single team. It is every employee's responsibility to ensure cus-
             tomers receive the best service and a positive experience when interacting with the
             company.

         2. High-performing companies view customer service as their primary revenue driver, and
             seventy-three percent of business leaders say there is a direct link between customer service
             and business performance.

         3. A few of the benefits companies gain from creating positive customer relationships
             include the following:
                   Higher customer retention
                   More customer loyalty
                   Better business reputation and brand credibility
                   Ability to maintain prices
                   Increased competitive advantage
                   Improved employee morale and attitude

         4. Businesses can develop meaningful customer relationships and create long-lasting cus­
             tomer loyalty by doing the following:
                   Communicate company values
                                                               CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 197

           Know your company journey
           Provide exceptional customer service
           Activate loyalists
           Show customer appreciation
           Connect in a deeper way
           Ask for feedback
           Continually improve the customer experience

 5. The journey mapping process brings together sales, marketing, and customer support to
     define what customers need to know before they buy, what they need after they buy, and
     how these interactions can be enhanced.

 6. Customer experience trends include the following:

           AI is becoming more evolved and seamless
           Consumers want conversational experiences
           Customers are eager for deeper personalization
           Consumers well-being and sentiment are reshaping CX
           CX teams are breaking down silos

 7. Social listening is the process of actively tracking and analyzing online conversations, men-
     tions, and discussions about a brand, competitors, products, or industry to gain valuable
     insights into customer sentiment, trends, and emerging issues.

8. Social monitoring, while closely related, focuses more on observing and responding to spe-
     cific brand mentions, comments, or queries in real time, often aiming for immediate engage-
     ment or support.

 9. Social selling uses social media to build relationships with potential customers rather than
     relying on cold calls or mass advertising. It emphasizes listening to customer needs, sharing
     relevant content, and providing value, leading to stronger connections and higher conversion
     rates.

10. According to Vonage's Global Customer Engagement Report 2022 omnichannel, commerce
     that integrates the different methods of interaction available to customers (e.g., online,
     mobile device, physical store), enhanced by artificial intelligence will help meet the
     expectations of customers. Customers expect an efficient customer experience in the first
     channel they choose. The two channels set to explode the most are video chat and chatbot.

11. Customer relationship management (CRM) is a technology for managing all company
     relationships and interactions with customers and potential customers. A CRM system helps
     companies stay connected to customers, streamline processes, and improve profitability.
198 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

        12. Salesforce CRM uses Social Studio (part of Salesforce Marketing Cloud) for social listening
             and monitoring, offering businesses a unified, data-driven approach to understand, engage,
             and respond to their audiences on social media

        13. Hootsuite CRM is widely used for social listening and monitoring by providing real-time
             tracking, analysis, and reporting of social media conversations and online mentions across
             various platforms. Its integrated features help organizations monitor brand reputation,
             uncover customer insights, and respond proactively to develop stronger customer relation-
             ships.

   End-of-Chapter Exercises

         1. Departments Responsible for Building Relationships. As stated in the chapter, it is
             every employee's responsibility to ensure customers have a positive experience interacting
             with the company. Search the Internet, speak with company employees, or hold a class dis-
             cussion (as assigned by your professor) in order to determine how four of the following
             departments participate in building positive customer relationships: Marketing/Promoting,
             Accounting, Sales, Human Resources, Information Technology, Operations/Delivery, Product/
             Service Development, Administration/Management, Purchasing/Acquiring Raw Materials.
             Make a list and share that list with your class and professor.

         2. Artificial Intelligence for Improved CX. One of the CX trends listed in the chapter is "AI is
             becoming more evolved and seamless." Use the Internet to research how businesses use AI
             to improve customer experiences. In which ways is AI becoming more involved and seam-
             less? How do you envision AI for CX evolving in the next 10 years? Share your findings with
             your class and/or professor.

         3. Consumers Emotions Reshaping CX. One of the CX trends listed in the chapter is "Con-
             sumer well-being and sentiments are reshaping CX." Use the Internet to research what this
             means, and provide a specific customer example. How are companies using customer emo-
             tions to improve CX? Discuss your findings with your class and/or professor.

         4. Loyalty Programs. Use the Internet (or visit a business) to research a specific loyalty pro-
                                                               CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 199

     gram from a specific company (e.g. Tim Hortons, Starbucks, Petro-Canada, Loblaws Super
     Store). Your professor may prefer to assign a specific company. Learn about how customers
     use the loyalty program to gain value. What about the loyalty program do you think is most
     valuable to customers? Why? How can the company afford to offer this loyalty program?
     What might happen if they did not offer the loyalty program? Do you feel this loyalty pro-
     gram is the best way for the company to gain customer loyalty? Why or why not? Share
     your research and thoughts with your class and/or professor.
 5. Brand Ambassadors. Use the Internet to research how companies connect with loyal cus-
     tomers and turn them into brand ambassadors. How do companies get these loyal cus-
     tomers to promote their products/services and become brand ambassadors? Locate a brand
     ambassador online. What is the brand ambassador getting from the relationship with the
     company? Share your findings with your class and/or professor.
 6. Creating a Community. Use the Internet, your personal experience, or speak with some-
     one, to discover how a specific company creates a community of customers. What is this
     community all about? What benefit are the customers getting? How does this help the com-
     pany build customer relationships that foster loyalty? Share your findings with your class
     and/or professor.
 7. Sharing Economy Companies. Use the Internet to research how sharing economy compa-
     nies build customer relationships. Your professor may assign a company for you to research
     or you can research one of the following: Airbnb, Uber, LIme, JustPark, ZipCar, Fon, Spota-
     home, Stashbee, Hubble, Omni, Fiverr, Snap, Couchsurfing, BlaBlaCar, or Silvernest. What is
     it about these types of businesses that customers like? What value are customers receiving?
     What type of customer experiences are they having? How are these companies building pos-
     itive customer relationships? Share your findings with your class and/or professor.
8. Personalized Customer Experiences. Use the Internet to research how companies per-
     sonalize customer experiences. Locate a specific company example and share your findings
     with your class and/or professor.
 9. CRM Comparison. Use the Internet to research several CRM systems. Determine which sys-
     tems would work for small businesses and which would be best for larger organizations.
     What are the pros and cons of each? Which are the most popular? Share your findings with
     your class and/or professor.
10. Co-Creation Examples. Use the Internet to research which companies are co-creating with
     their customers. Locate specific examples of co-creating experiences or services (rather than
     products). What are a few of the successful projects companies have had when co-creating
     with customers? Share your findings with your class and/or professor.
200 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

        11. Create a Journey Map. Watch the YouTube video, Customer Journey Mapping 101, and then
             create a journey map for a specific customer segment that would shop at Canadian Tire (or
             other company) on a fairly regular basis. Did you identify pain points? How might the com-
             pany do better? Share your map with your class and/or professor.

        12. Trailhead Training. Visit Trailhead at Trailhead | The fun way to learn (salesforce.com) and
             complete the Customer Service with Salesforce: Quick Look learning module for free. It
             should only take you about 10 minutes to complete. Scan through the learning modules for
             Salesforce and select three you think would be important training to offer employees of any
             organization. Share your suggested learning modules with your class and/or professor.

   Self-Check Exercise - Co-Creation Customer Relationships

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
                          https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=218#h5p-11
                                                                        CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 201

   Additional Resources

         1. 7 Types of Customer Relationship
         2. 5 Customer Service Trends to Watch in 2023
         3. Salesforce State of Service Report
         4. Hubspot Free CRM Software
         5. Customer Relationship Management Free Course (1 hour)
         6. An Introduction to Customer Relationship Management Free Course (3 hours)
         7. Customer Relationship Management in Business Services Free Course (4 hours)
        8. Customer Relationship Management Free Course (6 weeks, 3-5 hours per week)

References

(Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

Media Attributions

  · pexels-ketut-subiyanto-4350104 is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · ux-indonesia-w00FkE6e8zE-unsplash © UX Indonesia is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons

      Zero) license
  · Vonage Expected Usage of Video Chat and Chatbot © Vonage is licensed under a All Rights Reserved

      license
  · Airbnb Kitchen of Rental Property © Peggy is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license
  · feedback-3709752_1280 © Mohamed Hassan is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero)

      license
  · Social Media Monitoring © Mudassar Iqbal | Pixabay
  · Mobile Phone Social Media © Gerd Altmann | Pixabay
  202 | CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS

Notes

        1. Sapardic, J. (2023, August 30). What is customer relations? Definition, benefits & tips. https://www.tidio.com/blog/
             customer-relationship/

        2. Zendesk Blog. (n.d.). Customer relations 101: Beginner's guide to building relationships. https://www.zendesk.com/
             blog/customer-relations/

        3. Zendesk Blog. (n.d.). Customer relations 101: Beginner's guide to building relationships. https://www.zendesk.com/
             blog/customer-relations/

        4. Zendesk Blog. (n.d.). Customer relations 101: Beginner's guide to building relationships. https://www.zendesk.com/
             blog/customer-relations/

        5. Zendesk Blog. (n.d.). 7 ways to build customer loyalty (and why it's important). https://www.zendesk.com/blog/build-
             customer-loyalty/

        6. Zendesk Blog. (n.d.). 7 ways to build customer loyalty (and why it's important). https://www.zendesk.com/blog/build-
             customer-loyalty/

        7. windmill. (n.d.). Customer journey mapping: The Windmill guide to design thinking. https://www.windmill.digital/
             customer-journey-mapping-the-windmill-guide-to-design-thinking/

        8. windmill. (n.d.). Customer journey mapping: The Windmill guide to design thinking. https://www.windmill.digital/
             customer-journey-mapping-the-windmill-guide-to-design-thinking/

        9. Oson, S. (2022, June 2). 7 ways to build customer loyalty (and why it's important). https://www.zendesk.com/blog/
             build-customer-loyalty/

       10. Srivastava, S. (2023, November 3). AI in retail - How artificial intelligence is improving the retail shopping experiences.
             https://appinventiv.com/blog/impact-of-ai-in-retail/

       11. Srivastava, S. (2023, November 3). AI in retail - How artificial intelligence is improving the retail shopping experiences.
             https://appinventiv.com/blog/impact-of-ai-in-retail/

       12. Srivastava, S. (2023, November 3). AI in retail - How artificial intelligence is improving the retail shopping experiences.
             https://appinventiv.com/blog/impact-of-ai-in-retail/

       13. Eyo, I. (2023, January 4). 10 ways AI will improve the customer experience in 2023. https://www.zendesk.com/blog/ai-
             customer-experience/

       14. Salesforce. (2021, April 23). How to use AI to personalize your customer's experience. [Video]. YouTube.
             https://youtu.be/BVMDz6FUzxc?si=YakhaQ_eA609SUDz

       15. Vonage. (2022). The global customer engagement report 2022: Maximizing the omnichannel CX with AI.
             https://www.vonage.com/resources/publications/global-customer-engagement-report/

       16. Zendesk. (2023). Empowering consumers with conversational experiences. https://cxtrends.zendesk.com/trends/trend-2
       17. Zendesk. (2023). Customers are eager for deeper personalization. https://cxtrends.zendesk.com/trends/trend-3
       18. Shaw, C. (2019, December 13). Four customer experience lessons from The Airbnb Way. https://www.mycustomer.com/

             customer-experience/loyalty/four-customer-experience-lessons-from-the-airbnb-way
       19. Shaw, C. (2019, December 13). Four customer experience lessons from The Airbnb Way. https://www.mycustomer.com/

             customer-experience/loyalty/four-customer-experience-lessons-from-the-airbnb-way
       20. Zaidi, T. (n.d.). Airbnb Experiences explained [Plus how to book, examples]. https://trvlguides.com/articles/airbnb-

             experiences
       21. Airbnb Help Center. (n.d.). About Airbnb: What it is and how it works. https://www.airbnb.ca/help/article/

             2503?locale=en&_set_bev_on_new_domain=1696777926_ODlmYmE5MTQzMGZk
       22. Ruiz, J. (2021, May 25). 3 major ways Airbnb is improving the user experience for guests and hosts. https://thepoints-
                                                                  CHAPTER 9: BUILDING STRONG CUSTOMER RELATIONSHIPS | 203

     guy.com/news/airbnb-improved-user-experience/

23. Mah, K. (n.d.). How Airbnb personalization really affects rankings (14 Major Takeaways). https://higherbook-
     ings.com/airbnb-personalization/

24. Rouke, P (2016, October 5). Airbnb: How its customer experience is revolutionising the travel industry. https://econsul-
     tancy.com/airbnb-how-its-customer-experience-is-revolutionising-the-travel-industry/

25. Rouke, P (2016, October 5). https://econsultancy.com/airbnb-how-its-customer-experience-is-revolutionising-the-
     travel-industry/

26. Zendesk. (2023). Consumer well-being and sentiment are reshaping CX. https://cxtrends.zendesk.com/trends/trend-4

27. Zendesk. (2023). CX teams are breaking down silos. https://cxtrends.zendesk.com/trends/trend-5

28. Lama, D., Debayan, P. (2025, July 7). What is social listening? All you need to know. https://www.sprinklr.com/blog/
     social-listening/

29. Oliver, E. (2025, February 20). The new age of social listening--8 ways it helps increase your brand's value to consumers.
     https://www.agilitypr.com/pr-news/content-media-relations/the-new-age-of-social-listening-8-ways-it-helps-increase-
     your-brands-value-to-consumers/

30. Salesforce. (n.d.). CRM 101: What is CRM? https://www.salesforce.com/ca/crm/what-is-crm/?d=cta-
     resources-1-what-is-crmhttps://www.salesforce.com/ca/form/contact/crm-starter-pack/?d=cta-mustache-1-crm-
     starter-formhttps://www.salesforce.com/ca/?ir=1

31. Afshar, V. (2022, September 8). 10 key customer service trends for 2022 and beyond. https://www.zdnet.com/article/
     10-key-customer-service-trends-for-2022-and-beyond/

32. Salesforce. (n.d.) What is social CRM? https://www.salesforce.com/ca/crm/social-crm/

33. Pennings, E. (2025, September 15). I tested the 7 best free social media monitoring tools -- here's how they stack up.
     https://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/29437/20-free-social-media-and-brand-monitoring-tools-that-
     rock.aspx

34. Hootsuite. (n.d.). Protect your brand, outpace the competition, and stand out across all media. https://www.hoot-
     suite.com/platform/listening
204 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

CHAPTER 10: LEADING A CUSTOMER
CENTRIC STRATEGY

   Chapter 10 Learning Outcomes

     After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
         1. Describe two challenges leaders encounter while building a customer-centric organization.
         2. Describe three things a leader can do to make customer experience a company priority.
         3. Describe three habits of a customer-centric leader.
         4. List three characteristics of a strong customer service vision.
         5. State three questions managers can ask employees to determine if they are engaged with
             the company's customer service vision.
         6. Describe how to empower employees to deliver excellent customer service.
         7. List three sources for establishing quality standards.
        8. Discuss why it is important for businesses to use the right metrics when measuring cus-
             tomer service quality.

Build a Customer-Centric Organization

"The uniquely cross-functional nature of effective customer-experience efforts puts a premium on smart gov-
ernance. Adequately addressing the challenge requires a dedicated effort on three levels. First, a customer-cen-
tric leadership structure must ultimately report to the chief executive and should be designed to stimulate
cross-department activity and collaboration. Second, leaders must commit to demonstrating behaviors and
serving as role models to deliver customer-experience goals to frontline workers and refine and reinforce those
goals over the long term. Finally, it is necessary to put in place the correct metrics and incentives that are criti-
cal for aligning typically siloed units/departments into effective cross-functional teams."1
                     LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 205

Overcome Challenges

Building a customer-centric organization takes time and has some challenges. If customer centricity already

flows through the DNA of an organization, the challenges will be minimal, but if a company is just beginning

to build the customer-centric mindset into core values, a few challenges may be encountered. A few of these
challenges are listed below.2

· Lack of Buy-In. Executive commitment across the organization is vital, especially when building cus-
   tomer centricity. Leaders need to set the tone and provide resources and support to make things happen.

· Disparate Data. It can be hard to break down or connect existing silos within an organization. Finding
   ways to share data and information freely can help ensure nothing about the customer experience is lost
   in the weeds.

· Resistance to Change. Certain employee beliefs can hinder customer centricity. For example, designers
   can be held back by the notion that focusing on the customer takes too much attention away from the
   product they're creating. Others may have a "that's not my job" mentality about taking customers into
   more consideration. They must be reminded that everyone has a common goal, no matter what their
   role: delivering the best customer experience.

· Ineffectual Processes and Tools. Not having the right technology to process customer data and draw
   actionable insights means you won't be able to respond to customer needs proactively or otherwise. The
   right processes are needed to ensure that the customer's voice is heard and used throughout the organiza­
   tion.

· Inadequate Employee Support. Building a customer-centric culture is not a "set it and forget it"
   process. It requires daily commitment, and a key part of that is empowering employees. People across the
   organization should feel encouraged to do what's right for and by the customer.
206 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

Research conducted by customer service provider
Arvato revealed that businesses tend to rate the cus­
tomer experience their company delivers higher
than consumers do.3

Despite the attention to customer experience that is
widely stated in corporate missions, visions, and val­
ues, actions speak louder than vision statements.
When it comes to resources and budget, CEOs tend
to prioritize technology over people or processes.
Even when company leaders recognize that customer
service could be better, they often will look to the lat­
est technology to provide the solution without delv­
ing deeper into customers' true wants and needs or
gathering insights from frontline staff.4

Contact center leaders cited poor cross-departmen-
tal collaboration and lack of understanding and
respect for the center as two of the top three chal-
lenges they are currently dealing with, and the num-
ber one challenge being agent attrition.5

Leaders have a huge impact on building a customer-         A person holding a sign saying "We are here to do
centric culture. The leader must be customer-              better"
obsessed and share those values and goals with the

company employees. Does the leader walk the talk? Does the leader put customers first? Are products, ser-

vices, and processes created with customer needs and wants shaping results? If the company is focused on

short-term results or is investing in areas that do not improve the customer experience, employees will observe

this, and leaders will see behaviours from employees that are not customer-focused. Leaders who want to

deliver exceptional customer experiences need to invest in targeted employee incentives that will steer perfor-

mance toward exceptional service.

Become a Customer-Centric Leader

Watch "A Customer-Centric Culture Needs a Leader" YouTube video below to learn why leadership is so
important to creating a customer-centric culture.6 Transcript for "A Customer-Centric Culture Needs a Cus-
tomer-Centric Leader" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
       LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 207

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=96#oem­

bed-1

Prioritize Customer Experience

In building a customer-centric culture, leaders in customer experience pursue a range of approaches to over-
come the complexities of making the customer experience a priority. Several elements form the core of their
successful efforts. They include the following:7

 1. Set up a dedicated team for customer experience. This allows a company to maintain a continuous
      focus on customer experience across segments, brands, geographies, and functional areas.

 2. Establish C-suite engagement. Given the cross-functional collaboration required, the CEO must
      make the customer experience an active priority.

 3. Fit the customer-experience team into the organizational fabric. If not, customer experience
      transformation efforts may drown in a sea of organizational confusion.

"Disney makes use of a simple leadership framework that links the delivery of business results to customer sat-
isfaction and measures that satisfaction via two key indicators: "propensity to return" to a Disney experience
and "propensity to recommend." Disney's framing also stipulates that the way to satisfy customers is through
engaged employees. For Disney's business leaders, the logic is clear: their task is to develop excellent employ-
ees, who in turn help to create satisfied customers, leading to business results."8

Apply Leadership Principles

To create a customer-centric organization, leaders apply the following principles:

 1. Model specific behaviours. Managers must walk the walk. Customer centricity is taught to agents
      and should be supported in the company vision, mission, and values as well as modeled by management.

 2. Foster understanding and commitment among employees and managers. Making a connection
      between improved customer satisfaction and bottom-line financial results will help all employees under-
      stand the importance of exemplary customer service.

 3. Develop capabilities and skills. Train agents in customer-centric behaviours, but also train manage-
      ment so they are able to coach and support the team. Hire for fit.
208 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

 4. Reinforce behaviours through formal mechanisms. Financial incentives can help, but nonfinancial
      recognition schemes are more powerful.

Practice the 8 Habits of Customer-Centric Leaders

Leaders who build and sustain customer-centric organizations consistently practice certain habits that keep
customers at the core of every decision. Refer to Table 10.1 for the top 8 habits of the most customer-centric
company leaders.9
                                      LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 209

                         Table 10.1: 8 Habits of Customer-Centric Leaders

Habit                    Description                               Action Steps
1. Gather Customer Data
                         Customer-centric leaders collect and use  Regularly review customer feedback, surveys,
2. Continually Learn     customer insights to understand needs,    and service interactions. Implement
                         preferences, and pain points. They see    customer journey mapping to identify gaps
3. Establish Standards   data as the foundation for empathy and    and opportunities. Share data dashboards
                         better decision-making.                   across teams to keep customer voices visible.
4. Incentivize Actions
                         These leaders are lifelong learners who   Dedicate time monthly to review industry
5. Promote Cross-Team    stay current with customer                reports, emerging trends, and customer
Collaboration            expectations, industry trends, and new    insights. Encourage teams to attend learning
                         technologies. They encourage a growth     events and share key takeaways. Build a
6. Set the Foundation    mindset throughout the organization.      culture of curiosity by rewarding
                                                                   experimentation and learning.
7. Make
Customer-Informed        Leaders set clear expectations for how    Define customer experience standards (e.g.,
Decisions                customers should be treated. Standards    response times, service tone). Train
8. Leverage Design       create consistency, build trust, and      employees to meet or exceed these
Thinking                 ensure every touchpoint reflects the      expectations. Regularly audit interactions to
                         company's values.                         confirm standards are being met.

                         Customer-centric leaders align            Tie employee performance metrics to
                         recognition and rewards with behaviors    customer outcomes (NPS,
                         that improve customer experience.         satisfaction). Publicly celebrate employees
                         Incentives reinforce that customer-first  who go above and beyond for
                         actions matter.                           customers. Offer incentives for ideas that
                                                                   improve customer journeys.

                         Great experiences rarely come from one    Hold cross-department CX meetings to
                         department. Leaders break down silos,     share insights and align priorities. Create
                         ensuring marketing, operations, sales,    shared goals across teams that link directly to
                         and support work together to deliver      customer outcomes. Encourage joint
                         seamless customer journeys.               projects that blend skills from different areas.

                         Customer-centric leaders build the        Define a clear CX vision statement and
                         systems, culture, and processes that      embed it in company strategy. Invest in
                         enable great experiences to happen        infrastructure (CRM tools, service training,
                         consistently. They ensure CX is woven     customer journey analytics). Align
                         into strategy, structure, and values.     recruitment and onboarding to emphasize
                                                                   customer-first values.

                         Leaders prioritize decisions based on     Require customer data or feedback to be
                         customer impact. They weigh customer      part of every business case. Ask: "What
                         insights as heavily as financial metrics  problem are we solving for the customer?"
                         and ensure major initiatives serve        before approving projects. Pilot new ideas
                         customer needs.                           with customers before scaling widely.

                         Customer-centric leaders use design       Run workshops that involve customers
                         thinking to innovate around customer      directly in co-creating solutions. Prototype
                         needs. They apply empathy,                and test new ideas quickly to validate
                         experimentation, and iteration to create  assumptions. Train teams in design thinking
                         solutions that truly work for people.     principles to embed empathy-driven
                                                                   innovation.
210 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

Create a Customer Service Vision

Companies with strong service cultures take the time to clearly define what outstanding service means to
them. They do this in their mission and vision statements, in their employee training, in their advertising, and
in the behaviour of their managers and leaders. They ensure their products, services, and processes are
designed with consumer wants and needs in mind. Being customer-centric means that every department in
the company understands that the customer comes first and everything they do is to obtain, retain, and build
relationships with customers.

A customer service vision is a shared definition of outstanding service that gets all employees working in the
same direction. A strong customer service vision has three characteristics:10

 1. It's simple and easy to understand. A vision should not be too complicated or too long; it should
      bring clarity so all employees can understand it and act accordingly.

 2. It's focused on customers. Focusing on profit or expanding market share may be the end goal, but cus-
      tomer-centric companies achieve those goals by focusing on their customers.

 3. It reflects who the company is now, and who the company aspires to be in the future. It should
      be grounded in reality so the vision feels authentic to employees. It's about what is working for the com-
      pany now and what the company will build upon in the future.
                                                     LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 211

Company Vision Statements

Amazon - "To be Earth's most customer-centric
company, where customers can find and discover
anything they might want to buy online."11

Disney - "To make people happy."12

IKEA - "To create a better everyday life for the
many people."13

L'Oréal - "To provide the best in cosmetics innova-
tion to women and men around the world with
respect for their diversity."14

Microsoft - "To help people throughout the world
realize their full potential."15

Starbucks - "To inspire and nurture the human
spirit - one person, one cup, and one neighborhood
at a time."16

Zappos - "To provide the best customer service
possible. Deliver `WOW' through service."17

Engage Employees with the                            A person holding a sign saying "Where customers
Customer Service Vision                              matter"

Employees need to know that organizational success is defined by the customer service vision. Engaged

employees help fulfill the vision with the customers they serve. There are three questions you can ask employ-
ees to evaluate employee engagement in a customer-centric organization. 18 These include:

1. What is the customer service vision? Employees need to know it and where it is. It may be in a book,
    online, written on a poster, or in some other location.

2. What does the customer service vision mean? Employees should do more than just memorize it; they
    should be able to explain it in their own words.

3. How do you personally contribute? Employees should be able to describe how their individual role
    contributes to fulfilling the vision.
212 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

The customer service vision should be formally announced or introduced by the CEO or a high-ranking man-
ager. Companies must hire for the right fit; hire candidates who agree with or have personal goals aligned
with the company's vision. Training should then be provided to employees to help them understand how
their role aligns with the company's customer service vision. Ensure employees receive one-to-one coaching
from their immediate supervisor as needed. The goal is to verify that employees can answer all three of the
above questions consistently. Finally, empower employees to enable them to provide excellent customer ser-
vice and care, and be sure that company leaders are demonstrating their belief in the vision through their
everyday behaviors, discussions, and decisions they make.

Empower Employees to Deliver the Customer Service Vision

Employee empowerment means giving employees the authority, the right technology, systems, and the free-
dom to go the extra mile to make customers happy. This requires thorough training of customer service teams
to enable employees to identify and act on the opportunities to enhance the quality of support. Giving
employees ownership for their own work will not only boost motivation but also increase service quality, team
productivity, and quick decision-making."19

Empowerment doesn't mean allowing employees to do whatever they want. It means enabling them to deliver
service that's consistent with the customer service vision. Empowered employees need resources to serve their
customers, the best-known procedures for serving consistently and efficiently, and the appropriate level of
authority to handle unusual or unexpected situations.20

Empower employees in the following ways:

  · Educate the frontline call center agents on branding, culture, and values so they deliver service that is
      consistent with these values.

  · Provide agents with a 360-degree view of customers so they can make data-driven decisions.
  · Equip agents with the right tools so they can resolve issues at the first point of contact.
  · Cultivate innovation by encouraging autonomy and creative problem-solving.
  · Make agents integral members of the organization so they are proud to provide amazing service.21

Watch the "Customer Experience: Empower Employees with Decisions" YouTube video below to learn more
about employee empowerment.22 Transcript for "Customer Experience: Empower Employees with Deci-
sions" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
       LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 213

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=96#oem­

bed-2

Set SMART Goals Aligned with the Customer Service Vision

Effective goals should follow the SMART framework: Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Time-
bound. Goals for individual agents must be clear and realistic, while broader contact center goals should be
achievable and tied to measurable performance.

Just as important, goals must be aligned with the organization's customer service vision. If goals are not con-
nected to the vision, employees may focus on the wrong priorities. For example, if agents are rewarded solely
for completing a high volume of calls, they may rush conversations, leaving customer problems unresolved.
Similarly, if strict call-time limits are imposed, agents may transfer or end calls prematurely, frustrating cus-
tomers. These are examples of bad goals driven by external incentives. In contrast, good goals connect directly
to the service vision and encourage employees to act in ways that strengthen the customer experience.

Organizations often use metrics such as customer satisfaction, productivity, and revenue to evaluate service
and performance. Goals should not only connect to these metrics but also reinforce quality standards--such as
responsiveness, empathy, and accuracy--so that efficiency does not come at the expense of effectiveness. Goals
can be an important signal to employees about what to focus on and how to prioritize their work. The danger
is that some goals can push employees away from the customer service vision rather than towards it.23

In the contact center industry, there is a tendency to prioritize efficiency over effectiveness. For example, mea-
suring average handling time (AHT) may drive speed but reduce quality. Instead, focusing on first contact res-
olution (FCR) aligns better with the customer service vision by ensuring issues are resolved thoroughly the first
time a customer calls.24

Technology can also support SMART goals when used strategically. An IVR system, for instance, can stream-
line interactions by routing customers to the right agent on the first attempt. But if poorly configured, it can
create an endless loop of frustration and damage both the customer experience and the organization's reputa-
tion.25

Finally, goals should reflect the connection between employee satisfaction and customer satisfaction. Happy,
supported employees are more likely to deliver high-quality service. Even small improvements--comfortable
214 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

workspaces, clean facilities, and healthy food options--can positively influence morale, which in turn strength-
ens the customer experience.26

Create Quality Standards

Customer service standards refer to the level of performance customers can consistently expect from a com-
pany. These standards include factors such as speed, accuracy, transparency, accessibility, empowerment, effi-
ciency, and the friendliness of staff.27

Improving quality and customer service brings numerous benefits, including stronger customer loyalty,
increased revenues and profitability, positive word-of-mouth, and higher employee engagement. What defines
good, poor, or exceptional customer service ultimately depends on customer expectations.Quality refers to
the attributes of a product or service, while Standards outline the requirements, specifications, guidelines, or
characteristics that establish expectations for customer service. Standards serve as a blueprint for what should
consistently happen during customer interactions and provide a model to replicate across the organization.

There are three sources for establishing quality standards, as listed below.28

1. Customer expectations. These are always chang-       Customer Feedback by Star Rating
    ing, so companies must continually innovate. Meet-
    ing customer expectations is a combination of
    people, processes, and technologies.

2. The organization's mission, vision, and values.
    Quality standards should support or align with
    these core principles.

3. Stakeholders. A variety of groups shape service
    standards, including:

 Government regulators, who set laws and
  compliance requirements (e.g., privacy, safety, or accessibility standards).

 Suppliers and partners, who influence service levels through agreements, delivery times, or product
  quality.

 Employees whose training, engagement, and feedback help establish realistic and effective stan-
  dards.

 Shareholders or owners often push for performance standards that align with financial goals and
  corporate reputation.

 Industry associations, which may set benchmarks or best-practice guidelines for quality and service.
 The community, whose expectations for ethical practices, sustainability, and corporate responsibil-
                                                                                                LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 215

            ity increasingly shape standards.
          Customers, who are considered separately, as their direct experience and feedback remain the most

            important driver of quality.

Additional sources can also provide valuable insights:

          Industry benchmarks and best practices. Comparing performance to recognized standards in the
            industry helps ensure competitiveness and relevance.

          Competitor analysis. Evaluating how competitors deliver service can highlight strengths, weak-
            nesses, and opportunities to differentiate.

          Historical performance data. Past performance trends, customer service metrics, and previous suc-
            cesses or failures provide a baseline for improvement.

          Compliance and regulatory requirements. Standards set by regulators or accreditation bodies can
            shape minimum service expectations.

          Employee input. Frontline staff often have first-hand insights into where standards are met or
            missed, making their feedback essential for realistic and achievable quality measures.

"Customers frequently rank consistency as a primary driver of good customer service. To monitor the quality
and consistency of your team's replies, consider implementing quality assurance or conversation reviews. Pro-
viding ongoing feedback through reviews can ensure that your entire team is delivering excellent customer ser-
vice."29

Examples of Customer Service Quality Standards

Quality standards can be both quantitative (like response times) and qualitative (like tone, courtesy, and con-
sistency).

  · Response Time. Emails will be acknowledged within 4 business hours. Live chat inquiries must be
      answered within 30 seconds. Phone calls should be answered within 3 rings.

  · Accuracy and Transparency. All information provided to customers must be factually correct and up
      to date. If a resolution cannot be provided immediately, staff must set clear expectations (e.g., "I will get
      back to you by 3 p.m. tomorrow").

  · Courtesy and Professionalism. Every customer must be greeted with a friendly, respectful tone, using
      their name where possible. Staff must avoid jargon and communicate in clear, plain language.

  · Accessibility. Services and support must be available through multiple channels (phone, email, chat, in-
      person). Websites and digital services must meet accessibility standards (e.g., WCAG guidelines).

  · Problem Resolution. Customer complaints must be acknowledged within 24 hours and resolved
216 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

      within 3 business days, unless otherwise communicated. If an issue cannot be resolved, the case must be
      escalated according to a defined process.
  · Consistency Across Locations. Regardless of location or employee, customers should receive the same
      level of service quality. For example, product returns should follow a uniform policy company-wide.
  · Follow-Up and Feedback. After resolving an issue, employees will follow up with the customer within
      48 hours to ensure satisfaction. Customers are to be invited to share feedback via surveys or review
      requests.

Sometimes, there is resistance to creating quality standards, as some managers feel these standards are too rigid
and unnecessary. The best way to combat resistance is to demonstrate what quality is and the costs when
quality is lacking.

Establishing quality standards also provides a framework for training and evaluating employees. When staff
clearly understand the expected level of performance, they can adjust their behaviors and decision-making
accordingly. For example, if the standard emphasizes fast response times, employees will prioritize answering
calls or emails quickly. If accuracy and transparency are central, employees will be more mindful of providing
correct information and setting realistic expectations. Quality standards, therefore, act as both a roadmap and
a benchmark--guiding behavior while also making it possible to measure whether service is meeting expecta-
tions.

Another important aspect of creating quality standards is adaptability. While consistency is key, standards
cannot remain static. Customers' needs, technologies, and competitive environments evolve constantly. For
instance, what was once considered fast response time (such as returning an email within 24 hours) is now
often seen as too slow, with many customers expecting real-time chat support. Companies that regularly review
and update their standards demonstrate not only a commitment to excellence but also a willingness to inno-
vate in response to shifting customer expectations.

Quality standards also play a role in shaping organizational culture. By linking service standards to the orga-
nization's mission, vision, and values, companies reinforce the idea that service excellence is part of their iden-
tity--not simply a box to check. This alignment can foster employee pride and a sense of purpose, which in
turn enhances engagement and reduces turnover. Employees who feel connected to the company's service goals
are more likely to act as ambassadors for the brand, providing the kind of authentic, human-centered service
that customers value most.

Finally, creating quality standards provides an opportunity to quantify the cost of poor service and the value of
good service. For example, companies may track the expense of service failures, such as refunds, lost customers,
or negative online reviews. Conversely, they may measure the positive effects of high-quality service through
increased retention, repeat purchases, or customer referrals. These metrics not only justify the need for stan-
dards but also give managers concrete evidence to guide future improvements. When framed in this way, qual-
                                                                                                LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 217

ity standards shift from being perceived as restrictive rules to being seen as tools for success, both for employees
and the organization as a whole.

   Company Examples of Quality Standards in Action

     A practical example of quality standards in action can be seen at Starbucks. The company empha-
     sizes consistency in both product and service across its global locations. Customers expect their
     favorite beverage to taste the same whether they order it in Toronto, Tokyo, or London. To meet
     this expectation, Starbucks has strict product preparation standards, as well as clear guidelines for
     customer interaction, such as greeting customers warmly, writing their name on the cup, and main-
     taining a friendly tone. These service standards reinforce the brand's mission of being a "third
     place" between home and work where people feel welcome.30
     Another example comes from Amazon, where quality standards are built around speed, conve-
     nience, and accuracy. The company's customer service standards include offering rapid responses,
     easy returns, and 24/7 accessibility through multiple channels. Amazon invests heavily in technol-
     ogy and processes--such as automated order tracking and AI-powered customer support--to
     ensure service consistency. Their famous "customer obsession" principle is reflected in the stan-
     dards they set, which prioritize customer trust and hassle-free problem resolution.31
     The Ritz-Carlton is often cited for having some of the most rigorous and well-defined customer
     service quality standards in the hospitality industry. These standards are embedded in its "Gold
     Standards" program and include:

          · A Credo Card, which every employee carries and refers to, that encapsulates the values and
             service culture expected in all interactions.

          · The "Three Steps of Service"--pre-defined service steps or rituals that staff follow in guest
             interactions (e.g., greeting guests, anticipating needs, offering help).

          · A set of 12 Service Values that cover both functional and emotional elements of service
             (cleanliness, safety, empathy, responsiveness, professionalism, etc.). These values differenti-
             ate what is "just acceptable service" from what is "exceptional, memorable service.

     As part of ensuring consistency, The Ritz-Carlton has over 3,000 brand standards that apply across
     its hotels globally. These standards cover everything from how quickly phones should be answered
     and how employees should greet guests, to the appearance of uniforms, room cleanliness, and how
218 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

     staff should resolve guest issues. These standards make sure that whether a guest stays at a Ritz-
     Carlton in New York or Tokyo, the level of service is recognizable and consistent. They also tie
     closely into the company's mission and values, emphasizing not just efficiency and accuracy, but
     emotional engagement and creating memorable experiences.32
     These examples demonstrate that quality standards are not abstract rules--they are embedded
     into daily operations and customer interactions. Companies that apply standards effectively create
     a recognizable, reliable experience that customers come to trust and value. By ensuring these stan-
     dards are lived out in practice, organizations turn their service promises into tangible realities.

Use Metrics That Matter

Metrics are fundamental to effective business decision-making. They provide leaders with insights into opera-
tional efficiency, financial performance, and customer satisfaction. In customer-centric organizations, metrics
extend beyond internal performance measures--they reflect the customer's experience and indicate how effec-
tively the company meets their needs. Metrics also serve as a communication tool for employees, clarifying
expectations, reinforcing priorities, and holding teams accountable.

In customer service, both quantitative and qualitative metrics are critical. Historically, contact centers empha-
sized measures like Average Handling Time (AHT), Calls per Hour, or First Call Resolution (FCR). While
these metrics capture operational efficiency, modern organizations balance efficiency indicators with experi-
ence-focused metrics to ensure the service delivered aligns with customer expectations. Examples include:

  · Customer Retention and Churn: Tracks repeat versus lost customers, linking service to revenue.
  · Net Promoter Score (NPS): Gauges customer loyalty and likelihood to recommend.
  · Customer Lifetime Value (CLV): Reflects how valuable each customer is over the course of your rela-

      tionship.
  · Customer Effort Score (CES): Assesses ease of resolving an issue.
  · Quality Scoring: Evaluates interactions for tone, empathy, adherence to policies, and problem-solving.
  · Employee Engagement: Measures how motivated and empowered agents are, correlating with service

      quality.
  · Customer Satisfaction (CSAT): Measures contentment after an interaction.
  · First Contact Resolution (FCR): Tracks the percentage of issues resolved on the first interaction.
  · Service Level Metrics: Percent of calls or tickets resolved within target timelines.

These metrics can be applied across contact centers, in-person support, digital channels, and email communi-
                                                                                                LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 219

cation. A customer-centric approach emphasizes outcomes that enhance satisfaction and loyalty rather than
simply increasing volume or operational efficiency. By combining operational and experience-focused metrics,
organizations can make data-driven decisions that improve both employee performance and the overall cus-
tomer experience.

Measuring Customer-Centric Success

Customer centricity is a strategic investment, not just a soft skill. Like any investment, it requires measurement
to identify strengths, uncover friction points, and drive continuous improvement. Three core metrics--Cus-
tomer Churn Rate, NPS, and CLV--are particularly valuable in assessing customer-centric performance.

1. Customer Churn Rate

Churn Rate reveals when and why customers leave. Causes may include unmet expectations, poor onboarding,
or limited perceived value from products or services. Monitoring churn exposes weak points in the customer
journey and highlights areas for improvement.

Why it matters: Retaining customers is more cost-effective than acquiring new ones. It costs five to seven times
more to acquire a new customer than to retain an existing one, and even a 5% increase in retention can increase
profits by up to 95%. Companies with high retention grow faster and spend less on acquisition.

Formula to calculate Churn Rate %: (Number of customers lost during a time period) ÷ (Average total cus-
tomers during that period) x 100

What to watch for: Voluntary churn (customers choosing to leave) often signals dissatisfaction or poor fit.
Involuntary churn (billing issues, lapses) can often be resolved with better systems and communication.

Practical tip: Combine churn analysis with qualitative feedback--exit surveys, support transcripts, or inter-
views--to identify root causes and guide targeted improvements that strengthen customer loyalty.

2. Net Promoter Score (NPS)

Net Promoter Score (NPS) provides a clear view of how customers perceive a company and their likelihood to
recommend its products or services. It is a strong predictor of customer loyalty, referral potential, and overall
brand reputation.

How it works: Customers are asked, "How likely are you to recommend this product or service to a friend or
colleague?" Responses are given on a scale from 0 to 10 and categorized as:
220 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

  · Promoters (9-10): Loyal champions who refer others and renew often.
  · Passives (7-8): Neutral customers, vulnerable to switching.
  · Detractors (0-6): Dissatisfied customers who may churn or leave negative reviews.

Formula to calculate NPS: % Promoters - % Detractors = NPS score (-100 to +100)

What to track: Companies should run NPS surveys at multiple touchpoints, such as after onboarding, support
interactions, or quarterly check-ins. Segmenting responses by customer type, region, or product line helps
identify trends and areas for improvement.

Practical tip: Include follow-up questions to understand why a score was given. Insights can reveal whether
low scores are due to product issues, service gaps, or misaligned expectations, allowing targeted improvements
to enhance loyalty.

3. Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)

CLV estimates the total value a customer brings over their relationship with the company, guiding strategic
investment in acquisition, retention, and expansion.

How to calculate CLV: CLV = (Average annual revenue per customer × Average customer lifespan) - Cost to
acquire

Example: If a customer spends $2,000/year and stays for 5 years, and it costs $1,000 to acquire them: CLV =
($2,000 × 5) - $1,000 = $9,000

What to watch for:

  · CLV by segment: Identify the highest-value customers and focus efforts on retaining them.
  · CLV vs. Customer Acquisition Cost (CAC): Ensure acquisition spending does not exceed the expected

      value of the customer.
  · Trends in CLV: Rising or falling CLV may indicate changes in product usage, pricing, or market align-

      ment.

Practical tip: Track CLV over time to evaluate how improvements in customer experience--such as faster
onboarding or more responsive service--enhance long-term value.

In summary, Churn rate, NPS, and CLV provide complementary insights that create a complete picture of
customer-centric success. Churn highlights where customers are leaving, NPS reveals how they feel about your
brand, and CLV quantifies the long-term value of those relationships. Together, they allow organizations to
identify weak points, prioritize improvements, and make strategic decisions that enhance loyalty, increase rev-
                                                                                                LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 221

enue, and strengthen overall customer experience. Monitoring all three ensures that efforts to delight cus-
tomers are both measurable and impactful.

Applying Metrics in Operations

To make decisions that positively impact customers, both employees and managers must rely on real-time and
historical data. Metrics are most effective when integrated into daily operations. Companies enhance cus-
tomer centricity by:33

  · Using software that provides comprehensive dashboards and real-time metrics.
  · Empowering agents with real-time and historical data so they can make informed decisions that enhance

      the customer experience.
  · Aligning KPIs to the customer lifecycle and key touchpoints (CLV, NPS, CES).
  · Linking agent performance and feedback to metrics for continuous improvement.
  · Fostering a culture of data-driven decision-making.

When measuring how well quality standards are being met, the scoring system must reflect the standards and
behaviors you want to reinforce. A flawed system can overvalue less important skills while minimizing the crit-
ical ones, making it necessary to test and adjust as needed.34

Historically, contact centers prioritized quantitative metrics such as Average Handling Time (AHT) or Calls
per Hour. Today, top-performing organizations recognize that true customer-centricity requires balancing
operational efficiency with the overall customer experience. Metrics should not merely track activity; they
should drive improvements in customer satisfaction, loyalty, and agent effectiveness.35

To achieve this, businesses can leverage automated alerts, dashboards, and targeted coaching to address delays,
prevent churn, and proactively resolve issues. Performance should be measured against established quality
standards, reinforcing behaviors that positively impact customer experience. In addition to technology-driven
tools, service quality can be assessed through coaching sessions, role-playing exercises, direct observation,
recorded interactions, and even mystery shopping.

Watch the "How Can You Use Customer Service Metrics in Performance Reviews?" YouTube video below to
learn how leaders can use quality standards and performance metrics during employee performance reviews to
improve overall customer experience.36 Transcript for "How Can You Use Customer Service Metrics in Per-
formance Reviews?" Video [PDF-New Tab]. Closed captioning is available on YouTube.
222 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

       One or more interactive elements has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view
       them online here: https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=96#oem­

bed-3

Key Takeaways

    1. Building a customer centric culture may be challenging. A few of the challenges a
        leader may encounter include lack of buy-in, disparate data, resistance to change, ineffectual
        processes and tools, and inadequate employee support.

   2. Leaders in customer experience pursue a range of approaches to overcome such complexity
        of making the customer experience a priority. Several elements form the core of their
        successful efforts. They include the following: Set up a dedicated team for customer experi-
        ence, establish C-suite engagement, and fit the customer-experience team into the organiza-

       tional fabric.

   3. To create a customer centric organization leaders apply the following principles: Model
        specific behaviours, foster understanding and commitment among employees and managers,
        develop capabilities and skills, and reinforce behaviours through formal mechanisms.

   4. Being customer centric means that every department in the company understands that
        the customer comes first and everything they do is to obtain, retain, and build relationships
        with customers.

   5. A customer service vision is a shared definition of outstanding service that gets all
        employees working in the same direction. A strong customer service vision has three charac-
        teristics: It's simple and easy to understand, it's focused on customers, it reflects who the
        company is now, and who the company aspires to be in the future.

   6. There are three questions you can ask employees to evaluate employee engagement in a
        customer centric organization: What is the customer service vision? What does the customer
        service vision mean? How do you personally contribute?
                                                                                          LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 223

    7. Employee empowerment means giving employees the authority, the right technology,
        systems, and the freedom to go the extra mile to make customers happy.

   8. Customer service standards refer to the performance that customers can expect from the
        company. It encompasses various factors, like speed, accuracy, transparency, accessibility,
        empowerment, efficiency, and friendliness of the staff. There are three sources for establish-
        ing quality standards: Customer expectations, the organization's mission, vision, and values,
        and stakeholders such as government, suppliers, employees, shareholders, industry associa-
        tions, and the community.

   9. Previously, contact centers focused more on quantitative metrics such as Average Handling
        Time (AHT) and Calls per Hour. However, modern service centers recognize the importance
        of measuring customer experience and agent behavior more than quantitative metrics.

End-of-Chapter Exercises

    1. Contact Center Goals. Search the Internet for examples of good and bad goals for a cus-
        tomer service contact center. Take a few notes then share your findings with your class-
        mates and professor.

   2. Customer Service Standards. Review the list of 7 Commonly Used Customer Service Stan-
        dards. Which standard do you feel is the most important? Why? Discuss with your class-
        mates and professor.

   3. Cross-Departmental Service. Why is it important for quality customer care/service to be a
        cross-functional objective? Provide an example of serving a customer where cross-depart-
        mental input may be needed. Discuss with your classmates and professor.

   4. Reinforce Employee Behaviour. Search the Internet for ways to reinforce employee
        behaviour beyond financial incentives. Would these strategies work for every employee?
        Why or why not? Discuss your findings with your classmates and professor.

   5. Model Behaviour. Search the Internet for ways in which managers can model customer
        centric behaviours. Make a list and share it with your classmates and professor.

   6. Leadership Style Quiz. Take a leadership quiz to determine your leadership style.
224 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

         7. Leadership Skills Quiz. Take a leadership quiz to determine how good your leadership skills
             are.

        8. Customer Service Quiz. Take a quiz to evaluate how well your team delivers customer ser-
             vice.

   Self-Check Exercise - Leading a Customer Centric Strategy

                          An interactive H5P element has been excluded from this version of the text. You can view it online
                          here:
                          https://ecampusontario.pressbooks.pub/customercentricstrategy2/?p=96#h5p-8

   Additional Resources

         1. 15 Steps to Becoming the Best Team Leader in the Call Center Industry, YouTube Video
         2. Contact Center Trends for 2021, YouTube Video
         3. How Many Agents Do You Need? YouTube Video
         4. How Companies Can Achieve True Customer Centricity, YouTube Video
                                                                                                  LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 225

           5. An Introduction to Customer Centricity at Google, YouTube Video
          6. Customer Centric Culture Change, YouTube Video
           7. Beyond the Trends: Developing a Customer-Centric Retail Mindset in B2C & B2B
          8. Service Metrics for Customer Service, LinkedIn Learning
          9. Leading a Customer Centric Culture, LinkedIn Learning
         10. Customer Service Leadership, LinkedIn Learning

 References

 (Note: This reference list was produced using the auto-footnote and media citation features of Pressbooks;
 therefore, the in-text citations are not displayed in APA style).

 Media Attributions

    · A person holding a sign saying "We are here to do better " © Photo by RODNAE Productions from
       Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

    · A person holding a sign saying "Where customers matter" © Photo by RODNAE Productions from
       Pexels is licensed under a CC0 (Creative Commons Zero) license

    · Customer Feedback by Star Rating © Gerd Altmann | Pixabay

Notes

        1. Bhattachariee, D., Müller, L., Roggenhofer, S. (2016, March 11). Leading and governing the customer-centric organiza­
             tion. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/leading-and-governing-the-customer-
             centric-organization#

        2. Franz, A. (2023, April 26). The challenges of building and sustaining a customer-centric organization.
             https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbescoachescouncil/2023/04/26/the-challenges-of-building-and-sustaining-a-cus-
             tomer-centric-organization/?sh=4b31af712681

        3. Hash, S. (2018, August). Leading customer-centric change. https://www.contactcenterpipeline.com/Article/leading-
             customer-centric-change

        4. Hash, S. (2018, August). Leading customer-centric change. https://www.contactcenterpipeline.com/Article/leading-
             customer-centric-change

        5. Hash, S. (2018, August). Leading customer-centric change. https://www.contactcenterpipeline.com/Article/leading-
             customer-centric-change
226 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY

      6. Customers That Stick. (2020, January 7). A customer-centric culture needs a leader. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwTih30Qr20

      7. Bhattachariee, D., Müller, L., Roggenhofer, S. (2016, March). Leading and governing the customer-centric organization.
            https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Operations/Our%20Insights/Lead-
           ing%20and%20governing%20the%20customer%20centric%20organization/Leading%20and%20govern-
           ing%20the%20customer%20centric%20organization.pdf

      8. Bhattachariee, D., Müller, L., Roggenhofer, S. (2016, March). Leading and governing the customer-centric organization.
            https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/Operations/Our%20Insights/Lead-
           ing%20and%20governing%20the%20customer%20centric%20organization/Leading%20and%20govern-
           ing%20the%20customer%20centric%20organization.pdf

      9. Skillsoft. (2020, April 14). The 8 habits of customer-centric leaders. [Video]. YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/
           watch?v=Iqo6IEgnD2E

     10. Toister, J. (2018, August 29). Leading a customer-centric culture. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
           https://www.linkedin.com/learning/leading-a-customer-centric-culture-2018/guide-employees-with-a-
           vision?u=2167290

     11. Law, T. (2021, June 10). 17 seriously inspiring mission and vision statement examples. [Blog]. Oberlo.
           https://www.oberlo.com/blog/inspiring-mission-vision-statement-examples/

     12. Brex. (2020, August 28). 22 vision statement examples to help you write your own. [Blog]. https://www.brex.com/blog/
           vision-statement-examples/

     13. Law, T. (2021, June 10). 17 seriously inspiring mission and vision statement examples. [Blog]. Oberlo.
           https://www.oberlo.com/blog/inspiring-mission-vision-statement-examples/

     14. Law, T. (2021, June 10). 17 seriously inspiring mission and vision statement examples. [Blog]. Oberlo.
           https://www.oberlo.com/blog/inspiring-mission-vision-statement-examples/

     15. Brex. (2020, August 28). 22 vision statement examples to help you write your own. [Blog]. https://www.brex.com/blog/
           vision-statement-examples/

     16. Law, T. (2021, June 10). 17 seriously inspiring mission and vision statement examples. [Blog]. Oberlo.
           https://www.oberlo.com/blog/inspiring-mission-vision-statement-examples/

     17. Brex. (2020, August 28). 22 vision statement examples to help you write your own. [Blog]. https://www.brex.com/blog/
           vision-statement-examples/

     18. Toister, J. (2018, August 29). Leading a customer-centric culture. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
           https://www.linkedin.com/learning/leading-a-customer-centric-culture-2018/guide-employees-with-a-
           vision?u=2167290

     19. Patel, S. (2023, August 13). How to empower your team to deliver great customer service success. [Blog]. Revechat.
           https://www.revechat.com/blog/empower-customer-service-team/

     20. Toister, J. (2018, August 29). Leading a customer-centric culture. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
           https://www.linkedin.com/learning/leading-a-customer-centric-culture-2018/guide-employees-with-a-
           vision?u=2167290

     21. Geraghty, S. (2014, July 18). 7 essentials of a customer-centric call center. [Blog]. Talkdesk. https://www.talkdesk.com/
           blog/7-essentials-of-a-customer-centric-call-center/

     22. Emanuele, G. (2020, October 26). Customer experience: Empower employees with decisions. [Video]. YouTube.
           https://youtu.be/_fpVNX3oPC8

     23. Toister, J. (2018, August 29). Leading a customer-centric culture. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
           https://www.linkedin.com/learning/leading-a-customer-centric-culture-2018/guide-employees-with-a-
           vision?u=2167290

     24. CallCenter Helper. (n.d.). Top 10 smart contact center goals. https://www.callcentrehelper.com/top-10-contact-centre-
                                                                                          LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY | 227

     goals-82427.htm

25. CallCenter Helper. (n.d.). Top 10 smart contact center goals. https://www.callcentrehelper.com/top-10-contact-centre-
     goals-82427.htm

26. CallCenter Helper. (n.d.). Top 10 smart contact center goals. https://www.callcentrehelper.com/top-10-contact-centre-
     goals-82427.htm

27. Outsource Accelerator. (2023, March 17). The 7 C's to improve customer service standards. https://www.outsourceaccel-
     erator.com/articles/customer-service-standards/#:~:text=%20Improving%20customer%20service%20stan-
     dards%20%201%20Courtesy.,to%20provide%20a%20customized%20customer%20service...%20More%20

28. Cleveland, B. (2016, December 12). Quality standards in customer service. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
     https://www.linkedin.com/learning/quality-standards-in-customer-service-2016/defining-quality-in-customer-ser-
     vice?contextUrn=urn%3Ali%3AlearningCollection%3A6569259166630768640&u=2167290

29. Chambers, S. (n.d.). How to set customer service goals (+7 example goals. [Blog]. Help Scout. https://www.help-
     scout.com/blog/customer-service-goals/

30. Starbucks. (2025, July 29). Elevating Every Visit: Starbucks Biggest Investment in Operating Standards and Customer
     Experience. https://about.starbucks.com/press/2025/elevating-every-visit-starbucks-biggest-investment-in-operating-
     standards-and-customer-experience/

31. Rossman, J. (n.d.). Leadership principle #1 -- Amazon customer obsession. https://johnrossman.com/amazon-leader-
     ship/amazon-customer-obsession/

32. Solomon, M. (2015, December 16). How 3,000 customer service standards create The Ritz-Carlton customer experience.
     Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/micahsolomon/2015/12/16/how-3000-customer-service-standards-create-the-
     ritz-carlton-customer-experience/

33. Geraghty, S. (2014, July 18). 7 essentials of a customer-centric call center. [Blog]. Talkdesk. https://www.talkdesk.com/
     blog/7-essentials-of-a-customer-centric-call-center/

34. Cleveland, B. (2016, December 12). Quality standards in customer service. [Video]. LinkedIn Learning.
     https://www.linkedin.com/learning/quality-standards-in-customer-service-2016/defining-quality-in-customer-ser-
     vice?contextUrn=urn%3Ali%3AlearningCollection%3A6569259166630768640&u=2167290

35. The Reporting Engine. (2020, June) 5 traits of a customer-centric contact center. [Blog]. https://thereportin-
     gengine.com/blog/5-traits-of-a-customer-centric-contact-center/

36. Admin Career Guide. (2025, July 27). How can you use customer service metrics in performance reviews? [Video].
     YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EET2ak9B9QY
228 | LEADING A CUSTOMER CENTRIC STRATEGY
                   GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 229

GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Absenteeism

      Since a call center is so dependent on people being available to answer phone calls and resolve customer
      issues when workers are absent it increases the workloads for other agents who may already have lots of
      work to deal with.

Active listening

      is the art of using words and phrases to communicate a positive, supportive tone to your customers (or
      anyone else for that matter).

Agent Productivity

      To calculate agent productivity take the total time the agent is working (answering calls, doing adminis-
      trative work, doing after-call work) and divide by the time the agent was scheduled to work, then multiply
      by 100. Formula = (Total Output / Total Input) x 100 = Labour Productivity

Artificial Intelligence (AI)

      is technology that allows computers to perform tasks requiring human-like intelligence, such as learning,
      problem-solving, and making predictions.

Augmented Reality (AR)

      retail applications today focus on helping consumers experience brands and products without having to
      go into stores.

Automatic Call Distributor

      ACD is a telephony system that recognizes, answers, and routes incoming calls to the terminal or agent
      that is best suited to handle the caller's needs.

Average Call Transfer Rate

      is a metric that monitors the number of calls transferred to another department, a supervisor, or a differ-
      ent queue.
230 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Average handling time (AHT)

      is the average time spent by an agent in handling customer issues or transactions.
Average Speed of Answer (ASA)

      refers to the average amount of time wherein a call is required to be answered.
Business Intelligence (BI)

      is software that ingests business data and presents it in user-friendly views such as reports, dashboards,
      charts, and graphs. BI tools enable business users to access different types of data -- historical and current,
      third-party and in-house, as well as semi-structured data and unstructured data like social media. Users
      can analyze this information to gain insights into how the business is performing.
Call Recording

      enables agents and managers to record inbound and outbound calls.
Call Routing

      is a management process that routes calls as per categories, which are based on predefined business rules,
      wait time, and customer value. This allows agents to prioritize calls that need to be answered first based
      on their value, urgency, etc.
Call Scripting

      helps agents follow a dialogue template for easy reference. They can fill their responses directly into the
      customer relationship management tool (CRM) to design workflows.
Campaign Management System

      A CMS is most helpful for outbound contact centers. The software provides the agent with a contact list,
      or other info needed to reach out to the right people.
Computer Telephony Integration

      CTI is a type of technology that enables computer and telephone systems to interact together. Contact
      centers implementing CTI can use computers to manage all telephone calls, which in turn leads to
      increased efficiency and better results.
                              GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 231

Contact Center Manager

The contact center manager sets objectives in service quality and analyzes metrics to see if the objectives
have been met.

Cost Per Contact

metric refers to the expenses related to running a contact center (i.e., operational costs, wages, benefits).
To calculate the average cost per contact, the total cost associated with operating the business is divided
by the total number of contacts handled.

Cross-Cultural Communication

is the study of how verbal and nonverbal communication takes place among individuals from different
backgrounds, geographies, and cultures.

Customer Centric

Being customer centric means that every department in the company understands that the customer
comes first and everything they do is to obtain, retain, and build relationships with customers.

Customer Centricity

is a way of doing business that fosters a positive customer experience before, during and after the sale in
order to drive repeat business, build customer loyalty (who refer others), and increase business growth.

Customer Churn Rate

refers to the percentage of customers you have lost over a certain period of time.

Customer Engagement Metrics

are effective in measuring service accessibility and the quality of customer experience.

Customer Experience (CX)

is the result of an interaction between the customer and the company. A Customer Experience (CX)
Team is a group focused on ensuring that every customer interaction is positive, consistent, and aligned
with the company's brand, using feedback and data to improve experiences.
232 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Customer Insights

      Companies should gather customer insights before producing products customers won't want, like, use
      or buy. They can do this in many ways, including holding focus groups, conducting surveys, gathering
      customer feedback, tracking website clicks and emails, and observing trends.

Customer Journey

      is the complete sum of experiences that customers go through when interacting with a company and its
      brands. It considers the complete path from brand discovery to purchasing and beyond. The focus in not
      on purchases made, but rather on how the customer feels about the interactions throughout their jour-
      ney with the company.

Customer Journey Map

      is a visual depiction (diagrammed or written) detailing the path the customer takes from the time the cus-
      tomer first discovers the brand, to purchasing, and beyond.

Customer Lifetime Value (CLV)

      is one of the key statistics to track as part of a customer experience program. CLV is a measurement of
      how valuable a customer is to your company, not just on a purchase-by-purchase basis but across the
      whole relationship.

Customer Relations

      refers to the different methods and strategies that a business can use to forge, improve, and manage all
      interactions with its customers.

Customer Relationship Management (CRM) System

      CRM software gives agents the 360° customer info they need to solve customer needs as quickly as possi-
      ble. Contact center agents can also use the servicing application to document customer interactions that
      can be brought up if the caller needs more help in the future. Having a record can help agents resolve cus-
      tomer issues more efficiently.

Customer Retention Rate

      refers to the percentage of existing customers or users that are still part of the organization's pool of con-
      sumers over a certain period of time.
                                       GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 233

Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT).

A great indicator of customer happiness is the Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT). This metric is cal-
culated by asking a question that pertains to the customer's feedback on a particular interaction with an
agent, "How pleased were you with your experience?" or "Was the agent able to handle your concern sat-
isfactorily?"

Customer Service

is the assistance and advice provided by a company to customers throughout the customer journey;
before, during and after the sale.

Customer service goals

Setting customer service goals can serve an important role in managing service teams. Set SMART goals.
Good goals focus attention on the right things, while poorly shaped goals focus attention on other things.

Customer Service Orientation

means that as an employee you are able to display positive attitudes and behaviors, and demonstrate an
awareness of the importance of meeting or exceeding customer needs and expectations.

Customer service philosophy

is a shared mission for your support team, a set of guiding principles that ensure you're upholding your
core values with every customer interaction

Customer Service Representative (CSR)

A customer service representative (CSR) - also called an agent - is a person who works in a call or contact
center and helps customers with their issues. They may do this using a variety of channels, including
phone, chat, email and social media. Customer service representatives (CSRs) play an important role in
influencing the customer experience.

Customer Service Standards

refer to the performance that customers can expect from the company. It encompasses various factors, like
speed, accuracy, transparency, accessibility, empowerment, efficiency, and friendliness of the staff.

Customer Service Training

Investing the time and money in customer service training can prove to be an invaluable investment for
234 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

      businesses of diverse sectors and sizes. Teaching members of staff the competencies, knowledge and skills
      required to increase customer satisfaction and therefore customer retention is a shrewd way for businesses
      to ultimately increase their sales performance.

Customer service values

      impact the experience the customer receives and they help to define the personality and attitude the busi-
      ness is trying to put forth. Often companies offer training to employees on how to uphold these values.

Customer Service Vision

      A customer service vision statement provides meaning and direction for employees. It is the statement
      that outlines the type of service that agents are expected to provide to customers. It tends to be quite ide-
      alistic and `big picture' thinking, needs to be clear and unambiguous, and it should be easily understood
      by both employees and customers alike.

Customer service vision statement

      The first section of a customer service philosophy is a customer service vision statement, which Jeff Tois-
      ter defines as "a statement that clearly defines the type of customer service employees are expected to pro-
      vide.

Customer Touch-point

      is a point in time when the company connects in some form with the customer (e.g., website, phone,
      email, social media, retail store, returns, service, and products).

Design Thinking

      is a way to solve problems by focusing on understanding users, generating creative solutions, and testing
      ideas to make products, services, or experiences that truly meet customer needs.

Digital Tranformation

      is the integration of digital technology into all areas of a business, resulting in fundamental changes in the
      way a business operates and the value they deliver to their customers.

Email Response

      empowers agents to answer customer queries and manage requests across platforms, such as email, chat,
      or mobile apps, from a centralized interface.
                                GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 235

Employee Empowerment

means giving employees the authority, right technology, systems, and freedom to go the extra mile to make
customers happy.

External customers

are the customers who purchase products or services from the company. Employees who work in job
positions that require them to interface with external customers directly might be referred to as front-
line/front-facing/front-end/customer-facing employees. Those that work to serve internal customers are
working in back-end/back-office/behind-the-scene job positions.

First Contact Resolution (FCR)

metric shows how many customer requests were solved during the first contact.

Generation Z

sometimes known as "zoomers," is the demographic cohort that comes after millennials and proceeds
Generation Alpha. Members of the Gen Z years were born between 1997 and 2012. So as of 2023, the
Gen Z age range is anywhere from 11 to 26. They are commonly referred to as the first fully "digitally
native" generation.

Inbound Contact Center

Inbound contact centers primarily deal with incoming customer calls and tend to focus on assistance for
customers who need instructions, a technician, problems solved, questions answered, or other assistance
with products, services, and orders.

Interactive Voice Response

IVR is an automated telephony system that interacts with callers before routing them to the right agent
or department, based on the required expertise. The feature aims to ease the situation for callers.

Internal customers

are the company employees who need support, information or action from other employees. These inter-
nal customers may work just down the hall, in another building, or in another country, but they are still
part of the company and working to help satisfy external customers.
236 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Internet of Things (IoT)

      is made up of billions of smart, connected devices, and gives any "thing" a voice through the data it gath-
      ers, produces and distributes.

Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)

      measure how effectively a company is achieving its goals against a set of targets, objectives, or industry
      peers.

Knowledge Management System

      KMS is a computerized system designed to support the creation, storage, and dissemination of informa-
      tion. Such a system contains a central repository of information that is well structured and employs a vari-
      ety of effective and easy to use search tools that users can use to find answers to questions quickly.

Machine Learning

      is a branch of artificial intelligence (AI) and computer science that focuses on the use of data and algo-
      rithms to imitate the way that humans learn, gradually improving its accuracy.

Metrics

      is a method of measuring something, or the results obtained from this. The right metrics or key perfor-
      mance indicators (KPIs) should effectively measure a business's specific capacities.

Millennials

      sometimes known as Generation Y, is a demographic cohort that follows Generation X and proceeds Gen-
      eration Z. Millennials were born between 1981 and 1996 (although this age range may vary depending on
      the source).

Modern Contact Center

      allows customers to contact a company not just via calls, but across whatever channel they choose.

Net Promoter Score (NPS)

      is a customer loyalty metric that businesses use to gauge how their customers feel about them. It measures
      your customers' willingness to recommend your company, product, or service to others. Companies with
      high a NPS are more likely to achieve long-term profitable growth.
                                                                                GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 237

Non-verbal communication

refers to gestures, facial expressions, eye contact, body language, posture, and other ways people can com-
municate without using language.

Omnichannel Contact Center

A multichannel contact center allows a business to contact or stay in touch with customers over a variety
of channels. For example, video calls, phone calls, email messages, and social media messaging. On the
other hand, an omnichannel contact center not only allows the business to interact with customers over
various channels but also collates all the data onto a single platform.

Onsite Configurations

With onsite configurations, contact centers are owned and operated by the company itself.

Outbound Contact Center

In an outbound contact center, agents call potential or existing customers rather than receiving calls from
them.

Personalization

has become integral to the customer journey and is now a key driver of brand loyalty across all channels.
Consumers are much more likely to buy from brands, both in-store and online, when offers are person-
alized.

Personas

are fictional customer types created to represent real target customer groups.

Positive attitude

is a mindset that helps you see and recognize opportunities. It is not always easy to stay positive especially
when things do not go as planned, or when dealing with angry customers.

Positive language

is the art of using words and phrases to communicate a positive, supportive tone to your customers (or
anyone else for that matter).
238 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Predictive Dialer

      A predictive dialer automatically dials from a list of phone numbers. This saves agent time as the dialer
      will detect busy signals, voicemail messages, disconnected phone numbers, and when there is no answer.
      Predictive dialing is applicable across channels: mobile, text, social, chat, and email.

Problem-solving model

      provides you with concrete, easy to remember steps you can work through when faced with any issue,
      customer service related or other.

Quality

      is simply the attributes of a product or service.

Quality Management

      QM applications give managers insight into employee performance so that any areas of weakness can be
      identified. Managers can also use QM to ensure that agents are adhering to internal policies and proce-
      dures.

Rate of abandoned calls

      refers to the total number of calls where a caller hangs up before an agent answers.

Remote Work

      is also referred to as telework, telecommuting, mobile work, flexible workplace, flex-hours, or e-commut-
      ing and is a work arrangement in which employees do not commute to a central location instead they
      work outside the office location from various locations.

Service breakdowns

      occur daily in all types of organizations. They happen whenever the product or service delivered fails to
      meet customer needs, wants and expectations.

Service Culture

      in an organization means putting customers at the center of the business model, developing policies, pro-
      cedures, values, norms, and beliefs that are centered around focusing on customer satisfaction and under-
      standing their needs and wants.
                                                                         GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 239

Service Level

To calculate the Service Level, divide the total number of calls answered within the threshold by the total
number of calls and the total number of abandoned calls.

Service recovery

is a company's resolution of a problem from a dissatisfied customer, converting them into a loyal cus-
tomer. It is the action a service provider takes in response to service failure.

Service standards

are guidelines for employees to follow when interacting with customers.

Service-level agreement (SLA)

is the agreed-upon, documented, level of service between a vendor and a client. Numerical metrics are
often assigned to determine the success or failure of the agreement, along with clear repercussions for
failing to meet the service level standards. It's most commonly used by technology and customer service
providers.

Social Listening

involves gathering and analyzing real-time data from social media platforms, websites, forums, and blogs
to understand broader public opinion and sentiment. In contact centers, social listening allows agents to
listen to customer issues online using predefined keywords and hashtags on social media. Social media
posts can be immediately routed to agents and prioritized so that they can provide immediate resolution
to customers.

Social Monitoring

is the practice of tracking notified brand mentions, comments, and tags on digital channels and respond-
ing as appropriate, often focusing on customer service and reputation management. It allows businesses
to quickly address questions, praise, or complaints one-on-one, providing timely support and engage-
ment.

Social Selling

uses social media to build relationships with potential customers rather than relying on cold calls or mass
advertising. It emphasizes listening to customer needs, sharing relevant content, and providing value,
leading to stronger connections and higher conversion rates.
240 | GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Standards

      are for the requirements, specifications, guidelines, or characteristics established for customer service.

Texting Response

      Mobile devices have become indispensable tools of the twenty-first century. Studies show that two-way
      text messaging systems offer a more direct and expedient means of contacting call centers.

Ticketing Software

      A ticketing system collects customer support requests from all the sources and centralizes them with the
      customer data about contact history. Integrating ticketing software with a call center system allows your
      agents to respond to all the queries efficiently.

Time Division Multiplexing and IP

      TDM was developed in 1870 for large system telegraphy implementation. The technology transports
      contact center interactions by segmenting multiple data streams and then putting them in a single sig-
      nal. IP has replaced TDM as the primary mechanism for transporting contact center transactions. IP
      offers easy access and value-added services such as instant messaging, video calling, and making phone calls
      directly from websites - all while moving through a less costly network.

Toll-Free Telephone Service

      Toll-free or "800" service lets customers call the company free of charge. The company or agency pays
      the phone bill for all incoming calls. There are different levels of service, and depending on the package
      selected, it can accommodate callers from the U.S. and U.S. Territories, and Canada.

Traditional Call Center

      is focused on voice calls. Even if a call center provides some multi-channel customer service, the interac-
      tions are siloed in the individual channels.

Trunk Circuit Networks

      Used in the context of contact centers, a basic "trunk circuit" is a telephone line connecting the phones
      at the contact center to the telephone network. Each circuit can handle one phone call at a time. The
      number of circuits required depends on the number of simultaneous callers the contact center wishes to
      accommodate.
                             GLOSSARY OF TERMS | 241

TTY/TDD Communications

A Text telephone is a special device that lets people who are deaf, hard of hearing, or speech-impaired use
the telephone to communicate.

Verbal communication

refers to the ability of a customer service representative to think of the right words in order to appease a
customer and provide a solution

Voice of the Customer (VoC)

is the systematic collection and analysis of customer feedback to understand their needs, preferences, and
expectations, guiding business decisions and improvements.

Web Chat

Web chat is a real-time communications system between agents and the company's customers that uses
a simple, Web interface. Users need browser access in order to use the service. It allows agents to handle
multiple chat sessions at the same time.

Work-from-home Agent

Companies benefit from the work-from-home agent setup as it makes it easier for them to provide cus-
tomer service across multiple time zones. Since the customer service team is working from various loca-
tions, businesses with remote call centers can provide coverage during off-hours without having to put
employees on different shifts. This makes employee scheduling significantly easier for companies that pro-
vide 24/7 customer support.

Workforce Management System

WFM is used to forecast the volume of customer voice and digital channel interactions. Contact center
managers can use the forecasts to hire the optimal number of agents to ensure customer transactions meet
a certain standard of service. WFM systems often tie into other workforce optimization solutions to pro-
vide the tools to empower contact center agents.

Workforce Optimization

Contact center workforce optimization is a consolidated environment of technology, strategies, and
processes to maximize agent efficiency, productivity, and quality to enable the contact center to perform
at the highest level.
