Entrepreneurship

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS

MICHAEL LAVERTY, COLORADO STATE UNIVERSITY GLOBAL
CHRIS LITTEL, NORTH CAROLINA STATE UNIVERSITY
OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS-375
Houston, Texas 77005

To learn more about OpenStax, visit https://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.

©2020 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0). Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:

- If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
    must retain on every page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
    following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
    but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
    "Access for free at openstax.org."

- If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
    https://openstax.org/details/books/entrepreneurship in your citation.

For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support@openstax.org.

Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo,
OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.

HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-947172-69-2
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13  978-1-975076-34-4
PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN-13      978-1-951693-12-1
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN-13     978-1-947172-70-8
Original Publication Year   2020
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
OPENSTAX

OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced
Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech
initiative based at Rice University, we're committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete
their courses and meet their educational goals.

RICE UNIVERSITY

OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university
with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research,
unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by
cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human
endeavor.

PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT

OpenStax is grateful for our generous philanthropic partners, who support our vision to improve educational
opportunities for all learners.

Laura and John Arnold Foundation                 The Maxfield Foundation
Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation  Burt and Deedee McMurtry
Ann and John Doerr                               Michelson 20MM Foundation
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation                  National Science Foundation
Girard Foundation                                The Open Society Foundations
Google Inc.                                      Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III
The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation         Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation
Rusty and John Jaggers                           The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund
The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation     Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation
Charles Koch Foundation                          The Stuart Family Foundation
Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc.                 Tammy and Guillermo Treviño
  Study where you want, what
   you want, when you want.

                        When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
                         highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.

                                               Our books are free and flexible, forever.
                               Get started at openstax.org/details/books/entrepreneurship

Access. The future of education.
openstax.org
    TABLE OF CONTENTS

    Preface 1

1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective 7

        1.1 Entrepreneurship Today 8
        1.2 Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals 20
        1.3 The Entrepreneurial Mindset 30

2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways 41

        2.1 Overview of the Entrepreneurial Journey 41
        2.2 The Process of Becoming an Entrepreneur 57
        2.3 Entrepreneurial Pathways 75
        2.4 Frameworks to Inform Your Entrepreneurial Path 80

3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs 97

        3.1 Ethical and Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship 98
        3.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship 111
        3.3 Developing a Workplace Culture of Ethical Excellence and Accountability 124

4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention 149

        4.1 Tools for Creativity and Innovation 150
        4.2 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention: How They Differ 155
        4.3 Developing Ideas, Innovations, and Inventions 167

5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity 183

        5.1 Entrepreneurial Opportunity 184
        5.2 Researching Potential Business Opportunities 190
        5.3 Competitive Analysis 204

6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques 217

        6.1 Problem Solving to Find Entrepreneurial Solutions 218
        6.2 Creative Problem-Solving Process 229
        6.3 Design Thinking 238
        6.4 Lean Processes 242
   7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea 253

             7.1 Clarifying Your Vision, Mission, and Goals 254
             7.2 Sharing Your Entrepreneurial Story 264
             7.3 Developing Pitches for Various Audiences and Goals 267
             7.4 Protecting Your Idea and Polishing the Pitch through Feedback 276
             7.5 Reality Check: Contests and Competitions 280

   8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales 297

             8.1 Entrepreneurial Marketing and the Marketing Mix 298
             8.2 Market Research, Market Opportunity Recognition, and Target Market 311
             8.3 Marketing Techniques and Tools for Entrepreneurs 323
             8.4 Entrepreneurial Branding 331
             8.5 Marketing Strategy and the Marketing Plan 338
             8.6 Sales and Customer Service 343

   9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting 355

             9.1 Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting Strategies 356
             9.2 Special Funding Strategies 362
             9.3 Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs 374
             9.4 Developing Startup Financial Statements and Projections 377

   10 Launch for Growth to Success 391

             10.1 Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup 392
             10.2 Why Early Failure Can Lead to Success Later 403
             10.3 The Challenging Truth about Business Ownership 414
             10.4 Managing, Following, and Adjusting the Initial Plan 422
             10.5 Growth: Signs, Pains, and Cautions 427

   11 Business Model and Plan 443

             11.1 Avoiding the "Field of Dreams" Approach 444
             11.2 Designing the Business Model 453
             11.3 Conducting a Feasibility Analysis 461
             11.4 The Business Plan 466

   12 Building Networks and Foundations 495

             12.1 Building and Connecting to Networks 496
             12.2 Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team 507
             12.3 Designing a Startup Operational Plan 519

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues 551

         13.1 Business Structures: Overview of Legal and Tax Considerations 552
         13.2 Corporations 557
         13.3 Partnerships and Joint Ventures 567
         13.4 Limited Liability Companies 570
         13.5 Sole Proprietorships 572
         13.6 Additional Considerations: Capital Acquisition, Business Domicile, and Technology 575
         13.7 Mitigating and Managing Risks 580

14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning 593

         14.1 Types of Resources 594
         14.2 Using the PEST Framework to Assess Resource Needs 616
         14.3 Managing Resources over the Venture Life Cycle 625

15 Next Steps 643

         15.1 Launching Your Venture 644
         15.2 Making Difficult Business Decisions in Response to Challenges 651
         15.3 Seeking Help or Support 659
         15.4 Now What? Serving as a Mentor, Consultant, or Champion 664
         15.5 Reflections: Documenting the Journey 667

A Suggested Resources 677

     Index 683
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Preface  1

Preface

Welcome to Entrepreneurship, an OpenStax resource. This textbook was written to increase student access to
high-quality learning materials, maintaining highest standards of academic rigor at little to no cost.

About OpenStax

OpenStax is a nonprofit based at Rice University, and it's our mission to improve student access to education.
Our first openly licensed college textbook was published in 2012, and our library has since scaled to over 30
books for college and AP® courses used by hundreds of thousands of students. OpenStax Tutor, our low-cost
personalized learning tool, is being used in college courses throughout the country. Through our partnerships
with philanthropic foundations and our alliance with other educational resource organizations, OpenStax is
breaking down the most common barriers to learning and empowering students and instructors to succeed.

About OpenStax resources

Customization

Entrepreneurship is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY) license, which
means that you can distribute, remix, and build upon the content, as long as you provide attribution to
OpenStax and its content contributors.
Because our books are openly licensed, you are free to use the entire book or pick and choose the sections
that are most relevant to the needs of your course. Feel free to remix the content by assigning your students
certain chapters and sections in your syllabus, in the order that you prefer. You can even provide a direct link
in your syllabus to the sections in the web view of your book.
Instructors also have the option of creating a customized version of their OpenStax book. The custom version
can be made available to students in low-cost print or digital form through their campus bookstore. Visit the
Instructor Resources section of your book page on openstax.org for more information.

Art attribution in Entrepreneurship

In Entrepreneurship, most art contains attribution to its title, creator or rights holder, host platform, and license
within the caption. For art that is openly licensed, anyone may reuse the art as long as they provide the same
attribution to its original source. Some art has been provided through permissions and should only be used
with the attribution or limitations provided in the credit.

Errata

All OpenStax textbooks undergo a rigorous review process. However, like any professional-grade textbook,
errors sometimes occur. Since our books are web based, we can make updates periodically when deemed
pedagogically necessary. If you have a correction to suggest, submit it through the link on your book page on
openstax.org. Subject matter experts review all errata suggestions. OpenStax is committed to remaining
transparent about all updates, so you will also find a list of past errata changes on your book page on
openstax.org.

Format

You can access this textbook for free in web view or PDF through openstax.org, and for a low cost in print.
2                                                                                 Preface

About Entrepreneurship

Entrepreneurship is designed to meet the course needs of a one-semester undergraduate course on the
subject. This resource will cover the key principles of entrepreneurship alongside the concepts, strategies, and
tools needed to succeed as a small business owner, franchisee, founder, or other entrepreneurial professional.

Coverage and scope

Our Entrepreneurship textbook aligns to the scope and sequence of most introductory entrepreneurship
courses. We have endeavored to make the core theories and practical concepts engaging, relevant, and
accessible to students. We sought to achieve this by relating concepts to everyday life, contemporary issues,
and the real-world challenges that students may face as twenty-first century entrepreneurs.

Entrepreneurship course coverage and approach varies greatly by institution. Some programs focus on
research or cases, others on simulation or competition, and many synthesize a variety of approaches. While
OpenStax engaged a wide array of faculty reviewers, opinions differ based on the purpose, audience, and
structure of the course. The material's open licensing enables you to customize the content and incorporate
additional resources in order to fit your course goals.

Engaging Feature Boxes

Throughout Entrepreneurship, you will find features that engage students by taking selected topics a step
further and challenge students to apply what they are learning. Each feature box contains either a link to a
deeper exploration of the topic at hand or critical thinking questions that may be geared toward class
discussion, student projects, or written essays. Our features include:

  · Work It Out. This feature presents entrepreneurial opportunities or dilemmas for which students are
      asked to work out a solution.

  · Are You Ready? Students are asked to reflect on their readiness for applying the chapter's concepts in
      these integrated exercises, partial plans, or scenarios of a plan or project.

  · What Can You Do? This feature challenges students to take the role of a social entrepreneur and balance
      a host of interests, some conflicting, as they explore possible venture opportunities.

  · Entrepreneur in Action. Chapter-relevant entrepreneurial endeavors are profiled so students can
      examine the real-life efforts of entrepreneurs.

  · Link to Learning This feature provides online resources and videos that are pertinent to students' deeper
      exploration of the topics. Link to Learning boxes allow students to connect easily to some of the most
      important thought leaders and concepts in the field.

Module materials that reinforce key concepts

  · Learning Objectives. Every module begins with a set of clear and concise learning objectives. These
      objectives are designed to help the instructor decide what content to include or assign, and to guide
      students on what they can expect to learn. After completing the module and end-of-module exercises,
      students should be able to demonstrate mastery of the learning objectives.

  · Summaries. Section summaries distill the information in each module for both students and instructors
      down to key, concise points addressed in the section.

  · Key Terms. Key terms are bold and are followed by a definition in context. Definitions of key terms are
      also listed in the glossary, which appears at the end of the module online and at the end of the chapter in
      print.

  · Assessments. Review, discussion, and case questions accompany every chapter, providing opportunities

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Preface  3

      for students to recall, discuss, and examine the concepts learned in each chapter.
  · Suggested Resources Each chapter concludes with a collection of additional resource links to provide

      budding entrepreneurs with additional resources to support their entrepreneurial goals.

Additional resources

Student and instructor resources

We've compiled additional resources for both students and instructors, including Getting Started Guides
Companion PowerPoints, an Instructor Solution Guide, and a Test Bank. Instructor resources require a verified
instructor account, which you can apply for when you log in or create your account on openstax.org.

Instructor and student resources are typically available within a few months after the book's initial publication.
Take advantage of these resources to supplement your OpenStax book.

Community Hubs

OpenStax partners with the Institute for the Study of Knowledge Management in Education (ISKME) to offer
Community Hubs on OER Commons--a platform for instructors to share community-created resources that
support OpenStax books, free of charge. Through our Community Hubs, instructors can upload their own
materials or download resources to use in their own courses, including additional ancillaries, teaching
material, multimedia, and relevant course content. We encourage instructors to join the hubs for the subjects
most relevant to your teaching and research as an opportunity both to enrich your courses and to engage with
other faculty.

To reach the Community Hubs, visit www.oercommons.org/hubs/OpenStax.

Technology partners

As allies in making high-quality learning materials accessible, our technology partners offer optional low-cost
tools that are integrated with OpenStax books. To access the technology options for your text, visit your book
page on openstax.org.

About the authors

Senior contributing authors

Michael Laverty, Colorado State University Global

Dr. Laverty received his BA from the University of Notre Dame, his MBA from the Keller Graduate School of
Management, and his EdD from Nova Southeastern University. He is also a certified Six Sigma Black belt. He
instructs business courses at numerous universities in the US and abroad. As a former equity partner in a very
successful venture capital group, Laverty has owned many business ventures ranging in size from $1-35
million. His continuing scholarly and practitioner-oriented focus is paying back through mentoring and
developing entrepreneurial leaders of tomorrow.

Chris Littel, North Carolina State University

Chris Littel is a Lecturer in Entrepreneurship and Management at the Poole School of Management at North
Carolina State University and previously instructed at the Kelley School of Business at Indiana University and
the Institute for Entrepreneurship at Florida Gulf Coast University. Littel holds a B.S. in Engineering from the
U.S. Military Academy at West Point and a master's in International Economics, International Relations and
Security Studies from the Nitze School of Advanced International Studies of the Johns Hopkins University in
4                                                                                 Preface

Washington, D.C. Littel has also served in leadership positions in companies such as Johnson & Johnson, and
currently works as a consultant. He teaches a variety of entrepreneurial courses in which students work with
startup companies to help solve growth challenges.
Contributing authors
Chandra D. Arthur, Cuyahoga Community College
Martin S. Bressler, Southeastern Oklahoma State University
Stephen M. Byars, USC Marshall School of Business
Bryan Coleman, Assumption College
Mehran C. Ferdowsian, Wilkes University
Geoffrey Graybeal, Georgia State University
Wm. David Hawkins, Northwestern Oklahoma State University
Jennifer Herrera, Capella University
Lyzona Marshall, Seton Hill University
Angela Mitchell, Wilmington College
William Nantz, Houston Community College
Denisse Olivas, University of Texas at El Paso
Karli Peterson, Colorado State University Global
Mark A. Poepsel, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville
Kevin Raiford, College of Southern Nevada
Jeffrey J. Sabolish, University of Michigan-Flint
Sally Sledge, Norfolk State University
Kurt Stanberry, University of Houston-Downtown
Reviewers
Joseph F. Adamo, Cazenovia College
Tom Adamson, Midland University
Franklene M. Baker, Grand Rapids Community College
Jennifer Bergenfeld, New York University
Lucian Bifano, Auburn University
Kathy Bowen, Murray State College
Dixon Cooper, Ouachita Baptist University
Shawna Coram, Florida State College at Jacksonville
Peter Hackbert, Berea College
Peter T. Hahn, Roger Williams University
Perry Hidalgo, Gwinnett Technical College
Karen Hines, Berkshire Community College
Nai Lamb, The University of Tennessee at Chattanooga

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Preface                                                       5

David LeCount, Tulsa Community College
Ira T. Lovitch, Mount Saint Mary's University
Debra McCarver, Washington State University
Bruce A. McHenry, South Mountain Community College
Russ Meade, Husson University
Eleonor Moore, Kirtland Community College
Phillip L. Nelsen, Salt Lake Community College
Miguel A. Orta, Nova Southeastern University
Chris Papenhausen, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
Susan Peters, University of North Carolina at Pembroke
Brian Pusateri, University of Scranton
William R. Sandberg, University of South Carolina
Natalie Sappleton, Quantic School of Business and Technology
Linda Shul, Central New Mexico Community College
Marcene S. Sonneborn, Syracuse University
Andreas Widmer, Catholic University
Lisa Zidek, Florida Gulf Coast University
                                                                                                                                                                                                Preface
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     1

              The Entrepreneurial Perspective

Figure 1.1 Phil Libin, former CEO of Evernote, discusses his product. Evernote is an app that allows users to
create notes in a variety of formats and save and share them across platforms. (credit (a): modification of "Phil
Libin and Loic Le Meur - LeWeb Day 1 - Dan Taylor/Heisenberg Media" by Heisenberg Media/Flickr, CC BY 2.0;
credit (b): modification of "screenshot of the old Evernote iPhone app" by Jason Jones/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        1.1 Entrepreneurship Today
        1.2 Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals
        1.3 The Entrepreneurial Mindset

      Introduction

   Phil Libin, cofounder and former CEO of Evernote, once said there are "lots of bad reasons to start a company.
   But there's only one good, legitimate reason . . . it's to change the world."[1] Evernote is an example of an
   entrepreneurial startup. Its goal is to make our lives more organized and increase our personal memory
   abilities by storing necessary and desired information on the Evernote app. Evernote is designed to capture
   information through note taking (including pictures, web pages, drawings, and even audio), track and
   organize this material, and then save and archive the information. Evernote Corporation describes itself as
   "not only an organization, rather it is a family of professionals who are creative, innovative and experienced in
   their respective fields."[2]
   Around the globe, individuals, communities, and organizations advocate for and support the entrepreneurship
   movement. Many colleges and universities offer courses, degrees, and competitions for entrepreneurship
   teams. Communities provide support through services such as incubators that foster planning and startup
   activities. Organizations like UNESCO's Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development

   1 Robin Wauters. "Evernote CEO Phil Libin: `My Advice to Aspiring Entrepreneurs? Don't Do It.'" The Next Web. April 27, 2012.
   https://thenextweb.com/video/2012/04/27/evernote-ceo-phil-libin-my-advice-to-aspiring-entrepreneurs-dont-do-it-video/
   2 "Evernote SuccessStory." SuccessStory. June 24, 2018. https://successstory.com/products/evernote
8                                                                                 Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

holds a Youth Entrepreneurship Competition annually.[3] That is where student Chloe Huang, in 2017,
submitted her idea for an algae energy pavilion to the Education for Sustainable Development competition.
Huang recognized the problem of lakes suffering from oversaturation of algae and saw a solution in
converting the algae into a biofuel, creating green energy while alleviating an environmental problem.[4]

In the examples of both Libin and Huang, the entrepreneurial products focus on the use of technology and
improving life, but they also represent two vastly different approaches to entrepreneurship. Libin's focus was
on improving quality of life by allowing users to track and organize information in their business and personal
lives, whereas Huang focused on a global environmental issue to sustainably improve water quality. Each idea
solves a problem that many people might not even have noticed. Becoming aware of problems that need to be
solved, then solving the problem to make our lives easier or better, is part of the entrepreneurial perspective.

 1.1 Entrepreneurship Today

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define entrepreneur and entrepreneurship
  · Describe types of entrepreneurial careers and lifestyles
  · Understand entrepreneurs as problem solvers
  · Explain current factors driving the growth of entrepreneurship
  · Compare differences in entrepreneurial opportunities around the globe

As we delve into the study of entrepreneurship, let's define what we mean by the word entrepreneur. An
entrepreneur is someone who identifies and acts on an idea or problem that no one else has identified or
acted on. This combination of recognizing an opportunity to bring something new to the world and acting on
that opportunity is what distinguishes an entrepreneur from a small business owner. A small business owner
is someone who owns or starts a business that already has an existing model, such as a restaurant, whereas
an entrepreneur is someone who creates something new. This new creation can be a new process or product,
a business that identifies a new or unique target market, or a combination of ideas that creates a new
approach or method, for example.

In a broader sense, what people consider an entrepreneur can vary. Some scholars strictly differentiate
between entrepreneurs and small business owners.[5] Others acknowledge that a small business owner may
also be an entrepreneur--they are not mutually exclusive. Someone may start a venture that is not a
completely new idea, but that introduces a product or service to a new region or market. Where does a
franchise fall in this discussion? Again, there is not complete agreement, with some claiming that a franchisee
and entrepreneur cannot be the same, and others arguing that a franchise is, indeed, an entrepreneurial
venture. According to an article in Forbes, "In the for-profit world, an entrepreneur is someone who creates
and runs a new business where one did not exist before. And, no, the McDonald's franchisee didn't create
McDonald's. But he certainly created a McDonald's where there never was one before. Franchisees are
entrepreneurs."[6] The point is that small business owners and franchisees can be considered entrepreneurs.
For the purposes of this course, you will learn the key principles of entrepreneurship alongside the concepts,

3 UNESCO. "Global Action Programme on Education for Sustainable Development." n.d. https://en.unesco.org/gap
4 Chloe Huang. "Algae Energy Pavilion." Entrepreneurship Campus. August 1, 2017. https://www.entrepreneurship-campus.org/ideas/14/7404/
5 Hamid Bouchikhi. "A Constructivist Framework for Understanding Entrepreneurship Performance." Organization Studies. July 1, 1993.
doi.org/10.1177/017084069301400405; William D. Bygrave and Charles W. Hofer. "Theorizing about Entrepreneurship." Entrepreneurship Theory
and Practice 16, no. 2 (1991): 13-22.; Michael A. Hitt, R. Duane Ireland, S. Michael Camp, and Donald L. Sexton. Strategic Entrepreneurship:
Creating a New Mindset. (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 2002).; Jeffry A. Timmons. New Venture Creation: Entrepreneurship for the 21st Century.
(Irwin Press, Burr Ridge, IL: Irwin Press, 1994).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective                                                                                           9

strategies, and tools needed to succeed as a small business owner or franchisee.

Entrepreneurs have many different talents and focus on a variety of different areas, taking advantage of many
opportunities for entrepreneurial ventures. An entrepreneurial venture is the creation of any business,
organization, project, or operation of interest that includes a level of risk in acting on an opportunity that has
not previously been established. For some entrepreneurs, this could be a for-profit venture; for other
entrepreneurs, this could be a venture focused on social needs and take the form of a nonprofit endeavor.
Entrepreneurs might take a variety of approaches to their entrepreneurial venture, such as those shown in
Table 1.1.

       Type of                              Types of Entrepreneurs
  Entrepreneur                                               Approach to Venture
Innovators
                Find new approaches, methods, or products that add value through solving a problem
Creators        in a unique manner
Market makers   Make something new or see a problem that other people have not noticed
                Innovate or reinvent their market from a future perspective by asking what the
Expanders and   market could evolve into
scalers         Seek out opportunities to expand upon previously created methods, processes, or
                products

Table 1.1
In this course, you will explore these myriad avenues toward entrepreneurship.

ARE YOU READY?

How Do You Define Success?

What is your personal definition of success? How would you define success for your venture idea? Take
time to consider these questions carefully.

  · Write your answers to both questions as formal descriptions of your definition of success.
  · After completing your definitions, meet with your family members or your personal support group

      (the important people whose support you need to achieve the defined success statement) to discuss
      your personal definition of success.
  · After hearing their input, you might want to revise your personal success statements.
Follow through with this activity by talking to your startup team or other supporting people about your
venture's success definition. This activity may help guide you in decision-making throughout your life
journey and the journey of starting your venture. It will also be helpful when you and your startup team

6 Paul B. Brown. "Franchisees Are Entrepreneurs (Let the Debate Begin)." Forbes. September 19, 2012. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
actiontrumpseverything/2012/09/19/franchisees-are-entrepreneurs-let-the-debate-begin/#55c9fb8f2bf3
10  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

   create a vision statement for your venture.

The Entrepreneurial Lifestyle and Career

People often have thought of entrepreneurs as corporate rebels, nonconformists, or activists. Being an
entrepreneur has become synonymous with being an innovator, a change agent, or a risk taker. Regardless of
job titles or descriptive characteristics, entrepreneurship has a universal appeal for how people think and
engage with the world.

Choosing the path of entrepreneurship requires a willingness to take on calculated risks. The difference
between risk and calculated risk is due diligence, or conducting the necessary research and investigation to
make informed decisions that minimize risk. Not everyone is comfortable letting go of a steady paycheck,
especially when we know that there is no long-term guarantee that the paycheck will continue into the future.
In one approach to minimizing personal financial risk, some startup entrepreneurs continue with their current
employment while working on the side to develop their idea into a venture that eventually will generate an
income. Until the venture requires near full-time work and generates income, maintaining an outside income
works well for many entrepreneurial teams.

Consider the eyeglass startup Warby Parker (Figure 1.2). Dave Gilboa and Neil Blumenthal, lead entrepreneurs
for Warby Parker, were still working their normal jobs when they approached an angel investor with their idea.
The angel investor asked a few questions and wasn't impressed. This investor believed that Gilboa and
Blumenthal should demonstrate their solid commitment to the venture by quitting their day jobs to dedicate
more time and energy to Warby Parker. Instead of following that advice, Gilboa and Blumenthal kept their day
jobs while they continued to work toward building their venture, and Warby Parker eventually became highly
successful. There are many paths to becoming an entrepreneur, and many paths to creating a successful
venture (see Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways). It is important to identify the path that works best in your
life--and for the venture--and that supports your goals and your unique situation and visions.

Figure 1.2 (a) Co-founder and co-CEO Dave Gilboa helped push (b) Warby Parker to become a successful
entrepreneurial venture. (credit (a): modification of "775208326EC00084_TechCrunch" by TechCrunch/Flickr,
CC BY 2.0; credit (b): modification of "Warby Parker Aventura Mall" by Phillip Pessar/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Within the entrepreneurial world, the idea of a lifestyle venture has evolved to mean a business in which the
founders' primary focus is the lifestyle they will attain through becoming entrepreneurs, rather than a
primary

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  11

interest in financial rewards through the selling of the business. Within the entrepreneurial world, harvesting
is the typical exit strategy. The harvest is the point at which the investors and entrepreneurial team receive
their return on creating and building the venture.

For a lifestyle venture, the entrepreneur is more likely to be a solo entrepreneur, someone who moves forward
in starting a new venture without the support of a team or group of likeminded individuals who recognize the
value or potential of an entrepreneurial idea that could potentially result in significant returns. A lifestyle
venture is also more likely to be funded through family and friends, and more traditional methods such as a
bank loan or a small business loan. This lifestyle includes greater freedom to decide areas of responsibilities,
hours of contribution to the venture, and other decisions that support the desired lifestyle. An example of a
startup lifestyle venture is The Wander Girls, a company that identified the unique concerns of women
traveling alone.[7] The Wander Girls organizes trips and events for groups of women traveling in India. A team
member organizes the trip, travels with the female tourists, and handles daily interactions and transactions.

Another example of a lifestyle venture is based on how an entrepreneur aligns values, interests, and passions
to create a balance between enjoying life and earning enough money to support those passions. Roxanne
Quimby had a passion for living off the grid, creating her own life in the woods of Maine, and not being
restricted by the rules and regulations required when working as an employee. After becoming a parent,
Quimby faced the challenges presented by her lifestyle choices and started making candles to earn enough
money to support her family. Eventually, Quimby's lifestyle candle-making business expanded into the highly
successful Burt's Bees Corporation, moving her lifestyle business into a career as the CEO of Burt's Bees
(Figure 1.3). After selling Burt's Bees to Clorox Co., Quimby continued her passion for the north woods of
Maine by donating land and money to create a wildlife sanctuary and preserve that land from development.

Figure 1.3 The Burt's Bees product line grew from an idea for a lifestyle entrepreneurial venture into a
major company. (credit: "Burt's Bees" by Carol Bleistine/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

Quimby's latest endeavors include creating a pasta company, My Pasta Art, focused on increasing
employment opportunities for people in northern Maine,[8] and building the tourist industry to encourage
people to enjoy the region's beautiful habitat and scenery. Although she is highly successful from a financial
perspective, money was never the motivation for her ventures. As you can see, there are many paths to finding
your career in entrepreneurship, and multiple trigger points at which you might make the decision to become
an entrepreneur.

7 The Wander Girls. n.d. http://thewandergirls.com/
8 Mary Pols. "Making Pasta's the New Focus for Roxanne Quimby." Portland Press Herald. August 13, 2017.
12  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

    WHAT CAN YOU DO?

    How Can You Put Your Strengths to Work?

    Create a list of ten strengths that you currently possess. If you need help creating your list, ask your
    friends or family what they believe you are good at doing. Think about what achievements you have
    accomplished, what compliments you have received, and what people say about you. The answers to
    these questions will help you identify your strengths.

      · Create a list of ideas that build off your strengths or are related to your strengths.
      · Then analyze this list to create another list of possible businesses that you could start that relate to

          your strengths.

The Entrepreneur as a Problem Solver

What are some challenges you face in your life? Have you ever actively thought about how you could solve
those problems? Or have you actively identified exactly what the problem is from an analytical perspective?
We often have a tendency to jump quickly from noticing a problem to selecting a solution, with little
understanding of whether we have even correctly identified the problem. Identifying the problem--and
testing the potential, novelty, and feasibility of your solution--is an important part of resolving the problem.
Often, when we start to explore the problem, we find that it has multiple causes. Among them are:

  · The need for something to be better, faster, or easier
  · The effects of changes in world on your industry, product, or service
  · Market trends based on geography, demographics, or the psychology of the customers
You will learn more about identifying opportunities in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity and Problem
Solving and Need Recognition Techniques.

One characteristic of a savvy entrepreneur is recognizing the ability to identify a problem from an opportunity-
identification perspective. We might identify feeling hungry as a problem, but an entrepreneur would identify
the problem using an opportunity-identifying perspective by determining how the problem could be
translated into an opportunity to create a new venture--perhaps combining the problem of feeling hungry
between meals into a street kiosk or a vending machine with food choices or creating a new snack that is
nutritious, satisfying, and portable. People need to eat, and they get hungry, but during a busy day with no
open time or convenient food, people end up hungry. Rephrasing the problem, or need, from an opportunity
viewpoint opens the search for a sustainable solution beyond the simple awareness of feeling hungry. We
might solve this problem by opening a snack bar with offerings that contain essential vitamins and proteins,
and is easy to transport with a long shelf life. Understanding the problem from the perspective of how to solve
it for one person into how to solve it for multiple people rephrases the problem into an opportunity-
identification perspective.

You might also have an interest in solving food-related problems on a larger scale. People trapped in a war-
torn region may not be able to leave the safety of their shelters to find food, grow food, or barter for food, or
they may not have the money to buy food. How could you reach your target market within a war-torn area?
Red Cross emergency response vehicles traveled 2.5 million miles to deliver food, relief supplies, and support
to communities affected by disasters during 2017.[9] That's the equivalent of driving around the globe 103

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  13

times. Could your idea of creating a snack bar fit into a partnership with the Red Cross?
Although this might seem like a simple problem with a simple solution, persevering from the recognition of a
problem to finding a realistic solution, then moving that solution forward into a successful venture, requires an
entrepreneurial mindset. Every day, people become entrepreneurs as they identify and solve problems, or face
new challenges or frustrations, and resolve them in creating products or services to address these issues.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Recognizing Problems

   In your daily life, what problems do you encounter? What would make your life easier? How would you
   finish this sentence: "If only ________ existed, my life would be better or easier"? To spur your creativity,
   you might research global problems to find an area that interests you, that sparks your passion for living
   a fulfilling life. When identifying a problem, consider process-related problems as well as service-related
   problems.
   For more ideas like Chloe Huang's, visit the UNESCO Global Action Programme on Education for
   Sustainable Development (https://en.unesco.org/gap) and review other submissions that may activate
   your own creativity in thinking about how you want to contribute your skills and knowledge to improve
   our world.

      · What problem have you identified?
      · What can you do to resolve that problem?

Factors Driving the Growth of Entrepreneurship

Do you know anyone who has lost their job? Or who has been rejected or mistreated at work? Or had their
income reduced, or benefits removed? Research shows that 47 percent of all US employment is at risk through
artificial intelligence and other technologies, although there will also be new opportunities for jobs that
currently don't exist.[10] These types of experiences and outlooks have provided the impetus for many people
to start their own businesses. When we work for someone else, we are at the mercy of their decisions and
actions, but we get paid and don't carry the full risk of their decisions. When we work for ourselves, we get to
make the decisions (not that making decisions is easy). But when we have our own business, we have greater
control--in exchange, we also carry the risk for all decisions we make. This control over decision-making is one
reason that some people find the world of entrepreneurship attractive.

Another contributing factor to the desire to become an entrepreneur is the excitement and fun of creating
something new. Many entrepreneurs are excited at the idea of moving the concept through to the
materialization of the idea.

A third factor that supports the growth in entrepreneurship is the combination of retirement and longer life
expectancies. Many people enjoy working. For them, retirement consists of too much open time and not

9 American Red Cross. "2017 in Review: Red Cross Delivers More Food, Relief Items, and Shelter Stays Than Last 4 Years Combined."
December 18, 2017. https://www.redcross.org/local/georgia/about-us/news-and-events/news/2017-in-Review-Red-Cross-Delivers-More-Food-
Relief-Items-and-Shelter-Stays-than-Last-4-Years-Combined.html
10 Carl Benedikt Frey and Michael A. Osborne. "The Future of Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computerization?" Technological
Forecasting and Social Change 114 (2013): 254-280. https://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf
14  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

enough activities or the type of engagement with the outside world that fulfilled their needs during their
working lives. Retirement also presents unique financial considerations, depending on an individual's lifetime
savings and planning. The combination of having available time and a desire for continued earnings
encourages some older adults to explore their own entrepreneurial opportunities.

A fourth factor driving the growth of entrepreneurship is the expanding awareness and support of
entrepreneurship as a viable career choice. In much of the twentieth century, families encouraged their
children to find a stable career with a large corporation. During this era, there was a certain expectation of
reciprocal loyalty between the employer and the employee based on some traditional employee-employer
roles in that century. The general, informal agreement was that if employees came to work every day and
fulfilled their responsibilities, they would have long-term employment with that corporation. But as
competition increased and new business practices evolved, this unspoken guarantee no longer held true. The
model of certainty of employment gradually disappeared. As people acquired a new perspective on their
careers and income, they increasingly realized that we are all responsible for our own paths. Most studies
suggest that people change their careers between three and seven times.[11] Note that this is not how often
people change jobs, but how often they change their careers, moving from one industry to another, or moving
from one type of work to a different type of work. The older model of stability through working hard for
someone else has vanished. This awareness and acceptance have encouraged recent generations to consider
creating their own futures through entrepreneurial ventures.

Just as individuals have become aware of the benefits of entrepreneurship, communities and organizations
have also become aware of how entrepreneurial ventures add economic development and enhancements
worth supporting, bolstering opportunities for those who decide on this path.

Entrepreneurship around the Globe

In the United States, entrepreneurial opportunities abound, relatively speaking. Between 1990 and 2014, the
number of campus-based entrepreneurship education programs increased from 180 to over 2,000.[12]
Comparing globally, the United States has the greatest number of entrepreneurial ventures, with Switzerland,
Canada, Sweden, Denmark, and Australia following in order, according to Global Entrepreneurship Index, a
global consulting firm (Figure 1.4).

11 Dawn Rosenberg McKay. "How Often Do People Change Careers?" The Balance. September 20, 2019. https://www.thebalancecareers.com/
how-often-do-people-change-careers-3969407
12 Infographic.ly Team. "Infograpic: The Growth of Entrepreneurship around the Globe." Entrepreneur Middle East. January 26, 2017.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/288286

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  15

Figure 1.4 The number of entrepreneurial businesses, in millions, is shown for several countries.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Why is the United States leading with the greatest number of entrepreneurial ventures? What does it take to
become an entrepreneur? In addition to having an entrepreneurial mindset (see The Entrepreneurial
Mindset), entrepreneurs also need education and funding to support their new ventures.

You will learn more about funding in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting, but as an introduction, you
should know there are three primary sources of outside funding: family and friends, angel investors, and
venture capitalists. Some family members and friends are willing and able to invest money in helping the
entrepreneurial team. An angel investor is someone who has available funds and an interest in supporting a
new venture. They are often entrepreneurs who have successfully launched and harvested their own ventures,
and who have an interest in helping other entrepreneurs in their startups, staying active in the entrepreneurial
world, and a desire to receive a return on their investment in the venture. Angel investors often provide
funding early in the life of a venture. As the venture grows, it typically requires more funding, at which time
venture capitalists may invest in the venture. A venture capitalist (VC) is a group of people (or organizations)
who pool resources to invest in entrepreneurial ventures, contributing larger sums of funds than are available
through angel investors. In each funding round, investors receive an equity stake in the venture with
expectations that at some point in the future, the venture will be sold, or harvested, at which time the
investors will receive a return on their investment. Because they tend to be in larger groups, VCs typically have
access to larger amounts of money and resources than individual angel investors. (You will also learn about
other types of financing, such as bank loans and bootstrapping, in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting.)

In the United States, VCs contributed $72.3 billion in 2015 for 3,916 deals, or funding rounds. In China that
same year, $49.2 billion were invested in 1,611 ventures.[13] European VC investment totaled $14.4 billion and

13 Infographic.ly Team. "Infographic: The Growth of Entrepreneurship around the Globe." Entrepreneur Middle East. January 26, 2017.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/288286
16  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

1,598 deals. Tracking these numbers over time shows steady increases in VC funding as entrepreneurial
ventures have become more common (Figure 1.5).

Figure 1.5 The total venture capitalist investment and number of deals for several countries are shown.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Other factors that can affect entrepreneurial opportunity include employment rates, government policies, and
trade issues. For example, in the Middle Eastern kingdom of Saudi Arabia, a newer driver of entrepreneurship
includes a high unemployment rate with a large percentage of the population in its prime earning years. In the
past, employment was less of a concern because of dependency on state support from oil revenue. The
population received monthly allotments to cover expenses from state-owned oil production. More recently,
the population has become restless, with a desire to become productive and have greater control over their
own resources. And the rulers recognize that oil production income is volatile and unsustainable. Today, with
more future-oriented leaders, countries in the Middle East desire to encourage their citizens to consider
starting their own businesses.[14] The example of entrepreneurship in the United States has spread around the
globe, with other countries taking an interest in developing support systems to encourage their populations to
become entrepreneurs.
As noted, the United States is a world leader in entrepreneurial innovation. Perhaps because the United States
is, in large part, a nation of immigrants, with people arriving from all over the world, Americans have few
prescribed traditions that encourage conformity. America's longstanding traditions and reputation for
individualism, ingenuity, and self-reliance have reinforced this mindset. However, the governments of other
nations have discouraged their citizens from independent or innovative thinking. Some cultures emphasize
political, cultural, and economic unity, and place a strong value on not being noticed, blending in, and
following prescribed habits and traditions. Countries like Japan, France, Russia, China, and others continue to
reflect these norms. Other countries have complex bureaucracies that prevent quick responses and place
barriers to entrepreneurial activities. Parts of worldwide economic structures (banking, investments, and
technology) are not accessible or even explicitly exclude some nations and the poor. Systems like this
discourage people from coming forward with entrepreneurial ideas because the culture and bureaucracy

14 Infographic.ly Team. "Infographic: The Growth of Entrepreneurship around the Globe." Entrepreneur Middle East. January 26, 2017.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/288286

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective                                                                  17

prevent people from finding access to information necessary for the successful advancement of an idea. In
contrast, other countries are noticing the benefits of encouraging their populations to become more open-
minded and creative through new ventures.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Transparency International is an organization that tracks corruption, which can be an inhibitor to
   entrepreneurship. The Transparency International website (https://openstax.org/l/52TransparencyI)
   provides information to rank 180 countries in identifying the abuse of entrusted power for private
   gain.[15]

Key characteristics that encourage entrepreneurship include support for freedom to create and innovate.
What conditions encourage creativity and innovation? Acceptance of failure is a key characteristic for success
as an entrepreneur. Many of the great inventions in the United States resulted after dozens of failures, as
when Thomas Edison eventually developed a working light bulb. Edison identified a problem: Once the sun
set, working hours were restricted, as were daily activities such as reading a book or washing dishes. Edison,
along with many other inventors, recognized the need for an artificial light source. Consider how complex this
idea was and how many failures must have occurred before creating a product that emitted light.

Another condition that encourages entrepreneurial behavior is the ability and opportunity to connect with
other people to discuss ideas, problems, challenges, and solutions. This connection with other people, in an
open environment that supports the exchange of ideas, is essential for encouraging creativity and innovation.

With the advent of the Internet, people around the planet are becoming increasingly aware of geopolitical and
environmental situations across the globe. As more people observe these changes and situations, more
people exchange ideas. These discussions can generate new opportunities for people to discover methods for
solving problems. Any one of us could be living in one country but identifying a problem in another country.
Given our interests and backgrounds, we could actively choose to develop a solution for that problem. What
we need, as a general approach, is an efficient and transparent way to form companies and enable
constructive competition, along with continued free and fair trade.

These are just some of the areas that many nations and organizations consider as they seek to encourage a
transition away from group-prescribed thinking toward uniquely individual entrepreneurial ideas. Each of us
encounters life from a different perspective. Although we all might recognize the restrictions presented by the
sun setting every night, only a few people might question why we couldn't change that situation by creating
our own light. Similarly, someone in another country may observe our country (or vice versa) and ask why that
country has a particular problem. Meanwhile, people living with that problem may have become so
accustomed to it that they might not recognize the opportunity to seek solutions.

Increasing opportunities in entrepreneurial education are also driving growth. More colleges and universities
are teaching entrepreneurial studies and opening entrepreneurial centers that encourage students from every
discipline to become entrepreneurs.[16],[17] As the employment and entrepreneurial landscape continue to

15 Transparency International. n.d. www.transparency.org
16 National Survey of Entrepreneurship Education. n.d. www.nationalsurvey.org
17 "The Princeton Review & Entrepreneur Name the Top Undergraduate & Graduate Schools for Entrepreneurship Studies for 2020." Cision
PR Network. November 12, 2019. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-princeton-review--entrepreneur-name-the-top-
undergraduate--graduate-schools-for-entrepreneurship-studies-for-2020-300955876.html
18  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

evolve, some institutions have started offering courses to prepare students for work in the gig economy.[18] In
fact, some of the best new entrepreneurial ideas come from groups of students in different majors who
collaborate to create new, innovative business ideas that meet specific needs and challenges in today's world.
In some cases, students from different universities around the globe are connecting to come up with business
ideas to solve global problems, such as the lack of clean drinking water and the need for medical vaccination
programs. Technology and global travel have made such partnerships more common and very productive.

The world of entrepreneurship opens doors for each of us to look beyond our own self-created barriers and
explore opportunities around the world. Consider the creation of Starbucks, borne from the realization of how
pleasant it can be to sit at a European café and drink excellent coffee. Awareness of an idea that is
commonplace in one country, but new to a different country, presents the possibility of introducing that idea
to another nation. In the Starbucks example, was there a problem that needed to be solved? Not necessarily,
but the founder, Howard Schultz, had a desire to bring a specific quality-of-life element from one country to
another, a business idea with an entrepreneurial aspect. One of the entrepreneurial aspects of creating
Starbucks was the idea of mass expansion of coffee shops. Prior to Starbucks, the idea of creating a high-
quality coffee drink hadn't been developed. Even more significant was the idea of expanding the business
across the United States and then around the world.

Given the growth of coffee shops throughout the United States, we might not think that this idea is innovative,
but before Starbucks, coffee typically was served at a diner, and it was served out of habit, rather than as the
main attraction. With Starbucks, people changed their ideas about coffee and their coffee-drinking habits.
Although businesses like Dunkin' Donuts served coffee, their focus was on selling donuts, not coffee. As
Starbucks grew through repositioning coffee as their main product, other companies like Dunkin' Donuts and
McDonalds realized the missed opportunity in not reinventing the coffee market with multiple choices of high-
quality coffee. In fact, Dunkin' Donuts has changed its name to just "Dunkin," removing the emphasis on
doughnuts.[19]

Social and Environmental Issues and Opportunities

A social entrepreneur has an interest in solving a social, environmental, or economic problem. A social
entrepreneur identifies a problem with a social or community focus, a concern for quality of life, or concern for
our entire planet's health (you will learn more about social entrepreneurship in The Ethical and Social
Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs). One such person is Angad Daryani, a young serial inventor. Daryani left
school in the ninth grade to join the Media Lab at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), where he
worked on an industrial-scale air filter to clean pollutants and carcinogens out of our planet's air. Daryani's
home country of India is the world's third largest emitter of carbon dioxide, according to Global Carbon Atlas,
behind China and the United States (Figure 1.6).[20]

18 Diane Mulcahy. "Universities Should Be Preparing Students for the Gig Economy." Harvard Business Review. October 3, 2019.
https://hbr.org/2019/10/universities-should-be-preparing-students-for-the-gig-economy
19 Kate Taylor. "Dunkin' Donuts Is Officially Dropping the `Donuts' from Its Name Despite Earlier Backlash." Business Insider. September 25,
2018. https://www.businessinsider.com/dunkin-donuts-changes-name-no-donuts-2018-9
20 "Fossil Fuel Emissions." Global Carbon Atlas. 2017. http://www.globalcarbonatlas.org/en/CO2-emissions

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  19

Figure 1.6 The Mumbai skyline is clouded by hazy pollution. (credit: modification of "Smog over Mumbai" by
Christian Haugen/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Social Entrepreneurship

   Consider a social issue that you might feel compelled to take on as a passion project. Some social issues
   include childhood hunger, access to clean water, access to education, or opioid abuse. Watch Johann
   Hari's Ted Talk on addiction (https://openstax.org/l/52HariTedTalk) to learn more.

      · Do you have any ideas for creating an entrepreneurial venture around the idea of building quality
          relationships and communities?

      · How would you balance a passion project with an entrepreneurial purpose?

Not only is Daryani interested in solutions for air pollution, but his product will also provide financial gains and
add to his personal credibility as a serial entrepreneur, or someone who starts and harvests multiple
entrepreneurial ventures. Darvani describes himself as an inventor and social entrepreneur, combining his
interest in improving lives through a variety of entrepreneurial ventures including products like Sharkits (a do-
it-yourself-kit company that teaches children how to build technology), the SharkBot 3D Printer (an attractive,
low-cost, and reliable 3D printer), and several other projects that combine technology and human needs. As
each of these products advances to commercialization, the products and technology are becoming more
applicable for other uses as well. For more examples of projects that Darvani is working on, take a look at his
website (http://www.angadmakes.com), which includes videos and articles, and highlights the international
recognition he has received for his innovative work.
20  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

    ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

    Angad Daryani

    Research Angad Daryani and his technology to remove air pollution (https://www.cnn.com/2018/03/28/
    health/angad-daryani-tomorrows-hero/index.html).

      · What other products could this technology or methodology be used for, besides the originally
          intended application of improving air quality?

      · What critical decisions would you anticipate that Angad will face in creating and commercializing his
          product?

      · How would you define success for Angad or this air-cleaning company?

 1.2 Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define an entrepreneurial vision
  · Develop a vision statement

When you think of yourself as a successful entrepreneur, what types of images or feelings do you experience?
Do you find yourself daydreaming about creating the next great solution to society's problems, or do you see
yourself providing a solution for the next health or environmental crisis? Maybe you can imagine yourself
creating something that equally balances art, function, and ingenuity.
This section is designed to help you develop your entrepreneurial vision. Vision is an important part of
everyone's future, and this is especially true for entrepreneurs. Establishing your vision is the first of several
steps toward making your venture a reality.
Many would-be entrepreneurs aspire to launch the next great business or organization that will change the
world. Some know exactly what they want to create, whereas others figure it out as they go along. Although
there is no secret to success, you do need to have some idea about what you envision for your entrepreneurial
future. What do you see in your future? How do you want to contribute to the world?

Entrepreneurial Vision

Every successful entrepreneur that you encounter or read about likely started with an image or idea related to
something he or she felt passionate about creating. This occurs even when the person has no idea how (or if)
what they desire to accomplish or create will become a reality. An entrepreneur's vision is the start of a
roadmap that will determine where he or she wants to go with their entrepreneurial efforts. Vision speaks to
what the entrepreneur wants the business to look like in the future--perhaps five or ten years out.
Unfortunately, many potential entrepreneurs have dreams and ideas but never develop a concrete vision. A
vision statement is the picture you have for what the venture will become in the future: what it will grow into.
Be aware, though, that oftentimes, the identified vision at the start of the venture changes into something

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  21

different. In later chapters, we discuss how this change requires open-mindedness and a willingness to adapt.
The mission statement is a formal declaration about what the venture will do, what value it will provide to the
end customer, and how it will accomplish this action. In describing your mission, carefully think about the
value proposition that you provide. The value proposition is a summary statement that conveys the benefits
your product, service, or unique business process/model provides to customers. This relates back to the
perspective of problem solving. Not only do you need to solve the problem, but you also must provide value.
We might solve a problem, but if the value proposition isn't relevant or seen as "real" by the customer, the
venture will probably not be successful. Both concepts of a future vision and the mission of the venture should
be formalized into statements.

In spite of your best efforts, you may have trouble putting your entrepreneurial vision on paper. This is
normal, especially in the early stages of the process. You may want to start with an outline and fill in the details
later. Or set aside a short time each day that you can spend on this task so you train your mind to think about
the vision you are setting for yourself. If you experience a mental block, try changing your environment--go
outside, try a different time of day, or go to a setting that has similarities to the business you are interested in
creating. You might also consider talking with someone who has experience in the industry to give you
suggestions. Or better yet, find a mentor in your chosen area of interest and keep this person apprised of your
progress. Having someone to bounce ideas off is a great asset to have when imagining the possibilities of the
future.

   WORK IT OUT

   Finding a Mentor

   Mentorships can provide you with numerous benefits (Figure 1.7).
22  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

   Figure 1.7 Finding a mentor can provide you with invaluable benefits. (attribution: Copyright Rice
   University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   Read the article at https://www.forbes.com/sites/goncalodevasconcelos/2017/11/02/my-best-advice-for-
   entrepreneurs-find-a-mentor-this-is-why-and-how/#2bec86b1d469 on the benefits of having a mentor,
   and click on the resources the author provides in the article.
   Then read the article at https://www.inc.com/young-entrepreneur-council/4-types-of-mentors-every-
   young-entrepreneur-should-have.html, which discusses types of mentors. Notice that in this second
   article, the author focuses on sales, operations, business development, and entrepreneurial experience
   as the most significant areas that need expertise for startups.
   Next, describe the areas that you would want help from a mentor for learning and developing your
   business idea. Then, list a few possible avenues where you could find a mentor who fits your needs.
   Considering the information in these articles, how would this information help you develop your
   statements and describe your value proposition?

An entrepreneurial vision considers what you want your venture to become, what this venture will look like,
what the driving forces are, and what values and culture should surround it. Each individual entrepreneur has
a unique picture of what the venture will become. For example, Kevin F. Adler wanted to help homeless
people. He created Miracle Messages, a volunteer-based nonprofit organization with a goal of helping
homeless people reconnect with loved ones. The vision for this organization includes building a vast network
of volunteers and partnerships to stop homelessness and bring people together. This vision is about creating
community, helping each other, and strengthening communities. The business model encourages homeless
people to create short Miracle Messages through video, audio, or text, with messages then uploaded to social

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  23

media and other methods to find that person's loved one.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Globalizing Miracle Messages

   Go to the website www.miraclemessages.org to learn about the vision and mission of Miracle Messages.
   Their slogan, "Everyone is someone's somebody," conveys their culture of care and concern for all
   human life. As you read about this organization, consider what this organization could become in the
   future, with an extensive network that supports connecting volunteers to homeless people, then to loved
   ones, and to other organizations that support the physical relocations and resources to address the
   original reasons why the person became homeless. How can this organization become a global
   business? Consider families dislocated through wars, famine, and other disasters who want to find their
   loved ones. The infrastructure developed with Miracle Messages could be replicated for other
   populations besides homeless people in the United States. Depending on the founder's vision, Miracle
   Messages could continue to focus on homelessness in the United States, or the vision could expand into
   other geographic areas and needs.

In an entrepreneurial venture, when the vision has a shorter timeline, such as five years, it could focus on a
local problem or situation, and over time evolve into a vision that is broader and includes more diverse
markets or populations. Your vision should inspire the people involved in your startup to support your
venture. Use your imagination to create this picture of your venture with a focus on the future of the venture.
Even though entrepreneurs use their imaginations and creativity in developing this picture, they also need to
understand the venture's industry, the competition, and trends that are evolving or might evolve in the future.
This information helps guide the vision for the venture and define how it is uniquely different from any other
business. Ideally, the vision should be insightful, bold, inspirational, and believable, and it should be developed
into a formal vision statement.

The vision statement should also be clearly stated and discussed with the startup team. Although you might
not have a startup team, a mentor, or a support group developed yet, to create an entrepreneurial venture,
you will need support. Your support network understands that working without pay is often the normal
situation at the beginning, with the potential for financial rewards coming when the venture is harvested or
sold. For some entrepreneurs, knowing the vision includes the sale of the venture to another group or
corporation is difficult to accept. However, that is the point at which the venture can grow to become ever
more viable. Alternatively, if your vision is to be a small business owner, such as owning a franchise, then you
are buying into a business plan package that has already fine-tuned the processes and decisions to support
your success as the owner/manager of that business. A small business owner starts or buys into a business
idea that already exists, whereas an entrepreneur is someone who seeks to create something new through
either new products, services, methodologies, or combinations of ideas that create a new venture or
organization.

The lead entrepreneur should share the vision statement with employees and investors, as these groups are
formalized, communicating what this vision means personally and to the success of the venture. You might
also need to revisit this vision as your venture grows, making changes based on your decisions and knowledge
24                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

about your industry, products, and customers' needs. Even if your vision statement changes based on new
information and decisions, creating an initial vision statement is a valuable step and will help guide your
decisions.

   ARE YOU READY?

   A Personal Vision Statement

   What do you want your life to look like ten to twenty years from now? Consider these questions:
      · Where are you living?
      · What are you doing for a living?
      · What does your home look like?
      · Who lives in your home?
      · What are you doing with your life?

   You could describe a typical workday and weekend day in your life as part of answering these questions.
   Create a vision statement that describes the answers to these questions.

Creative Approaches to Developing Your Vision

There are many definitions of and ways to express creativity (you will learn more about creativity in Creativity,
Innovation, and Invention). Artists typically show their creative side in their art, musicians show their creativity
through music, and writers express their creativity in writing. Others express technical creativity through cell
phone innovations or new car technology. It is up to you to determine how you will express your creativity in
your venture and in your professional life. In most cases, when people follow their passions, their creativity
flows from that passion.

One approach to discovering your vision for your future is to begin with the end in mind. What picture of your
desired future do you have in mind? How could this vision fit with the ideas you have of creating a successful
venture? Notice that these questions are about both your personal future and the vision for your venture's
future. These two pictures should coexist. The vision for your personal future should allow for the necessary
resources to support the venture's future, just as the venture's future will provide for your personal future. We
will discuss work-life balance later in the chapter to help you identify what creates success as you describe
your vision.

Another approach to developing your vision is to use a creative thinking process. This type of thinking allows
people to come up with ideas that they might not have had without adopting a creative mindset. The creative
thinking process (covered in more depth in Creativity, Innovation, and Invention) has four steps: preparation,
incubation, illumination, and verification (Figure 1.8).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  25

Figure 1.8 These are the four steps of the creative thinking process. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

In the preparation stage, gather information and collect ideas. As part of the process of tapping into creative
ideas, you can apply divergent thinking by generating as many ideas as possible, even when those ideas do
not seem logical. Create a list of conflicting ideas, or ideas that are diverse and disparate. Preparation is the
first step of the creative thinking process. The next action is to walk away from thinking about the activity:
incubation. We are programming our minds to realize that the work done in preparation is an important topic
for consideration. When we walk away from consciously thinking about the activity or problem, we allow our
unconscious minds to continue to think about the activity, even though our conscious minds are busy doing
other things. This incubation period is essential for advancing creativity. In the incubation stage, you might go
for a walk, take a nap, or just continue with your daily activities. At some point, you may have a sudden
inspiration or illumination--an aha! moment--that clearly addresses the activity or problem you want to solve.
In this step, the answer often pops into our conscious minds, and we recognize how to proceed. The last step
is verification, crafting our vision statement or message, or responding to the exercise in creative thinking. You
can apply this creative thinking process to many different business situations. Once we further develop and
crystallize our ideas (the Business Model Canvas discussed in Launch for Growth to Success is a good tool for
this activity), we provide an opening for a creative and viable solution as we continue to think about the issue.

Design thinking, brainstorming, and mind mapping are tools that you will learn about later in the course.
Although these tools may be familiar, there are specific methodologies that can optimize their success in
entrepreneurial situations. Brainstorming requires that participants generate ideas around the desired topic
without judgment. You can do this alone or with others, but including other people provides a greater variety
of ideas, as one person's ideas might trigger another idea from someone else. Be sure to write down your
thoughts so that you can return to them later. Brainstorming is different from divergent thinking, which does
not require ideas to be associated with the identified topic. For example, in brainstorming on the topic of
26  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

helping the homeless population, we might come up with ideas such as finding community food and housing,
or providing free medical care. Using divergent thinking, we would arrive at more diverse ideas, such as
filming homeless people then uploading the videos to a social media website to connect family members with
the homeless person. These tools could incorporate divergent thinking in the idea-generation step, but
typically, unless people are taught how to use divergent thinking, the ideas generated are more structured
and constrained, and more logical. As much as we want to encourage divergent ideas, we also want to
discourage any judgment around our ideas. Once we start judging our ideas, we restrict our creativity and end
up with less than ideal solutions. Approach this process with some playfulness and relaxation.

Mind mapping is another popular technique for creative thinking. Here, you create an illustration on paper or
a chalk board. Write down the words that come to mind then link those words together with lines in a diagram
that shows how each word relates to the others. The idea is that one word can lead to another. You can
discover associations that might not have been evident before you created the mind map.

You can conduct research on entrepreneurial ideas by creating surveys and asking people questions about
their experiences related to your idea. For example, let's say you are considering creating a new non-messy
health food that can be eaten while commuting to work. You could ask people about their experiences eating
while commuting to work or ask questions about nutritional concerns or diets. Or you could find secondary
data on when people eat, eating while commuting, popular diets, or other related topics. Or you could find
case studies that focus on a few in-depth similar areas of interest or perform your own case studies by
selecting a few peers to track their eating habits. Or you could create a prototype of your product and ask
people to tell you about their experience using your product. You will learn more about research strategies in
Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity, Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques, and
Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Creativity through a Change in Routine

   Practice your creativity skills by changing your routine. Because our brains block out many routine
   activities, such as our commute to work, or other repetitious habits, we often fail to notice our
   surroundings. Pick one day this week to experience the world through a new perspective. Change your
   routine in as many ways as possible. As you change your routine, pay attention to how you are
   experiencing the day.

      · What was the experience like?
      · Did you notice being more alert to your surroundings?

   Consider how you can use this experience to learn how to identify new opportunities and to interact with
   people, situations, and objects to identify problems in a way that could be translated into an
   entrepreneurial venture.

Achieving Balance

Entrepreneurship comes with many challenges because the entrepreneur must wear many hats. This is
especially true if the entrepreneur is the only employee in the business. But regardless of the business
model,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  27

all entrepreneurs must be able to achieve balance in their lives between their dedication to growing their
entrepreneurial venture and their personal life. Developing a vision that includes different areas of your
professional and personal life can help make this type of balance achievable.

How do you define balance in your life? What areas do you consider when you think about a balanced life?
Having enough money to support your lifestyle might be one goal. Other areas might include physical
activities or hobbies, social interactions and entertainment, satisfaction with how you earn money, your family
and personal relationships, and other interests and values. Some entrepreneurs start lifestyle ventures to
achieve this balance. But how do we achieve balance when our goal is to be a career entrepreneur?

A career entrepreneur is someone who takes on the daily management as the owner of the venture,
accepting, and perhaps enjoying, the daily risks and rewards of managing and building the venture such as
Roxanne Quimby. For Roxanne Quimby, growing Burt's Bees involved making difficult decisions, such as
relocating from Maine to California to meet the growth needs of the company. Even though Roxanne wanted
to provide employment opportunities to people in northern Maine, she knew that her business needed the
right infrastructure for success, and that infrastructure wasn't available in Maine. If you choose to become a
career entrepreneur, your focus may be primarily on advancing your entrepreneurial idea into a successful
venture, like Roxanne did with Burt's Bees; this can come at the expense of personal life goals.

Many career entrepreneurs need support from family and friends who accept that the lead entrepreneur's
attention and energy are required for the success of the venture, and many lifestyle entrepreneurs will find
challenges in meeting the needs of the venture while maintaining work-life balance. Discussions with family,
close connections, and the entrepreneurial team should occur in the early idea-formulation stage to gauge the
support of the people whose interests might be compromised by the entrepreneur's dedication to advancing
the venture.

Clearly defining your idea of success for your life, and for your venture, is an important step in achieving
balance. What are your priorities? What can you do to balance the success of your new venture, the success of
your own life, and the success of your family? Considering that balancing all the roles that we have in life is a
frustration point for many people, can you find an opportunity to create an entrepreneurial venture?

   WORK IT OUT

   Exploring What Success Means to You

   What is your own definition of success? It's helpful for your entrepreneurial ventures for you to explore
   and define what success means for you personally and professionally.

      · This short Ted Talk explores what makes a person successful: https://www.ted.com/talks/
          richard_st_john_s_8_secrets_of_success?referrer=playlist-short_talks_to_watch_during_yo. Knowing
          how you personally define success is a worthwhile activity to help achieve balance.

      · Consider these eight secrets to success as you think about work-life balance: https://www.ted.com/
          talks/nigel_marsh_how_to_make_work_life_balance_work

      · Here is another Ted Talk that offers perspective on our lives and what we consider as success:
          https://www.ted.com/talks/alain_de_botton_a_kinder_gentler_philosophy_of_success

   After reviewing these resources, think about how you would define success, and how you can use that
28                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

   knowledge to plan for a satisfying work-life balance.

As you explore what success means for your venture and how your definition aligns with balance between
your personal life and dedication to your venture, you should consider some of the unique challenges
entrepreneurs can face. For example, there might be a learning curve in unfamiliar areas of business, such as
accounting or finance. Or you might face a dilemma about whether to expand a product line, or whether or
where to open a new location. Entrepreneurs often mention the physical requirements of starting up a
business. Physical demands can include the sheer stamina needed to clean a new space, move in, and set up
shop. Depending on your business, you also might need to adjust to being on call twenty-four/seven. Here
again, developing a vision of where you want to be in the future can help you plan for the challenges you will
face in the early stages of your business.

Entrepreneurship can be especially draining if you are not prepared for the tasks at hand--as can be the case
with any professional or personal role. Therefore, self-care and emotional awareness can play a key role in
maintaining your emotional health as an entrepreneur. Taking time for yourself is very important. This could
involve creating a time management calendar. Tracking how you spend your time can keep you on schedule
with tasks and prevent you from expending too much on any one area of the business or your personal life in
detriment to the other. Taking time away from the business is emotionally healthy and can provide important
perspective that can help you make better decisions. "Leaving work at the office" is a successful strategy that
many business people use to separate their personal and professional lives. If this is not possible--for
example, if you work from home--setting aside family or personal time can allow for work-life balance.

Having trusted advisors and mentors for your business and personal life can also promote emotional health.
When you face a decision or challenge that you have difficulty with, it is important to have someone to talk to
who knows you and knows your situation. Some entrepreneurs may find themselves in their first experience of
leading others, with total responsibility for the outcomes as owner of the business. Every business person
should have a personal leadership improvement plan. This plan can take the form of academic classes or
professional coaching, but sometimes, it will be a personal commitment to improvement. You should identify
your preferred leadership styles, as well as leadership strengths and weaknesses. It might be useful to look
back on your own work experiences to identify which leadership traits you admired and which ones you didn't.
As with any other business skill set, you can learn and improve these strengths in yourself. You also can hire
people with complementary skills to handle the areas that you feel unsure about.

Being aware of your own strengths and weaknesses, as well as of your preferences and dislikes, will help you
achieve and maintain balance in your life. Having counselors, mentors, advisors, checklists, and timelines can
keep you on track and prevent any one area of your business or personal life from taking over or being
neglected.

The Importance of Goals

Entrepreneurial vision imagines a future, whereas goals focus on a desired outcome. Although vision is key to
creating the future that you want for yourself and your business, goals are important to help you realize the
steps needed to make that vision a reality.

Read through your definitions of success and your vision statement. Now create a list of possible actions that
will help you achieve success and accomplish your vision. Review your list and categorize the words and
actions in terms of relevance and time frames.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  29

SMART goals are well-structured and defined goals that are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and
timely (Figure 1.9).

  · Specific: Your goals should be precise rather than overly broad.
  · Measurable: You should be able to test in some quantifiable manner whether a goal has been met,

      meaning that there needs to be some method to determine if the goal has been met or not.
  · Achievable: The goal must be attainable; it cannot be so lofty that it cannot be accomplished. On the other

      hand, the goal should not be so easy that it can be accomplished quickly or with little effort.
  · Relevant: The goal should be well suited for what you want to accomplish; this means that the goal should

      be relevant to the outcome needed.
  · Timely: Each goal needs to have a defined deadline, the time when the goal must be accomplished. What

      time frame do you have for completing your goals? How does this timeline fit into your overall plan?

Figure 1.9 Creating SMART goals can help you realize your vision. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

For example, if your personal definition of success and your vision for your future include financial
independence--with, say, a vacation home in the mountains--what goals can you define today that will lead to
this outcome? You would include financial goals tracked either monthly or yearly to save a set amount of
money based on your projection of how much money it will take to own these two vacation homes. You would
also set goals about finding the right locations. This process is also necessary to support the success of your
business venture. Setting goals is a powerful approach that leads us to the future we want for our lives.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Roomify's Goals

   Research Roomify at https://www.inc.com/profile/roomify and www.roomify.com. If you were one of the
   cofounders of this company, what goals would you create for this business? Should you harvest the
   company? Expand into other related products? Repackaging products for ease of purchasing is an
   excellent idea that can be translated into other areas. Can you think of a new idea based on repackaging
30                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

    products that is focused on the benefits of saving people time and the hassle of decision-making? Create
    a list of at least ten ideas based on the idea of saving people time and adding convenience to their lives.
    Which ideas most appeal to you?

Here is a fictional example of an entrepreneur's goals, which we can test against the SMART criteria to see if
they are feasible. Soraya runs a small tutoring business in Dallas, Texas. Her target market is high school
students. Soraya is currently the only employee in her sole proprietorship, but she hopes to hire more
employees soon. She is excited about her business, and so far, she has done well in the four years that she has
been operating it. On the advice of a friend in business school, Soraya has defined three business goals for the
next year. They are:

 1. Increase sales by 50 percent.
 2. Open a new location.
 3. Hire two employees.

In reviewing these goals using the SMART criteria, it is evident that goals one and three are specific because
they are quantitative, but goal two is not. All three goals can be measured. With Soraya as the only employee, it
is unlikely that she can achieve goals one and two, but goal three is achievable. And hiring more staff would
increase the likelihood of achieving additional goals. All three goals are relevant to growing the business. And
each goal could use more detail in terms of being timely. That is, in order to increase sales by 50 percent in the
upcoming year, Soraya should have additional monthly or quarterly sales goals to meet her annual goal.
Likewise, the opening of a new location requires more time-bound details, such as leasing or purchasing the
location, and determining the business model for this location. Finally, hiring additional employees should
have a time component as well, such as a timeline for recruiting, interviewing, selection, hiring, and training.
Therefore, Soraya's goals are appropriate for her small tutoring business, but they need refining so that they
meet the SMART criteria. Soraya is more likely to achieve SMART goals, and they are more likely to lead to
desired business outcomes.

 1.3 The Entrepreneurial Mindset

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain what it means to have an entrepreneurial mindset
  · Describe what is meant by entrepreneurial spirit or passion

Entrepreneurship takes many forms (see Table 1.1), but entrepreneurs share a major trait in common: An
entrepreneur is someone who identifies an opportunity and chooses to act on that opportunity. Most business
ventures are innovative variations of an existing idea that has spread across communities, regions, and
countries, such as starting a restaurant or opening a retail store. These business ventures are, in some ways, a
lower-risk approach but nonetheless are entrepreneurial in some way. For example, Warby Parker, a profitable
startup founded by four graduate students at Wharton, disrupted a major incumbent (Luxottica) by providing
a more convenient (online initially), affordable, and stylish product line for a large segment of consumers. In
this sense, their innovation is about creating something new, unique, or different from the mainstream. Yet
they attracted an existing, and in some ways mature, sector of an established industry. In a different way,
McDonalds, which is 90 percent owned by franchisees, introduced an "all day breakfast" menu in 2017 that

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective                                                                                              31

was hugely successful; it also targeted a larger segment (in part younger consumers) and brought back
consumers who had chosen other options. In summary, many entrepreneurs start a new venture by solving a
problem that is significant, offering some value that other people would appreciate if the product or service
were available to them. Other entrepreneurs, in contrast, start a venture by offering a "better mousetrap" in
terms of a product, service, or both. In any case, it is vital that the entrepreneur understand the market and
target segment well, articulate a key unmet need ("pain point"), and develop and deliver a solution that is both
viable and feasible. In that aspect, many entrepreneurs mitigate risks before they launch the venture.

Being aware of your surroundings and the encounters in your life can reveal multiple opportunities for
entrepreneurship. In our daily lives, we constantly find areas where improvements could be made. For
example, you might ask, "What if we didn't have to commute to work?" "What if we didn't have to own a
vehicle but still had access to one?" "What if we could relax while driving to work instead of being stressed out
by traffic?" These types of questions inspired entrepreneurial ventures such as ride-sharing services like Uber,
the self-driving vehicle industry,[21] and short-term bicycle access in the free bike-sharing program in Pella,
Iowa (Figure 1.10).[22]

Figure 1.10 A bike-sharing program in Pella, Iowa, allows users to access bikes at a variety of locations.
(credit: "Corral of VeoRide Dockless Bike Share" by "paul.wasneski"/Flickr, Public Domain)

These ideas resulted from having an entrepreneurial mindset, an awareness and focus on identifying an
opportunity through solving a problem, and a willingness to move forward to advance that idea. The
entrepreneurial mindset is the lens through which the entrepreneur views the world, where everything is
considered in light of the entrepreneurial business. The business is always a consideration when the
entrepreneur makes a decision. In most cases, the action that the entrepreneur takes is for the benefit of the
business, but sometimes, it helps the entrepreneur get ready to adopt the appropriate mindset. The mindset
becomes a way of life for the entrepreneur. Entrepreneurs often are predisposed to action to achieve their

21 Matthew DeBord. "Waymo Could Be Worth as Much as $75 Billion--Here's a Brief History of the Google Car Project." Business Insider.
September 9, 2018. https://www.businessinsider.com/google-car-project-history-2018-8
22 Ethan Goetz. "Bike Share Program Launched Monday." The Chronicle. July 2, 2018. https://www.pellachronicle.com/gallery/bike-share-
program-launched-monday/article_950cebac-7e49-11e8-97a0-8fd615410188.html
32                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

goals and objectives. They are forward thinking, always planning ahead, and they are engaged in "what if"
analyses. They frequently ask themselves, "What if we did this?" "What if a competitor did that?"--and
consider what the business implications would be.

Most people follow habits and traditions without being aware of their surroundings or noticing the
opportunities to become entrepreneurs. Because anyone can change their perspective from following
established patterns to noticing the opportunities around them, anyone can become an entrepreneur. There is
no restriction on age, gender, race, country of origin, or personal income. To become an entrepreneur, you
need to recognize that an opportunity exists and be willing to act on it. Note, however, that the execution of
the entrepreneurial mindset varies in different parts of the world. For example, in many Asian cultures, group
decision-making is more common and valued as a character trait. In these regions, an entrepreneur would
likely ask the advice of family members or other business associates before taking action. In contrast,
individualism is highly valued in the United States and so many US entrepreneurs will decide to implement a
plan for the business without consulting others.

Entrepreneurial Spirit and Passion

An entrepreneurial spirit allows entrepreneurs to carry a manner of thinking with them each day that allows
them to overcome obstacles and to meet challenges with a can-do attitude. What does it mean to have an
entrepreneurial spirit? For the purposes of this discussion, it could mean being passionate, purposeful,
positive, bold, curious, or persistent.

The founders of Airbnb have a passion for supporting individual rights to rent out unused space. Why should
the established model of hotels prevail? Why shouldn't an individual homeowner have the freedom to rent out
unused space and leverage that space into an income? Airbnb has succeeded in creating more flexible and
affordable options in the space of the rapidly growing "sharing" economy. At the same time, some states and
municipalities have raised issues about the regulations monitoring ventures like this. While entrepreneurial
spirit is partly about fighting for individual rights and freedoms, there should be a balance between economic
freedom and consumer protection. The entrepreneurial spirit involves a passion for presenting an idea that is
worthwhile and valuable, and a willingness to think beyond established patterns and processes, while still
keeping in mind local laws and regulations, in the quest to change those established patterns, or at least to
offer alternatives to those established patterns.

Passion is a critical component of the entrepreneurial process. Without it, an entrepreneur can lose the drive
to run the business. Passion can keep an entrepreneur going when the outside world sends negative
messages or less-than-positive feedback. For example, if you are truly passionate about starting an animal
shelter because of your love of animals, you will find a way to make it happen. Your internal drive to help
animals in need will spur you on to do whatever it takes to make the shelter become a reality. The same is true
of other types of startups and owners with similar passions. However, passion needs to be informed by the
entrepreneur's vision and mission--passion of the sake of passion is not enough. A clear mission
statement--which details why the business exists and the entrepreneur's objectives for achieving that
mission--will guide an entrepreneur's passion and keep the business on track. Passion, vision, and mission
can reinforce each other and keep the entrepreneur on the right track with next steps for the business.

Some ideas might seem small or insignificant, but in the field of entrepreneurship, it's important to recognize
that for every new startup, someone else may recognize a spin-off idea that expands upon the original idea.
The opportunities for identifying new possibilities are endless. Review your work in creating spinoff ideas for
Angad Darvani's projects, or Kevin F. Adler's Miracle Messages venture. Or consider possible spin-off ideas

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  33

around the technology used in agriculture. Creating spin-off ideas fits well with our discussion of divergent
thinking and brainstorming. Through these processes, we can discover new uses for existing technology, just
as Ring did by using video technology to add security by allowing customers to see who is at the door without
opening it.

An Entrepreneurial Mindset in Your Discipline or Field

Within your industry of interest or area of study, what are the challenges that create frustration? How can
these be turned into opportunities? Earlier in this chapter, we discussed Evernote, a company that focuses on
expanding our memories by storing and organizing information. Let's look at some other examples of
entrepreneurial endeavors in specific industries to help you plan your own venture in your own industry.
In the agriculture industry, insects, weeds, weather conditions, and the challenges of harvesting crops are all
ripe for entrepreneurial activities. The move toward organic produce has also affected this industry. From an
entrepreneurial perspective, what products could you invent to support both organic farming and the
problems of insects that damage or destroy crops? The old method was to use chemical sprays to kill the
insects, but today, the growing demand for organic foods and increased awareness of the impact of chemical
sprays on our environment are changing this scenario. One new idea to solve this problem combines a
vacuum cleaner with an agriculture product.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video on the creation of a crop vacuum that sucks up insects and bugs (https://openstax.org/
   l/52BugVacuum) to learn more.

A bug vacuum is an example of how using divergent thinking contributed to the solution of removing bugs
from crops without using chemicals. In the group activity of creating divergent ideas, this idea may not have
been received well. However, in the incubation stage, the idea must have come forward as a viable solution.
Entrepreneurs frequently face the challenge of pressure to conform to established habits and patterns within
industries.
Often, the entrepreneurial mindset includes futuristic ideas that shake up the normal, conventional processes
that are grounded in experience over time. Tried-and-tested processes and products that have a proven
history of success can be a formidable obstacle to new ideas. A new idea may even appear as impossible or
outlandish, perhaps even an embarrassment to the steady and predictable practices established within an
industry. This can create a dilemma: Do we try something new and unproven that lacks documented research?
Sometimes, we must disregard our past successes and research to be open to new possibilities for success
and failure. An entrepreneurial mindset includes creativity, problem-solving skills, and a propensity to
innovation.[23] Open-mindedness is one characteristic that supports creativity, problem solving, and innovation.
Taking the time to explore new ideas, dream, reflect, and view situations from a new perspective contribute to
the entrepreneurial mindset. Some innovations can lead to disruptions within the industry, or even create a
new industry.

23 Emma Fleck. "Needed: Entrepreneurial Mindset." Central Penn Business Journal, 34(12), 10. http://pageturnpro2.com.s3-website-us-
east-1.amazonaws.com/Publications/201803/15/83956/PDF/131668002208352000_CPBJ033018WEB.pdf
34  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

The innovator's dilemma was presented by Clayton Christensen to explain disruptive technology, which are
technologies that, once introduced, displace established patterns, processes, and systems previously accepted
as normal or accepted. One example of a disruptive technology is Airbnb, a company that threatens the
established hotel industry by connecting personal resources to people who desire those resources. If you have
a spare bedroom that you aren't using, why not sell that space to someone who wants and needs the space?

Airbnb has become a significant threat to the established hotel industry's business model of building large
hotels and renting rooms within those hotels to their customers. Airbnb has reconfigured that model, and
since its 2008 launch, 150 million travelers have taken advantage of 3 million Airbnb listings in more than 191
countries. Airbnb has raised more than $3 billion (plus a $1 billion credit line) and is considering selling stocks
to support significant expansion. The value of Airbnb is approximately $30 billion. Compare this market value
to Hilton's market capitalization of $19 billion and Marriott's of $35 billion. If you were the CEO of Hilton or
Marriott, would you be worried? The hotel industry recognized Airbnb as a threat, and in 2016, began a
campaign to create legislation to rein in Airbnb's growth and popularity. From the hotel industry's perspective,
Airbnb is not playing by the same rules. This is the definition of disruptive technology, the focus on creating a
new idea or process that negates or challenges established process or products.[24]

Sometimes disruptive technologies result from not listening to customers. Customers don't always know what
they want. Customer groups might need to be redefined by the entrepreneurial team on the basis of better
models, knowing when to invest in developing lower-performance products that promise lower margins while
still satisfying the need, and knowing when to pursue small markets at the expense of larger or established
markets. Basically, disruptive technologies occur through identifying new and valuable processes and
products.

The founders of Airbnb recognized that some people have unused resources, bedrooms, that other people
need. We can apply this idea to other unused resources such as vehicles and motor homes. We see this model
reproduced in short-term car rental and bike-sharing programs.

24 Katie Benner. "Inside the Hotel Industry's Plan to Combat Airbnb." New York Times. April 16, 2017. https://www.nytimes.com/2017/04/16/
technology/inside-the-hotel-industrys-plan-to-combat-airbnb.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  35

     Key Terms

career entrepreneur someone who takes on the daily management as the owner of the venture, accepting,
     and perhaps enjoying, the daily risks and rewards of managing and building the venture

disruptive technology technology that once introduced, displaces established patterns, processes, and
     systems previously accepted as normal or accepted methods

divergent thinking process of generating as many ideas as possible, even when those ideas do not seem
     logical; the list of ideas can be conflicting, diverse, and disparate

due diligence conducting the necessary research and investigation to make informed decisions that
     minimize risk

entrepreneur someone who identifies an idea that no one else has acted on or identified; small business
     ownership and franchising are also entrepreneurial options

entrepreneurial mindset awareness and focus on identifying an opportunity through solving a problem,
     and a willingness to move forward to advance that idea

entrepreneurial venture any business, organization, project, or operation of interest that includes a level of
     risk in acting on an opportunity that has not previously been established

entrepreneurial vision idea of what an entrepreneur wants a venture to become, what it will look like, what
     the driving forces are, and what values and culture should surround it

harvest point at which the venture is sold, at which time the investors receive a return on their investment
lifestyle venture business whose founders' primary focus is the lifestyle they will attain through becoming

     entrepreneurs, rather than a primary interest in financial rewards
mission statement statement of an organization's reason for being that defines its primary long-term goal,

     explains what the venture will do, what value it will provide to the end customer, and how it will
     accomplish that action
opportunity-identifying perspective method for identifying a problem and determining how it could be
     translated into an opportunity to create a new venture
quantifiable manner method to determine if a goal has been met or not
serial entrepreneur entrepreneur who becomes involved in starting multiple entrepreneurial ventures
SMART goals well-structured and defined goals that are specific, measurable, achievable, realistic and timely
social entrepreneur entrepreneur who has an interest in solving a social, environmental, or economic
     problem
value proposition summary describing the benefits (value) customers can expect from a particular product
     or service
vision statement picture of what the venture will become in the future or what the venture will grow into

     Summary

1.1 Entrepreneurship Today

An entrepreneur is someone who takes on an entrepreneurial venture to create something new that solves a
problem; small business ownership and franchising are also entrepreneurial options. The venture could be for
profit or not for profit, depending on the problem it intends to solve. Entrepreneurs can remain in a full-time
job while pursuing their ideas on the side, in order to mitigate risk. On the opposite end of the spectrum,
entrepreneurs can take on lifestyle ventures and become serial entrepreneurs. There are many factors driving
the growth of entrepreneurship, including employment instability, motivation to create something new,
financial factors and free time associated with retirement, and the greater acceptance of entrepreneurship as
36  Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

a career choice. The cultures of nations around the world affect the ability for entrepreneurs to start a venture,
making the United States a leader in entrepreneurial innovation. Entrepreneurs often find inspiration in social,
environmental, and economic issues.

1.2 Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals
Establishing an entrepreneurial vision helps you describe what you want your venture to become in the future.
For most entrepreneurial ventures, the vision also includes the harvesting or selling of the venture. There are
creative ways, such as brainstorming and divergent thinking, as well as investigative ways to define an
entrepreneurial vision. Once you have established your vision, it is important to write goals to help you realize
the steps toward making your vision a reality.

1.3 The Entrepreneurial Mindset
Identifying new possibilities, solving problems, and improving the quality of life on our planet are all important
aspects of entrepreneurship. The entrepreneurial mindset allows an entrepreneur to view the world as full of
possibilities. Entrepreneurial passion and spirit help entrepreneurs overcome obstacles to achieve their goals.
Disruptive technologies involve using existing technology in new ways and can provide new opportunities as
well as new challenges. Entrepreneurship is transforming some industries and potentially creating others,
though many entrepreneurs create value by starting small businesses, buying franchises, or introducing new
services in mature industries. The key thing to remember is that anyone can be an entrepreneur and that new
technologies are making the cost of starting a new business less costly, but still risky at some level.

     Review Questions

1. What factors contribute to a growing interest in entrepreneurship?
    A. unemployment levels
    B. low job turnover rates
    C. increasing levels of creativity
    D. decreasing rates of discrimination

2. Angel investors contribute to the entrepreneurial world by ________.
    A. outpacing venture capitalists in access to startup funds
    B. directly investing in entrepreneurial startups
    C. holding seminars to teach people how to become an entrepreneur
    D. forming groups of other investors to supply greater quantities of investment funds to entrepreneurs.

3. An entrepreneur is someone who ________.
    A. creates a small business based on other existing businesses
    B. creates a home-based business that sells products available through other retailers
    C. creates a business around the idea of solving a problem
    D. is highly creative

4. Roxanne Quimby of Burt's Bees is an example of an entrepreneur primarily for which of the following
reasons?

    A. She saw available resources and recognized the resources could be used to create a business.
    B. She acted on her passions.
    C. She solved a significant societal problem.
    D. She had the time and energy to dedicate to starting business.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective                                                                     37

5. In the early stages of developing an entrepreneurial venture, the entrepreneur might seek funding from
which group?

    A. venture capitalists
    B. the local bank
    C. friends and family
    D. shark tank

6. The acronym SMART for goal setting stands for ________.
    A. short-term, measurable, accurate, relevant, and timely
    B. specific, measurable, accurate, relevant, and timely
    C. specific, measurable, achievable, realistic, and time oriented
    D. specific, measurable, achievable, results, and time oriented

7. A vision statement does not include ________.
    A. a picture of the future described in words
    B. concepts and ideas that inspire and focus people's actions toward a united outcome
    C. both creative and exploratory process in creating the vision
    D. the scope of the venture

8. Which one of the following is not a quantifiable result?
    A. 5 percent annual growth in sales
    B. increase market share by 2 percent
    C. decrease collection of accounts receivable by $5,000.00
    D. increase creativity throughout the venture

9. Which of the following is not a creativity building technique or tool?
    A. conducting a case study
    B. brainstorming activities
    C. mind map creation
    D. brain writing

10. Disruptive technologies include all but which of the following?
    A. new methods or approaches that make established methods obsolete
    B. self-booking of air travel
    C. restaurant food delivery services
    D. a change from ownership of resources to the ability to have access to resources

11. The entrepreneurial mindset includes ________.
    A. a willingness to develop ideas that are not always initially popular
    B. a willingness to wait for an idea to become popular before moving forward with that idea
    C. an ability to focus on past successes
    D. a belief in following tradition and established patterns

     Discussion Questions

1. Why is the United States a leader in entrepreneurship?
2. What commonalities do the top five countries have that put them in the lead for entrepreneurial ventures?
38                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

3. One of Roxanne Quimby's motivations in starting businesses included helping employ people in her
community. How does or doesn't this motivation fit in the definition of an entrepreneur as someone who
identifies a problem and solves that problem?
4. What are the similarities and differences between the business ventures of Wander Girls and Roxanne
Quimby?
5. Why is knowing your vision for the future important?
6. Why should we create goals using the SMART method?
7. What is the value in using divergent thinking when trying to solve a problem?
8. How would you explain the concept of an entrepreneurial vision to your college roommate who is a history
major?
9. What is the primary difference between divergent thinking and brainstorming?
10. Identify five disruptive technologies and the industries that these technologies impact.
11. In thinking about the future, and your own experiences, what opportunities are there for disruptive
technologies in one or two familiar industries?
12. What is the difference between an entrepreneurial mindset and entrepreneurial spirit?
13. Describe your own level of entrepreneurial spirit.

     Case Questions

1. What suggestions could you make to Angad Daryani on other products that would fit his focus on improving
the lives of people?

2. On Angad Daryani's website, he says he believes "that the path humanity follows, need to be pivoted for the
better." What other needs or problems do humans have? Create a list of twenty needs that would fit Angad
Daryani's belief statement.

3. Research Miracle Messages. Identify Miracle Messages vision statement, mission statement, and value
statements. Do not copy their statements, but rather create your own statements based on what you would
create if you were the lead entrepreneur for this organization.

4. Identify five other organizations that have services or products that you would want to partner with if you
were the lead entrepreneur of Miracle Messages. What value does each of these five organizations provide to
Miracle Messages' vision, mission, and value? What services or products are not supported either through
Miracle Messages or the five organizations you addressed? What new for-profit or nonprofit could be created
as a spinoff idea from your research on Miracle Messages?

5. Review the website http://www.coastaltractor.com/ to learn more of about Coastal Tractor. What spinoff
ideas could you identify using this same technology or concept as the bug vacuum?

6. In reviewing Coastal Tractor's website, what evidence of an entrepreneurial mindset is present within this
company's website?

7. Do you think Coastal Tractor is using a disruptive technology? Why or why not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective  39

     Suggested Resources

1.1 Entrepreneurship Today
https://www.entrepreneurship-campus.org
https://youtu.be/zV2vi8FilLM

1.2 Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals
The following links might provide you with more ideas about creating a vision statement.
https://website-designs.com/business/the-importance-of-a-vision-statement-for-entrepreneurs/
https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/3882-vision-statement.html
Check out this website's ideas for developing your vision: https://www.executestrategy.net/blog/write-good-

  vision-statement
Eleven Free Goal Setting Software & Tools You Can Use: http://www.goal-setting-college.com/goal-setting-

  software/11-goal-setting-software-tools-you-can-use-for-free/
YouTube: Achieve More by Setting Smart Goals: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yA53yhiOe04
Twenty-four Essential Mind Mapping and Brainstorming Tools: http://mashable.com/2013/09/25/mind-

  mapping-tools/#jP47h7Q818qM
Read more about the challenges of work-life balance and what brings satisfaction to entrepreneurs in this

  article: https://www.wsj.com/articles/why-some-entrepreneurs-feel-fulfilledbut-others-dont-1432610236
Learn about applying a SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, obstacles, threats) to your personal life:

  https://www.forbes.com/sites/lisaquast/2013/04/15/how-to-conduct-a-personal-s-w-o-t-analysis/

1.3 The Entrepreneurial Mindset
M. M. Baluku, J. F. Kikooma, and K. Otto, "Positive mindset and entrepreneurial outcomes: The magical

  contributions of psychological resources and autonomy." Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship 30, no.
  6 (2018): 473-498.
E. Fleck, "Needed: Entrepreneurial mindset." Central Penn Business Journal 34, no. 12 (2018): 10.
M. Israr and M. Saleem, "Entrepreneurial intentions among university students in Italy." Journal of Global
  Entrepreneurship Research 8, no. 1 (2018): 1.
https://www.christenseninstitute.org/results/?_sft_topics=disruptive-innovation
40                                                                                Chapter 1 The Entrepreneurial Perspective

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     2

              The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

Figure 2.1 College graduates face numerous choices and challenges when deciding which pathway will lead
to career satisfaction and success. (credit: modification of "commencement graduation ceremony" by
"Goodfreephotos_com"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

        2.1 Overview of the Entrepreneurial Journey
        2.2 The Process of Becoming an Entrepreneur
        2.3 Entrepreneurial Pathways
        2.4 Frameworks to Inform Your Entrepreneurial Path

      Introduction

   What do you plan to do with your life after graduating from school? This is one of the most common--and
   admittedly most terrifying--questions that students are asked on a regular basis. There are literally thousands
   of career choices and just as many pathways or options to reach them. How do you decide which career
   pathway is best for you? You might select a new career based on your major, a favorite high school subject,
   the advice of a family member or friend, or an inspirational summer or internship experience.
   What if none of those options reflect the future that you see for yourself? It may mean that you are destined to
   create your own career path by becoming an entrepreneur. Regardless of the career pathway that you follow,
   your entrepreneurial journey begins with a single step.

   2.1 Overview of the Entrepreneurial Journey

   Learning Objectives
   By the end of this section, you will be able to:
42  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

  · Explain the entrepreneurial journey to explore and discover entrepreneurship as a career choice
  · Identify the steps, decisions, and actions involved in the entrepreneurial journey
  · Recognize the rewards and risks of the steps in the entrepreneurial journey

Self-Employment as an Entrepreneurial Journey

When the economy and the job market are strong, the entrepreneur has a safety net that decreases the risks
in creating a new venture, a startup company or organization that conducts business or is created to satisfy a
need, and allows for a quick recovery if the venture is not successful. There are more new startups when there
are high levels of confidence in both the venture's success and the entrepreneur's confidence in finding
employment if the venture fails. People over 40 years of age account for most new startup activity, in part
because of the continuing trend in which a business may choose not to hire an employee but instead hire an
independent contractor, a person who provides work similar to an employee without being part of the
payroll for the contracting business, and who is responsible for paying their own taxes and providing their own
benefits. With previous knowledge and expertise, this group of entrepreneurs recognizes opportunities
created by this move away from hiring full-time employees to more outsourcing to independent contractors.
One contributor is the gig economy, which involves using temporary and often transitional positions hired on
a case-by-case basis, rather than keeping a full staff of hired employees. Advantages for the employer include
a decrease in cost of benefits and loyalties to specific employees. Advantages for the hired worker or
independent contractor (sometimes called a freelancer) include no long-term commitment and flexibility in
accepting contracts. From an entrepreneurial perspective, the creation of websites that support the gig
economy offers opportunities for independent ventures. Many people today are becoming small
entrepreneurs. This process goes by a variety of names, such as the sharing economy, the gig economy, the
peer economy, or the collaborative economy. Maybe it means driving for a company such as Lyft, Uber, or
GrubHub, or perhaps offering services through TaskRabbit, UpWork, or LivePerson. The projected numbers of
independent contractors and on-demand workers are stated as 42 percent for small businesses by the year
2020, a growth of 8 percent from current figures.[1] And a projection of greater than 50 percent of the
workforce will be independent contractors by 2027 if this trend continues at the current pace.[2] In the
"Freelancing in America: 2019" report, the sixth annual study by UpWork and Freelancers Union, 57 million
United States citizens are estimated to freelance, with income approaching 5 percent of US gross domestic
product (GDP) at nearly $1 trillion and earning a median rate of $28.00 an hour, representing a hourly income
greater than 70 percent of workers in the overall US economy.[3] One report found that 94 percent of net job
growth from 2005 to 2015 was in alternative work categories, with 60 percent due to independent contractors
and contract company workers.[4]

According to the US Bureau of Labor Statistics, the number of self-employed Americans is growing, with 9.6
million self-employed people at the end of 2016. That number is expected to grow to 10.3 million by 2026.[5] A

1 David Pridham. "Entrepreneurs: Here's Good News for 2018." Forbes. 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidpridham/2018/01/10/
entrepreneurs-heres-good-news-for-2018/#660f5ebd6659
2 UpWork and Freelancers Union. "Freelancers Predicted to Become the U.S. Workforce Majority within a Decade, with Nearly 50% of
Millennial Workers Already Freelancing, annual `Freelancing in America' Study Finds." UpWork. October 17, 2017. https://www.upwork.com/
press/2017/10/17/freelancing-in-america-2017/
3 UpWork. "Sixth Annual `Freelancing in America' Study Finds That More People Than Ever See Freelancing as a Long-Term Career Path."
UpWork. October 3, 2019. https://www.upwork.com/press/2019/10/03/freelancing-in-america-2019/
4 David Pridham. "Entrepreneurs: Here's Good News for 2018." Forbes. 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidpridham/2018/01/10/
entrepreneurs-heres-good-news-for-2018/#660f5ebd6659; Lawrence F. Katz and Alan B. Krueger. "The Rise and Nature of Alternative Work
Arrangements in the United States, 1995-2015." 2016. https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/katz_krueger_cws_final_nov2018.pdf.
5 Elka Torpey and Brian Roberts. "Small-Business Options: Occupational Outlook for Self-Employed Workers." US Bureau of Labor Statistics.
May 2018. https://www.bls.gov/careeroutlook/2018/article/self-employment.htm

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  43

more recent study by FreshBooks' second annual "Self-Employment" report predicts that 27 million US
employees will leave traditional work in favor of self-employment by 2020, tripling the current population of
full-time self-employed professionals to 42 million. The main driver for this change in the workforce is a
greater desire for control over one's career with the ability to have greater control over working hours and
acceptance of work.[6],[7] Of course, self-employment is a broad category that includes small-business owners
as well as entrepreneurial startups and freelance gig employees. Since 2016, there has been a downward slide
in the number of employees working for self-employed businesses, which results from a variety of factors,
including difficulties in finding qualified employees, qualified employees having more employment options,
such as employment through the gig economy, outsourcing activities, and technology actions that decrease
the need for employees, with entrepreneurial activity remaining steady.[8]

Entrepreneurship around the World

In a 2017 Business Insider article, "America Needs Immigrant Entrepreneurs," David Jolley writes that
immigrants constitute 15 percent of the US workforce and 25 percent of the country's workforce of
entrepreneurs.[9] Forty percent of startups include at least one immigrant. Jolley's article cites a study that
identified immigrants as twice as likely to start a business as native-born Americans. In 2016, 40.2 percent of
Fortune 500 companies were founded by at least one immigrant or a child of immigrant parents. Dinah Brin,
writing for Forbes, stated in a 2018 article that immigrants form 25 percent of new US businesses and that new
immigrant-owned firms generated 4 to 5 million jobs.[10]

These statistics and other findings have prompted countries such as Canada to revise their immigration
policies to attract more entrepreneurial-minded immigrants. A World Bank report from May 2018 ranked the
United States 53rd out of 190 countries for ease in starting a business, with higher scores representing greater
ease.[11] The same report ranks the United States eighth for ease of doing business. The difference in these
rankings indicates that once a business is established, factors such as regulations, permits, access to credit,
and infrastructure support the business owner's ability to continue the business, but actually starting the
business is more challenging. For any given country, ease in starting a business and the country's interest in
supporting entrepreneurial activity are crucial in both attracting entrepreneurial people and supporting their
ability to open a business. Imposing restrictive regulations and processes on new ventures significantly
decreases the number of new ventures.

According to a 2018/2019 report, the highest rate of entrepreneurial activity worldwide in 2018 was in Angola
at 41 percent.[12] Angola's low-income economy meant fewer employment opportunities, creating pressures to
find other ways to earn an income. Guatemala and Chile reported 28 percent and 25 percent of
entrepreneurial activity, respectively, with medium- and high-income economies. These percentages are quite
high, considering that these economies offer employment opportunities in existing companies. In terms of

6 Carly Moulton and Dave Cosgrave. "Second Annual Self-Employment Report." FreshBooks. 2017. https://www.freshbooks.com/wp-content/
uploads/2018/04/2018selfemploymentreport.pdf
7 OECD Data. "Self-employment Rate." OECD.org. n.d. https://data.oecd.org/emp/self-employment-rate.htm.
8 Arnobio Molrelix. "The Biggest Reason the U.S. Needs Small Businesses to Thrive Has Nothing to Do with Taxes or the Economy." Inc., Dec.
20, 2018. https://www.inc.com/arnobio-morelix/inc-entrepreneurship-index-2018-q3.html
9 David Jolley. "America Needs Immigrant Entrepreneurs." Business Insider. September 5, 2017. https://www.businessinsider.com/america-
needs-immigrant-entrepreneurs-2017-9
10 Dinah Wisenberg Brin. "Immigrants Form 25% of New U.S. Businesses, Driving Entrepreneurship in `Gateway' States." Forbes. July 31, 2018.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/dinahwisenberg/2018/07/31/immigrant-entrepreneurs-form-25-of-new-u-s-business-
researchers/#10ee8099713b
11 "Ease of Doing Business Rankings." Doing Business. May 2019. http://www.doingbusiness.org/en/rankings
12 Niels Bosma and Donna Kelley. "Global Entrepreneurship Monitor 2018/2019 Global Report." GEM Consortium. January 21, 2019.
https://www.gemconsortium.org/report/50213
44  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

innovation, India at 47 percent, and Luxembourg and Chile at 48 percent each, take the lead in offering new
products and services not previously available. This entrepreneurial activity reflects the ease of starting a
business. The Netherlands, Poland, and Sweden were reported as the easiest countries in which to start a new
business, in part because many people in those countries view entrepreneurship as an attractive lifestyle. As
you can see, both economic opportunities and a country's specific support for entrepreneurial behavior
contribute to the number of people who enter entrepreneurial activities.

From a gender perspective, there are currently over 11 million woman-owned businesses in the United States.
This number includes both small business owners and entrepreneurs. Thirty years ago, there were only 4
million woman-owned businesses.[13] The number of woman-owned businesses has increased 45 percent
between 2007 and 2016, five times faster than the national average, with 78 percent of new women-owned
businesses started by women of color.

Starting Your Entrepreneurial Journey

How do you fit into this entrepreneurial journey? This chapter will help you to explore and discover your
potential for entrepreneurship as a career choice. Think of this exploration and discovery experience as a way
to map out a strategy to reach your goals or dreams. Let's imagine that your dream vacation is a hiking trip to
Glacier National Park in the US state of Montana. Just as hikers have different levels of experience, so do
entrepreneurs. Just as your plan for a wilderness hike would involve many stages, your entrepreneurial
journey involves multiple levels of self-discovery, exploration, experiences, and accomplishments on your way
to success. For our purposes, the term entrepreneurial venture means any type of new business,
organization, project, or operation of interest that includes a level of risk in acting on an opportunity that has
not previously been established. For each story of entrepreneurial success that is shared--such as that of
Facebook or Airbnb--there are even more lesser-known entrepreneurial success stories such as Zipline, a
company that delivers medical supplies in Rwanda and Ghana by drone. These entrepreneurs faced the same
dilemmas in pursuing their passion, or opportunities, which led them to their entrepreneurial destiny. They
courageously stepped out of their comfort zones to explore the possibilities that lie ahead. What is the
difference between entrepreneurs and you? The main difference is taking that first step. Many people have
ideas that fit into the definition of an entrepreneurial idea but never take that first step. Just as the Chinese
philosopher Lao Tzu suggests, every journey begins with a single step.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Taking the First Step

   Go to Fire Nation's website on taking the first step (https://openstax.org/l/52TakeFirstStep) to learn
   more. Changing your mindset (your perception of yourself and your life situation) and encountering
   trigger events (significant external situations) can nudge you into taking the first step toward being an
   entrepreneur.

      · Is there a venture you've always thought you should start but never did?
      · Think about what factors are stopping you. Consider your mindset and how you might change your

13 Gary Stockton. "Statistics and Obstacles Facing Women Entrepreneurs." Experian. January 29, 2018. http://www.experian.com/blogs/small-
business-matters/2018/01/29/statistics-and-obstacles-facing-women-entrepreneurs/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                            45

   mindset so that your venture could become a reality.
· What are some possible trigger events that could make the difference between starting your

   venture and waiting to start your venture?

Opening your future to the possibility of starting your own venture brings new and exciting experiences
(Figure 2.2). Every entrepreneur moves through several steps in considering the entrepreneurial journey. Once
you understand this journey, the steps will help you define your path toward creating and starting your new
venture. Each step of this process offers another level of understanding that prepares you for long-term
success. How will you achieve this success? By taking one step at a time, exploring and learning, considering
new ideas and expectations, and applying these experiences to achieve your personal outcome. Think of the
entrepreneurial journey as a guide to knowing what is in store for you as you start your new venture.

Figure 2.2 For some, preparing for an entrepreneurial journey may seem like going on a river-rafting
adventure that combines beautiful scenery with some exciting, but perhaps frightening, challenges. (credit:
"Hands Up" by Jeramey Jannene/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

One benefit of outlining a step-by-step process is the opportunity to explore different paths or behaviors that
may lead to an entrepreneurial venture. Think again of your dream visit to Glacier National Park. How would
you get there? What equipment would you need? What kinds of experiences would you expect to have? Think
of the Glacier National Park journey as your entrepreneurial journey, a metaphor intended to help you as you
create your career as an entrepreneur.

What makes someone ready or willing to choose entrepreneurship over becoming an employee of an
established business or a small business owner? It takes confidence, courage, determination, resilience, and
some know-how to select entrepreneurship as a career as well as the recognition of the opportunity. An
46                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

entrepreneur is defined as someone who not only recognizes an opportunity but who also is willing to act on
that opportunity. Both actions are required. We might identify an opportunity, but many people do not act on
the idea. Confidence, courage, and willingness are necessary to take that first step, as well as remembering
the following:

  · You are unique. Even if two similar people attempted to launch identical ventures, the results would likely
      not be the same. This is because each one of us has different ideas, approaches, available resources, and
      comfort levels, all of which influence the venture's development and eventual success.

  · Although there are no hard and fast rules or theories of the best way to launch into entrepreneurship, we
      can gain wisdom from the lessons learned by experienced entrepreneurs.

  · Selecting an entrepreneurial career requires honesty, reflection, and a tendency to be action oriented.
      You will need to recognize your own strengths, limitations, and commitment as part of that honesty.
      Reflection is required for self-growth--seeking improvements in your own skills, interactions, and
      decision making--and commitment is required to maintain consistency in your willingness to make the
      new venture a top priority in your life. You will also need to understand that you cannot accomplish
      everything by yourself, and you may need to ask for help. It helps to be curious, open, and able to take
      calculated risks and to be resourceful and resilient when faced with challenges or obstacles.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Entrepreneurial Potential Self-Assessment

   Take this quick Entrepreneurial Potential Self-Assessment (https://openstax.org/l/52EntSelfAssess) to
   assess your potential to become an entrepreneur. After completing this self-assessment, what new
   information did you learn about yourself? Do you think your answers will change as you acquire more
   life experiences and education? Why or why not?

    ARE YOU READY?

    Optimizing Interest Areas

    What are three areas that interest you? These could be hobbies, work activities, or entertainment
    activities. How would someone else describe your skills and interests, or what you are known for?
    Answering these questions provides insights into your strengths and interests. Next, what is one area
    that you are passionate about? What strengths could you bring to this passion to build your own
    business?
    Keep an open mind in looking for an opportunity that fits your strengths and interests. If you decide to
    explore entrepreneurship, what would be your first step? What are your initial thoughts about being an
    entrepreneur? What would you review or search to find more information on your idea or area of
    interest? With whom would you first question or discuss this idea? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  47

The Entrepreneurial Journey as a Trip

The entrepreneurial journey is your exploration to discover if entrepreneurship is right for you. Every
entrepreneurial journey is unique; no two individuals will experience it in the same way. Along the way, you
will find opportunities and risks coupled with challenges and rewards. It's useful to think about the
entrepreneurial journey as an exciting trip or other adventure. Most of the preparations and steps involved
with planning a trip are like those for starting a venture. Just as you would plan and prepare for a
trip--starting with inspiration and leading up to finally traveling on the trip--you might follow similar steps to
launch a venture. And just as you would prepare for any challenges that you might encounter on a trip--bad
weather, lost luggage, or detours--so you should consider potential obstacles or barriers along your
entrepreneurial journey (Figure 2.3). Think of these difficulties as opportunities to learn more about the
entrepreneurial process--and about yourself and how you manage challenges.

Figure 2.3 The entrepreneurial journey might also include potential obstacles and barriers that travelers on
this path must overcome. (credit: "Flickr - The U.S. Army - Camp Taji obstacle course" by The U.S. Army/
Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Developing a venture can be an exciting and active experience. It is also a lot of hard work, which can be
equally rewarding and enjoyable. Here we present the entrepreneurial journey as seven specific steps, or
experiences, which you will encounter along the road to becoming an entrepreneur. You'll find more
information about the entrepreneurial journey in other chapters in this book.

  · Step 1: Inspiration - What is your motivation for becoming an entrepreneur?
  · Step 2: Preparation - Do you have what it takes to be an entrepreneur?
  · Step 3: Assessment - What is the idea you plan to offer through your venture?
  · Step 4: Exploring Resources - What resources and characteristics do you need to make this venture work?
  · Step 5: Business Plan - What type of business structure and business model will your venture have?
  · Step 6: Navigation - In what direction will you take your venture? Where will you go for guidance?
  · Step 7: Launch - When and how will you launch your venture?

As you work through each step of the entrepreneurial journey you should prepare for significant aspects of
this experience. You will meet with rewards and challenges, the consequences that result from the decisions
made at various points along your journey. To visualize the steps of the entrepreneurial journey, imagine your
possible hiking trip to Glacier National Park (Table 2.1). Just as hikers have different levels of experience, so do
48                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

entrepreneurs. Compare the following aspects of preparing for a hike with aspects of your entrepreneurial
journey.

             Hiking and Entrepreneurial Journey Metaphor

   Type of   Mountain Hiking Skill Level                                          Entrepreneurial Journey Equivalent
     Hiker
Walker       · Basic or limited hiking experience                                 · New or limited entrepreneurial
                                                                                     exposure
Climber      · Moderate hiking experience
             · Special skills for adventure, difficult                            · Never started a venture
Mountaineer
                terrain                                                           · Some entrepreneurial knowledge
                                                                                     or experience
             · Experienced hiker with technical skills for
                climbing hills and mountains                                      · Exposure to entrepreneurship
                                                                                     (family or friend in business)

                                                                                  · Experienced entrepreneur
                                                                                  · Attempted or launched a venture

                                                                                     (solo or with partner)

Table 2.1

Step 1: Inspiration

When you think of being an entrepreneur, what is the inspiration for your venture? Just as you might have an
inspiration for a hiking trip to Glacier National Park, you will have an inspiration behind the decision to become
an entrepreneur. When you're planning a trip to a new and exciting place, one thing you might do is to
imagine what you will experience along the journey and on arriving at your destination (Figure 2.4). This
portion of the entrepreneurial journey includes imagining yourself as an entrepreneur or as part of an
entrepreneurial team. For this stage, you need a creative, open, and innovative state of mind, also known as an
entrepreneurial mindset, which is discussed in more detail in The Entrepreneurial Mindset and Creativity,
Innovation, and Invention. Dream big about your potential future and opportunities (Figure 2.5).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  49

Figure 2.4 The journey to entrepreneurship is as important as reaching your destination. (credit: "raise
challenge landscape mountain" by "mohamed_hassan"/Pixabay, CC0)

Figure 2.5 When inspired to start an entrepreneurial venture, one questions whether they can do it and
identifies obstacles that might present challenges. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

Step 2: Preparation

Just as when you are preparing for a trip, you need a plan (Figure 2.6) to move forward on your
entrepreneurial journey. Before your dream hiking trip, you might gather information about Glacier National
Park from a trusted source, such as a good friend with travel experience, or you might conduct online
research. Your friend's feedback could be just the motivation you need to try this experience yourself. Or you
might use your research to determine if the trip is possible. You will need to look at maps, either online or on
paper. Either way, you might also consider travel and accommodation options, such as booking a flight and
finding a place to stay. You might want to create benchmarks to align your journey with your available
resources, such as the amount of time and the amount of money you have to spend on the trip.
Benchmarking is a method of tracking target expectations with actionable results by comparing one's own
company's performance with an industry average, a leader within the industry, or a market segment.
Benchmarking can help design the trip to meet incremental goals and timelines. From both a travel plan and
50  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

an entrepreneurial perspective, although benchmarking is used as a control mechanism, we know that
situations can arise that require an alteration in the plan, causing the benchmarked items to also need
adjustments.

Figure 2.6 It is important to plan out your entrepreneurial journey, as you would plan out a trip. (credit:
"#conservationlands15 Social Media Takeover, August 15th, Santa Rosa and San Jacinto National Monument in
California" by Bureau of Land Management/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Which type of benchmarking will help you the most in beginning your entrepreneurial journey? Visit the
   American Society for Quality's resource page on benchmarking (https://openstax.org/l/
   52ASQbenchmark) for help.

To plan for an entrepreneurial journey, you should first conduct some preliminary research regarding your
venture idea. Your research must be honest and objective if it is to give you a clear picture of the venture.
Next, you might organize and prioritize your research and thoughts. For instance, you might see an idea like
yours online or on television, and feel disappointed that someone stole your great idea or beat you to the
punch. This is a common occurrence in entrepreneurship, but it should not discourage you. Instead, use that
knowledge and energy to find an overlooked or different aspect of your original idea. The difference might
even be the focus on a different target market, a specific group of consumers for whom you envision
developing a product or service. Further, it is critical to maintain a fluid focus upon expanding the scope of a
product or service to uniquely differentiate provisions of benefits apart from existing benefits or those offered
by competitors. A focus on a different target market is exactly how the Jitterbug smartphone was created,
because it targeted senior citizens. The Jitterbug smartphone offers a larger screen, larger buttons, and
simpler features that make it easier for older people to make quick calls or send texts.
Preparation also includes opening space in your life to the time and energy commitment needed to support
your new venture. Are the important people in your life willing to support the interest and passion you will

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                              51

need to dedicate the time, energy, and other resources to this new venture? Review the questions shown in
(Figure 2.7) to consider your answers to these questions. Preparation through research and other activities is
discussed in more detail in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity.

Figure 2.7 In preparing for your venture, you need to ask what you want to accomplish, what you want to
offer, and who you want to target. You also need to consider what potential obstacles might present
challenges. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 3: Assessment

Now that you have decided where to go for your trip and have gathered information to prepare for it, the next
action is to create and set your schedule. This action is simple but critical, because it involves connecting and
coordinating information and resources that fit your lifestyle and needs. For example, you might schedule an
early-morning Uber or Lyft to the airport and electronic delivery of your plane tickets to your smartphone. For
the entrepreneurial journey, this phase might also include recognizing appropriate relationships and
gathering needed resources. For many entrepreneurs, the opportunity to receive guidance from trusted
advisors or mentors may provide valuable insights on how to manage the process. This step allows for
reflection on your idea and intentions. After you've done your researching and gathering knowledge about
your idea through the preparation step, is the idea still viable? Is the idea still interesting to you? With a better
understanding of the industry, your idea, and your own interests that you gained in Step 2, is this idea
something that you still want to explore? This step is discussed more fully in Problem Solving and Need
Recognition Techniques with deeper coverage on the topic of opportunity recognition (Figure 2.8).
52  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

Figure 2.8 Assessing relationships and resources allows for reflection on your idea and intentions.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 4: Exploring Resources

Regardless of where you might travel, you could not complete your trip without adequate resources such as
available financing. There are many ways you might fund a hiking trip: savings, loan, pay-as-you-go,
sponsorship (family or friends), or any combination of these options, to name a few. No matter how you
finance your trip, it might help to have a balance of available credit and cash on hand to support your day-to-
day expenses and any extracurricular activities or even unforeseen emergencies. As discussed in
Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting, the US Small Business Administration (SBA) provides funding
opportunities.
This scenario is mirrored in the entrepreneurial journey. Just as you wouldn't begin a trip without adequate
resources, including access to cash, you wouldn't begin your entrepreneurial journey without the necessary
resources, including cash. The options between funding a trip and funding a new venture are similar, but they
have different names. For example, on a trip, you might use the cash you have on hand, from savings or a
personal loan. For an entrepreneurial journey, you might address cash management--management of cash
inflows and outflows to support cash needs of the venture--to include bootstrapping, a funding strategy that
seeks to optimize use of personal funds and other creative strategies (such as bartering) to minimize cash
outflows. (See Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting for more information on bootstrapping.)
Bootstrapping includes ideas like leasing instead of purchasing, borrowing resources, or trading unneeded
resources for needed ones. Another example of cash management includes a business model that offers
subscriptions rather than a payment received for an item purchased. Subscriptions provide the entrepreneur
with cash up front, with the buyer receiving benefits throughout the year. Consider the example of Amazon.
Amazon offers Prime with a yearly subscription service, as well as Subscribe & Save, Amazon Instant Video,
Amazon Mom, and Amazon Web Services, all based on a subscription business model.
According to Entrepreneur.com, other potential subscription-based models include services or products
geared to older consumers, with 8,000 people turning sixty-five every day. A similar idea offers services to
college students. Both ideas would offer family members a subscription that sends monthly gifts or products
to either the elderly person or college student. We also see this model offered to pet owners who pay a
monthly subscription to receive treats and toys for the family dog. Looking back at Amazon, we see the
company offering the ease of repeat purchases for frequently used products such as vitamins and air filters.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                            53

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Prospurly

   Prospurly is a subscription-based company that uses Cratejoy's subscription platform to sell small-batch
   artisanal products for bath, body, and home, marketing a natural lifestyle focused on the happiness of
   living a simple and appreciated life. Conduct your own research on Prospurly and other subscription-
   based businesses. Read the article, "How I Built a Subscription Business That's Made over 50k in 6
   Months," on Cratejoy (https://openstax.org/l/52CratejoyProsp) for more information about this company
   and Prospurly's move from ideation to profitability.

Other ideas for finding funding include applying for grant funding. The importance of cash and cash
management requires in-depth coverage, which is presented in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting and
Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues.
The idea of exploring resources includes many other options besides how to fund a new venture. In a trial run,
you would offer your product or service for sale within a limited market on a test basis to evaluate what
additional resources are needed to support the success of the venture (Figure 2.9). Examples of places where a
trial run fits well, depending on your product, include farmers markets, in-home sales, or through friends and
family. The idea is to track the feedback you receive about your product or service. How do people react to the
price, the quality of the product, the packaging? You can experiment by selecting one variable to
adjust--changing the price, the packaging, the sales pitch, the presentation, or the quantity--to track
reactions and make improvements based on this feedback. You may then decide to adjust other variables to
gather more information, as well as considering what other resources are needed for the success of the new
venture. Financing and ideas to preserve your financial stability are discussed more fully in Entrepreneurial
Finance and Accounting.

Figure 2.9 During a trial run, you can use a limited market to test your product or service. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 5: Business Plan

The ability to travel and visit new locations is a privilege and a great opportunity to gain exposure to new
54                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

experiences and opportunities. In addition to the work involved in preparing for a trip, the act and process of
traveling involves constant decision making to achieve your desired goals and outcomes. For instance, should
you travel to one location in Glacier National Park and explore that area in depth? Or should you attempt to
visit as many areas of the park as possible with your given resources and abilities?

The challenge at this step of your entrepreneurial journey is to remain focused on managing your resources to
meet your goals and outcomes as you write your business plan for your new venture. You will need to focus on
the skills, experience, and resources necessary for your venture, and the management and decision making
required to ensure success and adjust your plan based on changes and new information. Just as you might
find a location in Glacier National Park where you want to stay for a couple of nights, a deviation from your
original business plan (discussed in Business Model and Plan) will also require adjustments and changes
based on new information and insights.

Be honest with yourself by running a reality check about your ability to manage a venture, especially from a
personal-capacity perspective. For example, if you start a business, will it be a part-time or full-time venture?
Will you start while in school? Or will you wait until after graduation? The timing of opening the venture can be
the difference between success and failure. Consider the difference between hiking in Glacier National Park in
the middle of winter, when the daytime temperature is thirteen degrees below zero, and hiking in the middle
of summer, when the daytime temperature is seventy-nine degrees. The timing of your visit to the park is an
important part of your enjoyment and success in reaching your destination. In planning for your trip, you
would pay attention to your departure time to ensure enjoyment and success in your adventure. Similarly, as
part of your business plan, you would also research the best time to open your venture.

Finally, during your travels, getting lost, overwhelmed, or sidetracked is always possible. If you get lost when
traveling, you might refer to social navigation apps such as Google Maps, Waze, or HERE WeGo, to find turn-
by-turn directions and information. Or you might refer to a weblink, a printed map, or a local expert or guide
familiar with the area. The business plan is your map. You should identify decision points and milestones,
significant key accomplishments, in your plan. Milestones could include points such as hitting your breakeven
point, the point at which income from operations results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs. If the
financial projections in your business plan are unattainable, what is your next move within the plan? If you
don't reach the milestones identified in your business plan, what alternative choices can you make to redirect
your venture? The business plan, in its first draft, should inform you whether your venture has a chance at
success. If there are negative areas, what can you change? Building this plan before starting the business
provides you with knowledge and insights about your idea. Make any necessary changes to the plan to
strengthen the possibility of success. Then when you open the venture, track whether the reality of the
venture aligns with your business plan's projections and expectations. The business plan functions as both a
road map to help you see where you are going next in building your venture and as a checklist to track
whether you are on course or need to make adjustments. When entrepreneurs get off track, they can check
out self-help websites, speak with a business coach or counselor, or contact local agencies or organizations,
including those affiliated with the federal SBA. Organizations that offer free (or low-cost) small business
counseling, mentoring, and training, include:

  · SCORE (Service Corps of Retired Executives): https://www.score.org/
  · Small Business Development Center (SBDC): https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/osbdc/resources
  · Women's Business Center (WBC): https://www.sba.gov/local-assistance/

      find/?type=Women%27s%20Business%20Center&pageNumber=1
  · US Export Assistance Center: https://www.export.gov/welcome
  · Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC): https://veteransoutreachcenter.org/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  55

  · Other organizations include locally organized support such as pop-up entrepreneurial schools like PopUp
      Business School (https://www.popupbusinessschool.co.uk/) and https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/
      this-free-program-trains-people-how-to-start-a-business-but-without-debt

These and other resources will be discussed in more depth in Building Networks and Foundations. Look at the
review questions and the discussion questions at the end of this section to prepare for creating your business
plan. Business plans (Figure 2.10) are discussed more fully in Business Model and Plan.

Figure 2.10 Writing a business plan before launching a venture can give you important insights into your
idea and can help you modify your business before launch to give it a better chance of success. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 6: Navigation

Once you've completed your trip, reflect on the experiences you had. No matter how well you feel you have
planned, there is no way you can prepare for all of the potential challenges, changes, and obstacles that may
occur: missed or changed flights, poor weather, an unexpected illness, a trail or road closed for repairs, or
sudden good fortune. What parts of the trip went well? If you ran into a problem, how did you handle it? Was
the problem something you could have anticipated and planned for? Or was it unexpected? What did you
learn from the experience? If you were planning a trip to another national park, what would you do differently
in your planning stage? Just as seasoned travelers adjust to their circumstances and learn from their
experiences, so should you, as an entrepreneur, learn to adjust by meeting and managing challenges head on.

After completing your business plan, you will probably need to adjust your plan (Figure 2.11). You might
decide that you will not have enough resources to survive the time until your venture reaches the breakeven
point, or you might determine that the location you selected is no longer available. There are multiple
variables that require further exploration and research.

By nurturing an entrepreneurial mindset, you will be better prepared when opportunities, challenges, or
obstacles surface. Although you won't be able to predict or plan for every potential scenario along the
entrepreneurial journey, an entrepreneurial mindset helps you to be resourceful when opportunities,
challenges, or disappointments occur. By unpacking, or by taking an inventory of your available resources, you
can also get a better picture of what you may need to unload, retain, or discard, or even if a new direction is
the best course of action. On your entrepreneurial journey, evaluating the experience or situation is a perfect
opportunity for you to determine how realistic, overambitious, or shortsighted your dreams and goals for your
venture may be. This chapter will explore your vision for your future and your venture. Does your vision
56  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

include a level of flexibility when you discover new information that supports exploring a new area?

Figure 2.11 Navigation involves being prepared for and making changes when faced with obstacles.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 7: Launch

The actual launch is the exciting event when you open your business. By this point, you have made
improvements to your product through feedback received in your trial run; you've identified the value or
benefits provided by your product; you've identified your target market; and you've identified the location of
your launch, whether it is a geographical location or an Internet location.
Inc. magazine provides an analysis of the best locations to launch a new venture, with Austin, Texas, taking the
lead (see "Surge Cities: These Are the 50 Best Places in America for Starting a Business," in Suggested
Resources). Consider your target market and the resources necessary to support your venture when choosing
the location for your launch. Advice from within the entrepreneurial world suggests that sometimes the launch
should take place "under the radar," meaning in a location where you can make mistakes, fine-tune your
business model and offerings, and even become successful without competitors noticing that you have
created a disruption within the industry. (You will learn more about this in Launch for Growth to Success).
Even as you are launching your venture, many variables will require your attention, just as we covered in Step
7. Navigating through these variables as your venture grows requires constant attention as new potential
opportunities arise.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Sixto Cancel and Think of Us

   Sixto Cancel successfully faced the harsh challenges of aging out of the foster-care system without adult
   support or guidance. He imagined a better foster-care system for young people then cofounded the firm
   Think of Us. Think of Us is a platform that helps young people in foster care build their own personalized
   digital advisory board of supportive adults who act as a virtual life-coaching group. The adults guide the
   young people through the foster-care system and ensure that they are able to become independent

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                       57

when they leave the system at age eighteen. For more information about this venture, visit www.thinkof-
us.org.

 2.2 The Process of Becoming an Entrepreneur

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the evolution of entrepreneurship through American historical periods
  · Understand the nine stages of the entrepreneurial life cycle

Scholars of business and entrepreneurship have long debated how people become entrepreneurs. Are
entrepreneurs born or made? That is, are some people born with the natural skills, talent, and temperament
to pursue entrepreneurship? Or can you develop entrepreneurship skills through training, education, and
experience? These questions reflect the classic debates known as "nature versus nurture" or "born versus
made," which attempt to explain the determinants of a person's personality and character.

This debate has been around for centuries. In classical Greece, Plato supported the nature argument, whereas
Aristotle believed in the nurture perspective. During the eighteenth-century Enlightenment period, Immanuel
Kant (1724-1824; supported the supremacy of human reason) and John Locke (1632-1704; opposed
authoritarianism) argued their views. Kant firmly believed that obedience was the expected and desired
behavior, whereas Locke believed in allowing some degree of freedom and creativity. The focus of the aspects
of this argument changed when late-nineteenth-century psychologists sought to understand how individuals
obtain knowledge, and as modern psychologists concentrated on additional factors such as intelligence,
personality, and mental illness.

Scott Shane, a professor of entrepreneurial studies at Case Western Reserve University, codirected a study
using identical twins and fraternal twins as the research subjects. Shane determined that entrepreneurs are
about 40 percent born and 60 percent made, meaning that nature--that is, an individual's DNA--is responsible
for 40 percent of entrepreneurial behaviors, whereas nurture is responsible for about 60 percent of
entrepreneurial behaviors.[14] Although "nature versus nurture" and "born versus made" are parallel
arguments, researchers and experienced entrepreneurs suggest a combined viewpoint. You can unite your
natural talents and abilities with training and development to achieve a well-rounded entrepreneurial
experience and outcome. Once you determine that entrepreneurship is in your future, the next action is to
establish a process to follow, such as identifying useful reading materials, attending classes or workshops,
finding a mentor, or learning by doing through simulations or firsthand experiences. Firsthand experiences
occur throughout our days and lives as we gain relevant experiences and as we develop a mindset to seek out
opportunity-recognition behaviors. Completing coursework, such as reading this textbook, and reviewing the
suggested resources provided within this textbook are actions that can support your knowledge and
awareness of entrepreneurship as a valid option for your future.

14 I. Mount, "Nature vs. Nurture," Fortune Small Business 19, no. 10 (2009): 25.
58  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

   ARE YOU READY?

   Entrepreneurial Personality Test

   Review Bill Wagner's article "What's Your Entrepreneurial Personality Type?" in Entrepreneur at this link:
   https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/84134. Then, go to The Entrepreneur Next Door at
   http://www.theentrepreneurnextdoor.com/ to take the Entrepreneurial Personality Test to find your
   personality type.

      · Think about your results. Are you a generalist or a specialist?
      · Once you know this information, what other entrepreneurial personality types do you fit into?
      · How can you use this information in your pursuits as an entrepreneur?
      · What does this information tell you about selecting members of your startup team?

Historical Perspective

The evolution of entrepreneurship in the United States has spanned centuries. Entrepreneurs have responded
to and innovated within the political and economic conditions of their times. The United States' economic and
industrial spirit has inspired generations of entrepreneurial Americans. Understanding this history might help
you appreciate the importance of entrepreneurship as you consider your own entrepreneurial journey.

During the late 1700s, the Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians lived along the Red River of the North, which
flows through North Dakota and Minnesota, and into Canada. European explorers established trading posts in
this region and bargained with the Pembina and others for pemmican, a buffalo or fish jerky created by tribes
for survival during harsh winters when food was scarce. The Pembina pemmican was exported internationally
through trading with French, Canadian, British, and other explorers.[15] The Pembina solved a problem of food
scarcity, then leveraged the product to trade for other products they needed that were available through the
trading posts.

In the late 1880s, Madam C. J. Walker, an African American hair-care entrepreneur, developed and marketed
her products across the United States (Figure 2.12), hiring sales agents and founding the Madam C. J. Walker
Hair Culturists Union of America and the National Negro Cosmetics Manufacturers Association in 1917.[16] She
started her company with a philosophy of "hair culture," which quickly became popular and eventually led to
steady employment for African American women. Another African American, Charles Drew, established the
national blood bank in the late 1930s, just before World War II gave rise to the need for quick access to
blood.[17] He researched transfusion medicine and saw a need that he wanted to fulfill. Drew applied the ideas
from his doctoral thesis to create the blood bank and continued to innovate, developing mobile blood
donation stations.

15 "Summary of North Dakota History - Fur Trade." State Historical Society of North Dakota, Red River Fur Traders. n.d.
https://www.history.nd.gov/ndhistory/furtrade.html
16 "Madam C. J. Walker's `Wonderful Hair Grower.'" National Museum of African American History and Culture, Smithsonian Institution.
https://nmaahc.si.edu/blog-post/madam-cj-walker%E2%80%99s-%E2%80%9Cwonderful-hair-grower
17 "The Color of Blood." National Museum of African American History and Culture, Smithsonian Institution. https://nmaahc.si.edu/blog-post/
color-blood

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  59

Figure 2.12 Madam C. J. Walker developed her own hair care line, which is still sold today. (credit: Collection
of the Smithsonian National Museum of African American History and Culture, Gift from Dawn Simon Spears
and Alvin Spears, Sr.)

Many innovations and entrepreneurial activities are not achieved by one person acting alone. One example is
the invention of the cotton gin in 1794, attributed to Eli Whitney, and possibly based on a design by Catherine
Greene and African Americans working as slaves. Some scholars believe that the cotton gin had the
unintended consequence of hardening the grip of slavery in the South.[18] Eli Whitney, a descendant of a British
immigrant, leveraged his status as the creator of the cotton gin to manufacture muskets for the US
government, becoming known as a pioneer of American industry with a focus on standardization.[19]

Colonial and Early America: 1607-1776

The earliest concept of an "entrepreneur" can be traced to this era, from the French entreprendre, which
translates as "to do something" or "to undertake."[20] Jean-Baptiste Say (1767-1832), a French philosopher,
economist, and businessman, supported lifting restraints to encourage business growth, a highly liberal view
in the late 1700s. "The entrepreneur shifts economic resources out of an area of lower and into an area of
higher productivity and greater yield," is a concept attributed to Say, as is the word entrepreneur.[21]

Entrepreneurial-minded persons included merchants, landowners, manufacturers in textile-related trades,
shipbuilders, explorers, merchants, and world market traders.[22] The first immigrants to the British colonies

18 "Cotton Gin and Eli Whitney." History.com. August 21, 2018. https://www.history.com/topics/inventions/cotton-gin-and-eli-whitney
19 William O. Scheeren. "Invention of the Cotton Gin." Department of History, Ohio State University. n.d. https://ehistory.osu.edu/articles/
invention-cotton-gin
20 Russell S. Sobel. "Entrepreneurship." Library of Economics and Liberty. 2008. http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Entrepreneurship.html
21 Tim Hindle. "Entrepreneurship." The Economist. April 27, 2009. Adapted from Tim Hindle, The Economist Guide to Management Ideas and
Gurus, Profile Books.
60                                                                  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

took advantage of several key inventions developed before this era, such as printing, double-entry
bookkeeping, and improvements in ship design and navigational instruments. The first North American patent
was granted in 1641 by the Massachusetts General Court to Samuel Winslow for a new process for making salt.
The entrepreneurial spirit of the early colonists helped shape an economic landscape that lasted for
generations. Some notable pioneering inventors and entrepreneurs are shown in Table 2.2 and (Figure 2.13).

                              Notable Early US Inventors and Entrepreneurs

    Inventor or Entrepreneur  Contribution(s)                               Significance

Pierre-Esprit Radisson        Founded Hudson's Bay trading company          Offered bartering of furs for
(1640-1710), French                                                         textiles and guns
explorer

William Penn (1644-1718),     Founded Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as       Early social entrepreneur
colonist                      a sanctuary for Quakers

Sybilla Masters               Invented method to clean and refine Indian    Patent for a process for
(1676-1720), inventor         corn grown by early settlers                  cleaning and milling Indian
                                                                            corn (1715)

Thomas Hancock                Founded trading house that furnished          Sought alternative funding
(1703-1764), merchant         multiple goods                                sources to finance business
                                                                            interests

Benjamin Franklin             Established printing franchises and an        Epitome of an inventor and
(1706-1790), inventor,        infrastructure for his apprentices to launch  serial entrepreneur
publisher, statesman          in other colonies

Table 2.2

22 J. McAllister. "Colonial America, 1607-1776." Economic History Review. 42, no. 2 (1989): 245-59. https://www.jstor.org/stable/
2596204?seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  61

Figure 2.13 (a) William Penn founded the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a sanctuary for persecuted
Quakers. This colony could be considered an early form of social entrepreneurship. Shown is his first draft of
The Frame of Government in Pennsylvania. (b) As one of the country's founders, Benjamin Franklin contributed
to the Declaration of Independence. His accomplishments as a printer, writer, postmaster, diplomat, and
scientist (he contributed to the understanding of electricity) epitomize serial entrepreneurship. In this painting
by Charles Mills, a young Ben Franklin is seen operating a printing press. (credit (a): modification of "William
Penn - The First Draft of the Frame of Government - c1681" by University of Pennsylvania/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain; credit (b): modification of "Franklin the printer" by Library of Congress/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

As entrepreneurship flourished in the American colonies, the economic structure also began to emerge. The
prevailing view of economics was associated with the stockpiling of gold and silver. Colonists perceived
imports as a reduction of metal wealth--gold and silver money--and felt that exports channeled these metals
back to the colonies. To categorize the economic mindset of the time, the Scottish philosopher and economist
Adam Smith (1723-1790) wrote An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776). This
influential treatise outlined the concepts of free trade and economic expansion through capitalism, a system
in which individuals, people, and companies have the freedom to make decisions and own property as well as
benefit from their own efforts, with government playing a secondary role in oversight. This book confirmed
Smith as the "father of economics" and modern free trade. Among the most significant concepts that Smith
proposed were the "invisible hand" theory of supply and demand in the marketplace; the use of the GDP to
measure a country's level of production and commerce; and the self-interest concept, whereby individuals
inadvertently help others as they pursue their own goals.[23] The ability to gain personally from entrepreneurial
activities is a key factor in supporting entrepreneurial behavior. Smith's concepts continue to influence

23 "About Adam Smith." Adam Smith Institute. n.d. https://www.adamsmith.org/about-adam-smith/
62  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

modern economics and entrepreneurial activity.

The First Industrial Revolution: 1776-1865

As the colonies expanded, so did opportunities and interest in property ownership, manufacturing, inventions,
and innovations. An innovation is any new idea, process, or product, or a change to an existing product or
process. The understanding and acceptance of innovation developed around 1730, when the economist
Richard Cantillon identified the first academic meaning and characteristics of "entrepreneurship" as the
"willingness to bear the personal financial risk of a business venture."[24] The First Industrial Revolution was
notable for the explosion of inventive activities by the "great inventors," who pursued entrepreneurial
opportunities to meet market needs, demands, and economic incentives.[25]

An important thing to keep in mind is that dates of inventions don't necessarily reflect specific launch dates.
Development of these inventions may have been ongoing for years or decades before they were considered
market-viable products.

A plethora of inventors and their inventions transformed several industries and economic classes across the
growing nation. During this era, the country benefited from inventions that created, expanded, or
revolutionized industry and increased wealth and expansion. These revolutionary inventors included Eli
Whitney (cotton gin, 1794), Elias Howe (sewing machine, 1845), and Samuel Morse (telegraph, 1830s-1840s)
(Figure 2.14). Many other people contributed to these and other inventions.

24 Russel S. Sobel. "Entrepreneurship." The Library of Economics and Liberty. n.d. http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Entrepreneurship.html
25 B. Zorina Khan and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. "`Schemes of Practical Utility': Entrepreneurship and Innovation among `Great Inventors' in the
United States, 1790-1865." Journal of Economic History. 53, no. 2 (289-307) doi: 10.1017/S0022050700012924

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  63

Figure 2.14 Inventions abounded during the First Industrial Revolution. (a) A US patent was granted to Eli
Whitney in 1794 for the cotton gin. (b) This sketch shows Samuel Morse's telegraph. (c) Elias Howe invented
the sewing machine. (credit (a): modification of "Patent for Cotton Gin (1794)" by "Gamaliel"/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain; credit (b): modification of "Morse telegraph" by Unknown/Wikimedia Commons,
Public Domain; credit (c): modification of "Elias Howe Sewing Machine 1846" by Unknown/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain)

Although he was not an inventor but an industrialist, Andrew Carnegie provides an interesting example. A
manufacturer who focused on the value of innovations and how to implement them, Carnegie adopted newly
developed techniques to improve steel production. He also was among the first to implement vertical
integration, the strategy of gaining control over suppliers of raw materials and distributors of finished
products to expand or control the relevant supply chain. He developed a reliable network of suppliers and
distributors to support his steel factories. Carnegie also was one of the first magnates to practice philanthropy.
He gave away much of his immense fortune to support community and public library systems, concert halls,
museums, and scientific research.[26]

These entrepreneurial pioneers, and many others like them, sought ways to earn a return on investment on an
invention and to protect themselves legally through the patent process. A patent is a legal grant of protection
for an inventor over the rights, usage, and commercialization of an invention for a set time period.[27] An early
US patent was issued in 1790 to Samuel Hopkins for his process of making potash as a fertilizer ingredient.[28]

The innovations of women, African Americans (slaves or free persons), and other marginalized groups were
crucial during this era. As we saw earlier, Sybilla Masters invented a method for grinding Indian corn. She
received a patent from the English king in 1715. But because women were not allowed to file for patents or

26 Susan Stamberg. "How Andrew Carnegie Turned His Fortune into a Library Legacy." Morning Edition. August 1, 2013. https://www.npr.org/
2013/08/01/207272849/how-andrew-carnegie-turned-his-fortune-into-a-library-legacy
27 Shontavia Johnson. "With Patents or Without, Black Inventors Reshaped American History." Smithsonian. February 16, 2017.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/with-patents-or-without-black-inventors-reshaped-american-industry-180962201/
28 U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. "First U.S. Patent Issued Today in 1790." USPTO Press Release #01-33. July 31, 2001.
https://www.uspto.gov/about-us/news-updates/first-us-patent-issued-today-1790
64  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

even to own property at that time, the patent was filed in her husband's name.[29] Although the invention of
the cotton gin is attributed to Eli Whitney, as we have seen, it may have been based on a design by Catherine
Greene and African American slaves. Social and legal discrimination could limit or conceal the identities of
actual inventors, especially if they were women or slaves.[30] Most patent applicants and awardees were white
males. One exception was Mary Dixon Kies, who in 1809 became the first woman awarded a patent for her
process of weaving straw with silk or thread. This was a key innovation for the hat industry, due to an embargo
on European goods.[31] Likewise, many slaves were extremely innovative, but laws and prejudice prevented
them from filing independently for patents. Because slaves had no rights, many sought patent submissions
under their owners' names but received no recognition or compensation for their efforts.[32] It was not until
1820 that an African American, Thomas Jennings, was granted a patent for a process called "dry scouring" for
cleaning fabric.[33] As the successes and failures of inventors and innovations expanded, so did the consumer
demand for better-performing products and services. This led to the Second Industrial Revolution.

The Second Industrial Revolution: 1865-1920

Although the First Industrial Revolution had a broad scope and a transformative impact, the Second Industrial
Revolution helped shape consumer demand for the latest inventions and innovations developed by small and
large businesses. The breakthroughs of this era brought applicable innovations in many fields, from chemistry
to engineering to medicine.[34]

The nineteenth-century economists Jean-Baptiste Say and John Stuart Mill (1806-1873) refined and popularized
Cantillion's definition of an entrepreneur to capture the spirit of their era. Their definition of "entrepreneur"
describes someone who creates value by effectively managing resources for better productivity, and someone
who is a financial risk taker.[35]

After the US Civil War and into the 1870s, many industries flourished with improvements in production
organization (petroleum refinery storage, mass production) and technological systems (electricity and the
telephone). Additional inventions included improvements in steel production, chemical dyes, transportation
(diesel and gasoline engines, the airplane), assembly-line production, agriculture and food-processing
improvements (refrigeration), textiles, and the typewriter (Figure 2.15).[36] As entrepreneurial activity,
economic prosperity, and productivity demands increased, entrepreneurs and their inventions were highly
regarded and sought after, contributing to the belief that the United States was a land of opportunity.

29 "Sybilla Righton Masters." New Jersey Women's History. http://www.njwomenshistory.org/discover/biographies/sybilla-righton-masters/
30 Shontavia Johnson. "With Patents or Without, Black Inventors Reshaped American History." Smithsonian. February 16, 2017.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/with-patents-or-without-black-inventors-reshaped-american-industry-180962201/
31 US Patent and Trademark Office. "USPTO Recognizes Inventive Women during Women's History Month." USPTO Press Release #02-16.
March 1, 2002. https://www.uspto.gov/about-us/news-updates/uspto-recognizes-inventive-women-during-womens-history-month
32 Shontavia Johnson. "With Patents or Without, Black Inventors Reshaped American History." Smithsonian. February 16, 2017.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/with-patents-or-without-black-inventors-reshaped-american-industry-180962201/
33 Alex Camarota. "National Inventors Hall of Fame Inducts Next Class of Innovators." Inventors Eye. US Patent and Trademark Office. May
2015. https://www.uspto.gov/inventors/independent/eye/201506/index.jsp
34 Joel Mokyr. "The Second Industrial Revolution, 1870-1914." Semantic Scholar. 1998. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/769c/
a06c2ea1ab122e0e2a37099be00e3c11dd52.pdf
35 Russell S. Sobel. "Entrepreneurship." The Library of Economics and Liberty. n.d. http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Entrepreneurship.html
36 Russell S. Sobel. "Entrepreneurship." The Library of Economics and Liberty. n.d. http://www.econlib.org/library/Enc/Entrepreneurship.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  65

Figure 2.15 (a) The first commercially successful typewriter was produced by Christopher Latham Sholes and
Carlos S. Glidden; this is their 1873 prototype model. (b) The Wright brothers are among the best-known
pioneers of early flight. In this photo, Orville flies over their air field in 1904. (credit (a): modification of "Sholes
typewriter" by George Iles/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit (b): modification of "1904WrightFlyer"
by "DonFB"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Interwar and Postwar America: 1920-1975

When World War I began, the US economy was in a recession, with Europeans purchasing US materials for the
war. When the United States entered World War I in 1917, an economic boom ensued. Unemployment
declined from 7.9 percent in 1914 to 1.4 percent in 1918 as the United States produced goods and equipment
necessary to support the war efforts of the nation and its allies.[37] From an entrepreneurial perspective, World
War I contributed to military-related advancements, communication equipment, and improvements in
production processes. The American economic landscape began to shift during this era from small
independent companies to big corporations. The smaller businesses in the previous era either dissolved or
were absorbed by larger corporations. As the stock market crash of October 1929 and the Great Depression of
the 1930s struck worldwide, innovation slowed. Consumer confidence waned as economic confidence and
production declined, and unemployment rose.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit the History site on the Great Depression (https://openstax.org/l/52HistGrtDepres) or PBS's
   American Experience article on the Great Depression (https://openstax.org/l/52PBSGrtDepres) to
   understand the background and circumstances that led to the stock market crash of 1929, the Great
   Depression, and how the United States rebounded during this period.

After World War II ended in 1945, American society shifted from reliance on the traditional entrepreneur as a
resource to reliance on large organizations that offered stability and job security. Corporations continued to

37 Carlos Lozada. "The Economics of World War I." National Bureau of Economics Digest. January 2005. https://www.nber.org/digest/jan05/
w10580.html
66  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

buy up small firms to standardize innovative, large-scale mass production of goods, services, and jobs. The
idea of being an entrepreneur gave way to the idea of the "corporate man" with job security and health
benefits offered by big employers. Although entrepreneurship did not totally vanish, its growth slowed
tremendously compared with previous years and shifted to corporate entrepreneurship, whereby large
corporations funded the development of new ideas, opportunities, or ventures through formal research and
development processes that focused on the corporations' own strategies and goals. Figure 2.16 lists some of
the corporations that emerged during this period.

Figure 2.16 Many important corporations developed in the decades after World War I. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

As economic views and confidence in how the United States might regain economic prosperity shifted, so did
the scholarly meaning of entrepreneurship. One scholar and economist, Joseph Schumpeter (1883-1950),
introduced theories and terminology that continue to influence modern entrepreneurial concepts and
practices. He originated two critical phrases: entrepreneurial spirit, which is associated with those individuals
who are productive self-starters and make things happen, and creative destruction, which he defined as the
"process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly
destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one."[38] Schumpeter's theory that innovation would destroy
established corporations to create new ones was not a popularly held or shared view at the time. The thought
leaders of this era had different approaches to addressing the rise of corporations as part of the
entrepreneurial fabric of the United States. Schumpeter theorized that corporations were better positioned
than individuals to support the kinds of research and development that would result in innovations and have
economic impact.[39] To complement this view, he also proposed the concept that corporate support of
entrepreneurs' visions would result in a sustainable "capitalistic financial system" to support and expand on
the free-market system espoused by Adam Smith.[40] In contrast, the sociologist and journalist William Whyte
(1917-1999) argued that entrepreneurial culture had changed because "American business life had
abandoned the old virtues of self-reliance and entrepreneurship in favor of a bureaucratic `social ethic' of
loyalty, security and `belongingness.'"[41]

38 "Joseph Schumpeter." New World Encyclopedia. http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Joseph_Schumpeter
39 "Joseph Schumpeter." New World Encyclopedia. http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Joseph_Schumpeter
40 "Joseph Schumpeter." New World Encyclopedia. http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Joseph_Schumpeter
41 William Whyte. The Organization Man. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  67

Finally, it is critical to note that the growth of corporations and opportunities expanded beyond the borders of
the United States. Corporations faced novel global experiences that supported Schumpeter's creative
destruction theory, as other countries presented new dynamics to address. The annually created Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) report is a scholarly examination that examines how a group of nineteen
countries benefited from venture-capital investments and the factors affecting those investments for
entrepreneurial activity. This study addressed the question of entrepreneurial opportunities, entrepreneurial
capacity, and entrepreneurial motivation as parts of the engagement within all industries and the direct
correlation between venture-capital investment and high-growth startups.[42] The GEM report is created
annually with timely and relevant information related to entrepreneurship and is available at this website:
https://www.gemconsortium.org/. This cultural shift in the American entrepreneurial spirit generated new
interest in the training and education of workers, ushering in the knowledge economy.

The Knowledge Economy: 1975 to Today

In the mid-1970s, the promises of corporate life began to lose their appeal to entrepreneurial-minded
individuals. One change was established corporations' shift in focus on innovations from research and
development departments to internal entrepreneurial activities by intrapreneurs. An intrapreneur is an
employee who acts as an entrepreneur within an organization, rather than going solo. Intrapreneurs
contribute entrepreneurial ideas, products, and services, using corporate work time and resources, but on a
much less formal basis than past corporate contributions to innovation. Quickly evolving advances in
technology have touched every industry, and people with tech know-how have become champions. Firms
dominating the technological landscape include Apple, Microsoft, 3M, Alphabet (the parent company of
Google), IBM, and Oracle. In today's David-versus-Goliath culture, these companies once were small startups,
but now they command seemingly endless resources. New opportunities have arisen in the world of
technology for those willing and able to compete with these giants. All companies, large and small, are
interested in a more informed and educated workforce with specialized or advanced degrees in
entrepreneurship and business administration. The new entrepreneurs are prepared to develop and lead firms
that can become startup superstars. Viewed through our current lens, companies like Apple, Microsoft,
Google, and others have become the new Goliaths, but in their startup days, these companies were the
disruptors that fought to create new industries or reshape previously established ones.

The Entrepreneurial Process

Your approach to the entrepreneurial process, or the set of decisions and actions that you might follow (as in
Figure 2.17) as a guide to developing or adjusting your venture, is fluid, not static. This is because your
personal interests, background, experiences, resources, and connections are unique to you--but those areas
may change over time. For instance, you and a friend might take an art class together for fun and both
discover a hidden talent and eye for creating handcrafted jewelry that everyone loves. One day over lunch, you
share some of your frustrations with your friend about an interest in potentially selling your unique creations
to a local art gallery. Despite your research, you have few clues about where to start or how to get your art
shown in a gallery. During your conversation, you are surprised to learn that your friend has already sold
several pieces by following a mentor's advice. Through several referrals, she figured out that her best option
was to create a presence on Etsy, an artisan-focused website for e-commerce, electronic transactions,

42 William D. Bygrave, Pamela Lopez-Garcia, and Paul D. Reynolds. "The Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) Model for Economic Growth:
A Study of Venture Capital in 19 Nations." 2001. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
242407165_THE_GLOBAL_ENTREPRENEURSHIP_MONITOR_GEM_MODEL_FOR_ECONOMIC_GROWTH_A_STUDY_OF_VENTURE_CAPITAL_IN_19_NATIONS
68  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

particularly over the Internet, for the exchange of goods and services. Even though you both started at the
same place with similar goals, your results differed because you followed different entrepreneurial pathways.
In this case, your friend decided to enter the entrepreneurial process at a different stage than you did. This
type of scenario occurs every day and clarifies why ventures differ: The decisions of the entrepreneur or the
entrepreneurial team are the heart and success of the venture. Why the entrepreneur is the most crucial
resource for a venture will be discussed in more detail in later chapters.

Figure 2.17 Your entrepreneurial process may involve changing directions many times. (credit: modification
of "this way or that" by Robert Couse-Baker/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

If you decide to take the leap into entrepreneurship, you should follow a certain process before you launch
your venture. What is that process? As we discussed previously in the steps of the entrepreneurial journey, you
need to think through your goals, prepare and follow an action plan, make sound decisions and adjustments
along the way, and persevere through challenges and crises to ensure a successful journey. If that sounds like
you have some work to do, you are correct. However, if you follow or recognize the stages in the journey and
keep track of the related elements, it could be the most satisfying work of your career. Many people find the
entrepreneurial journey fulfilling, in part because they get to define their own paths. The plan to graduate,
then find a career working hard to help a company or organization reach its goals, are even more satisfying
when you can work for yourself to create your own path and purpose in the world.
Before you create your path, a key action in the entrepreneurial process is developing your entrepreneurial
mindset. Recall that an entrepreneurial mindset is about being open, self-reflective, and honest about what
you are willing to do and capable of doing to achieve success. For instance, are you comfortable with making
sacrifices like spending an evening doing research instead of hanging out with friends or family?

The Entrepreneurial Process: Venture Life Cycle and Product Life Cycle

In general, the entrepreneurial process includes several key stages or some variation of these stages. Keep in
mind that these stages do not always follow a sequential pattern, as circumstances and opportunities change.
One popular method of understanding and connecting to this entrepreneurial process is to think of your new
venture as similar to the human life cycle, the major stages that humans pass through in their life
development, and the different growth processes in between.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                                69

As we can see in Figure 2.18 and Figure 2.19, the startup stage is similar to the birth of an infant. During the
startup stage, or the birth of the idea, the venture requires resources to support the startup as the
entrepreneur develops the idea, creates the prototype, and builds the infrastructure to support production.
During the startup stage, cash supports building the venture. Meanwhile, the startup is seldom ready to
generate sales. Planning for this situation, knowing that cash is needed but not replenished through sales, is
an important consideration.

Figure 2.18 This image displays the phases that a new venture moves through as the idea is developed then
created as a prototype. The prototype is then perfected in preparation for stage 4, when sales are generated.
Stage 4 leads to the start of the growth stage, shown in Figure 2.19. Growth occurs through an increase in
sales of the product. At this point, in the product life cycle, adding features or enhancements to the product
will encourage increasing sales. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Figure 2.19 This image demonstrates the phases a business moves through from origination through the
death of the business. The yellow line represents sales, or success of the business's products. We see the most
sales dollars in the growth and maturity phases. At this point, the owner or entrepreneurial team must make
decisions for the rebirth of the business, at which time the business returns to the growth phase. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Just as a child grows rapidly in their early years, often a business venture experiences quick growth as the
product or service becomes commercialized and experiences strong demand, reflected through increasing
sales and stronger knowledge and access to the target market. Again, this stage requires resources to support
growth. The difference between this stage and the startup stage is cash is generated through sales activity. In
70                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

some entrepreneurial ventures, however, the growth stage is about building the venture, rather than
generating sales. For ventures like YouTube, the growth stage entails increasing the inventory of videos as well
as an increase in people accessing the videos.

Just as humans achieve maturity during their life cycle, the business might reach a point where growth slows
and perhaps moves into a decline stage. In our human experience, we can take actions to improve or lengthen
the maturity stage of our lives through better life choices, such as nutritious eating habits and exercise, to
increase longevity and delay decline. We can also extend the maturity of the business and even move into a
rebirth and a new growth phase through insightful decisions, such as adding new features to the product or
service, or offering the product or service to a new target market. The goal in our lives, and in this analogy, is
continued growth and success. Products can be altered or enhanced to extend the product's life cycle, which
also extends the life cycle of the venture.

Examples of avoiding the decline and death of a business fit well into the concept of product life cycle and are
prevalent in technology-related products such as the television, the personal computer, and the cell phone.
For example, black-and-white televisions underwent a growth stage after World War II. Color televisions were
introduced in the 1950s. As technology improved, television manufacturers have repeatedly moved through
the life cycle and avoided declines in sales with new features and adaptations with options such as plasma,
LED, and smart technology. An example of a product that started and then quickly declined into the death
stage of the business is the eight-track player, a music player available between the mid-1960s to the early
1980s. The eight-track player replaced the reel-to-reel tape recorder as a more accessible product for
installation in moving vehicles, from cars to Lear jets, to offer individual music purchased by the vehicle owner
for listening while traveling. Even as the eight-track player was becoming popular, moving from the
introductory stage into the growth stage of the product life cycle, the compact cassette was being developed.
In the early 1980s, the compact cassette format replaced the eight-track player, abruptly ending the product
life cycle of the eight-track player.

Some products lend themselves more easily than others to managing the life cycle. The goal is to manage the
product for continuous growth, whereas other products, such as the eight-track player, are based on
technology that quickly becomes obsolete when a better option becomes available. Other examples of
products with short life cycles are categorized as fads, like the hula hoop and pet rocks--fads from the past
that were reintroduced to a new generation of consumers and that moved quickly through the product life
cycle into the last stage--the death of the product with sales either nonexistent or so few that the product
becomes a novelty item.

The life cycles of the venture and of the product are two different concepts but are closely related. The venture
will need different resources during each stage of the cycle to support the growth and success of the venture.
Knowing what stage of the life cycle the product is in assists in decision making. For example, a decrease in
sales triggers the need to enhance the product's value to extend and continue strong levels of growth. From
the venture's perspective, managing the product life cycle also supports the continued success of the venture.

A successful venture avoids decline or death with the potential to prepare for either the sale of the venture or
a public offering of stock, known as an initial public offering (IPO), which gives the company access to
significant funds for future growth. Two entrepreneurial IPOs in May 2019 were Zoom and Uber. Zoom is a
company that offers video conferencing, web conferencing, webinars, and cross-platform access. Uber is a
ride-sharing company. Both entrepreneurial ventures used IPOs to support their future plans for growth.

Think about some of the friends you've known since childhood compared with those you've met in recent
years. Suppose you plan to work on a project together and want to figure out who should handle which parts
of the work. You might learn some information about a newer friend's past experiences through

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  71

conversations, observations, or other collaborations. Even so, it would not be possible--or necessary--to learn
everything about their childhood and how they learned a specific set of skills or acquired certain connections.
You would just start your interaction and work with your friend from the current time. The same is the case for
a venture. You might start a venture from the idea-generation stage or from infancy as part of the pre-launch
stage. Or you might join the process after someone else has already completed the early stages of the
business--for example, by purchasing an existing business or entering into a partnership. You might not have
been around when the business was launched, but you can continue with the development of the business
from the present moment. Just as each stage of human experience involves different concerns and milestones,
the same holds true for your venture. The venture is your responsibility to manage during each stage of the
development process.

Figure 2.20 provides an overview of each stage and the associated decisions that you might consider or
encounter for the entrepreneurial process.

Figure 2.20 The life cycle of a venture roughly parallels the life cycle of a person through different stages
that span pre-birth through infancy, youth, maturity, retirement, and then an end or a restart. However, unlike
in the human life cycle, the venture stages do not have to be static or sequential. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Stage 1: Startup

In stage 1, startup activities are related to your perceptions about a potential idea, how you develop your idea,
and how you might recognize appropriate opportunities. At this stage, the crucial activity is defining the
opportunity to develop your concept into a realizable business venture with a strong potential for success. In
this stage, you work on developing the idea more thoroughly to determine whether it fits your current and
72                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

future circumstances and goals. You will also work through exercises to distinguish ideas from viable
opportunities. Each of these actions is addressed in greater detail in future chapters. The goal of this section is
to introduce concepts for a greater understanding of these stages. Key actions or exercises in this stage
include:

  · Idea development
  · Opportunity recognition
  · Identification of a market opportunity
  · Research and due diligence, or conducting the necessary research and investigation to make informed

      decisions that minimize risk, such as ensuring you are not duplicating an idea that already exists

Stage 2: Development

Now that you have confidence in your idea, it is time to develop a structure to determine what type of venture
will work best for the idea. In Stage 2, you might select a business model (discussed further in Business Model
and Plan) and pull together a team (discussed in Building Networks and Foundations) to make your dream
venture a reality. The business model identifies how a business will build revenue, deliver value, and receive
compensation for that value. Some examples of business models include monthly subscriptions, pre-sale
orders, kiosk sales, and other choices. Entrepreneurial decisions in the development stage include many
options to consider, including bootstrapping, starting out with limited funds, receiving venture funding from
external sources, licensing to receive royalties on a per-item basis, purchasing another business, inheriting a
business, franchising either through the purchase of a franchise or building your company with the goal of
eventually creating your own franchise, creating a virtual web-based company, using mobile apps that support
your business or connect with other businesses, founding a social venture to support a cause, consulting, or
freelancing. Choosing among these options or creating your own unique approach to supporting the success
of your business will change your results and success level.

Key activities in this stage include:

  · Formulation or refinement of your concept
  · Design of business model, plan, goals, launch team, and operational structure
  · Creation of prototype product to fit market (sample or model for customer feedback)
  · Further research and due diligence, as needed

Stage 3: Resourcing

Using knowledge you gained in the first two stages, in the resource stage, you will evaluate the necessary
resources to support your new venture. Resources include financial support; support and selection of a
manufacturing location or facility (if you are producing a physical product); personnel talents, knowledge, and
skills; possible political and community support; and family support, because the new venture will require time
commitments that will cut into time with your family. Fundamentals of Resource Planning discusses obtaining
resources in more detail.

The key activities in this stage include:

  · Gathering pertinent resources, such human and financial capital, investors, facilities, equipment, and
      transportation

  · Establishing connections, networks, and logistics
  · Further research and due diligence, as needed

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  73

Stage 4: Market Entry

Market entry--the launch of your venture--is often undertaken in a soft launch, or soft open, within a limited
market to minimize exposure to unforeseen challenges. As an entrepreneur, you are presenting your new
venture to a specific market to see how well it is received and supported. You might make last-minute
adjustments at this stage, but the crucial part is to see how the market reacts to your venture. This is an
excellent time to scrutinize all aspects of your business for solutions to unexpected problems and
improvements in efficiencies, and to track customer reactions to your venture.

One of your most important responsibilities at this point is managing your cash flow, or the money coming
into and going out of a business, as cash is essential for the success of the venture. In the early stages of the
venture, you will need large amounts of cash to fund the operational activities, because your sales are not yet
guaranteed. Production costs, payroll, supplies, inventory, lease payments, and marketing: All of these
expenditures involve cash outflows from your venture as part of the startup costs. A successful business needs
available cash as well as customers for its products and services, or it will not survive. Key activities at this
stage include:

  · Assessing management structure and needs, adjusting as necessary
  · Managing cash flow
  · Launching the entity
  · Monitoring progress
  · Further research and due diligence, as needed

Stage 5: Growth

The growth stage includes making decisions that support the future growth of your venture. In the growth
stage, your decisions reflect the scalability of your venture. There is a big difference between a small-scale
venture and a venture that must handle significant levels of sales. At this point, your organizational structure
needs an update. You might need new functional levels, such as a finance department, or a human resources
department, or perhaps an assistant manager. Other considerations include the size of your facilities. Is the
current size, or capacity, appropriate for the growth of the venture? Other questions relate to the
appropriateness of your suppliers or inventory providers. Are quality and delivery time meeting your needs? Is
the payment system appropriate for your venture? In this stage, you should also monitor the growth of your
venture and make appropriate adjustments. For instance, if your venture is not growing as expected, then you
might go back to your business plan and see what adjustments you can make. Key actions in this stage
include:

  · Managing the venture
  · Making key adjustments, as needed
  · Further research and due diligence, as needed

Stage 6: Maturity

In the maturity stage, your venture has moved into the maintenance phase of the business life cycle.
Entrepreneurs monitor how a venture is growing and developing according to the business plan, and its
projections and expectations. Is your venture growing faster or slower than you expected? What milestones
has it reached? What changes are needed to continue the success of the venture? How can you address those
changes? Are you still able to maintain or meet the needs of the venture?

Depending on your situation, you still will need to take action to support the venture. Even if the venture is
74                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

operating efficiently and in a predictable manner, external changes could compel you to change your venture,
for example, by making improvements to the product or service, finding new target markets, adopting new
technologies, or bundling features or offerings to add value to the product.

One of the key points to understand at this stage is that ventures can, and often do, fail. Entrepreneurship is
about taking calculated risks to achieve a reward. Sometimes your venture may not turn out how you planned.
Keeping an open mind and learning from experience presents new opportunities for either changes to the
existing venture or even a new venture. Consider these examples of early entrepreneurial failures by people
who later went on to achieve great success:

  · Bill Gates's early Traf-O-Data company failed because the product did not work
  · Walt Disney was told he lacked creativity and was fired from a newspaper job
  · Steve Jobs was once fired by his own company, Apple
  · Milton Hershey started three candy companies before he founded the successful Hersey Company

Key actions of this stage include:

  · Strengthening market position
  · Awareness and willingness to change
  · Reaping return on investment (ROI)

Stage 7: Harvest

At some point, your company may outgrow your dreams, ambitions, or interests. At this stage, you are
harvesting or collecting the most return on your investment while planning how to retire or make a transition
away from this venture. Many entrepreneurs enjoy the excitement of starting and building a venture but are
less interested in the routine aspects of managing a company. In the field of entrepreneurship, the
entrepreneurial team creates a venture with the goal of harvesting that venture. Harvesting is the stage when
all your hard work and ingenuity are rewarded through a sizable return on the invested money, time, and
talents of the startup team, including any investors. During this stage, the entrepreneurial team looks for the
best buyer for the venture to achieve both a return on investment and a match for the continued success of
the venture. Key actions in this stage include:

  · Identifying what the entrepreneurial team, and investors, want out of the venture, their ROI
  · Planning for your future: What's next on your entrepreneurial journey?

Stage 8: Exit

The exit stage is the point at which your venture either has fulfilled its purpose as a harvested success that is
passed along to the next generation of business owners or has not met your needs and goals. These two
situations give rise to vastly different scenarios. In the harvesting of the venture, you might receive a sizable
cash payment, or a combination of cash payment and a minority share of stock in the venture's buyout. In an
exit that reflects the closing of the venture, your option is most likely liquidation of assets, which you would
sell to pay off any remaining creditors and investors. In both harvesting and liquidation, the challenge for you
as an entrepreneur can be to accept the emotional withdrawal from a venture that has consumed your
thoughts, time, and energy. The time has come for you to step out of the picture and allow the venture to be
cared for by a new "parent" or to close the venture completely. Key actions in this stage include:

  · Exit strategy and plan
  · Transition to the next generation of owners

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                       75

Stage 9: Rebirth

For some entrepreneurs, the excitement of creating a new venture supersedes the financial gain from
harvesting a successful venture. The thrill of transforming an idea into a realizable opportunity and then
creating a thriving venture is difficult to find elsewhere. In the rebirth phase, the entrepreneur decides to seek
out another new venture to begin the process all over again. As an experienced entrepreneur, you can create a
new type of venture or develop a new spin-off of your original venture idea. At this point, you have become a
serial entrepreneur, an entrepreneur who becomes involved in starting multiple entrepreneurial ventures.
Key actions in this stage include:

  · Redesigning or creating a new venture
  · Bringing in a new entrepreneurial team or the team from the previous venture

LINK TO LEARNING

"Drop into" Man Crates to learn about this entrepreneurial venture. Who is their clientele? Does this
company sell an experience, a product, or both? What life cycle stage is this business in now? Applying
your assessment of the company's life cycle stage, pretend that you are the CEO of the company. What
recommendations do you have for the company's continued success and growth?

Visit the Man Crates site (https://openstax.org/l/52ManCrates) to learn more.

 2.3 Entrepreneurial Pathways

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand how venture opportunities present different pathways to entrepreneurship
  · Describe methods for finding your personal path to entrepreneurship

When you think of which career pathway (as in Figure 2.21) to follow, you might not think of being an
entrepreneur in the same way that you would think of being a nurse, an attorney, or an engineer--but you
should. Entrepreneurship offers you the chance to express your creativity and business acumen and to control
your destiny. Conversely, if you were to earn an engineering degree, your employment options could involve
working for an engineering company. Your job would be relatively secure and structured, with a paycheck and
some perks. Or you could leverage your engineering degree into an entrepreneurial venture.

The entrepreneurial journey includes multiple experiences and decisions that will help you reach your
entrepreneurial goals. For example, some individuals inherit a family business. If your choice career proves not
so ideal or available as planned, entrepreneurship may be an attractive option. However, a growing number of
people intentionally choose business ownership as a vehicle for fulfilling their career goals and interests. If you
reach this crossroads in selecting your ideal vocation, how do you successfully navigate the entrepreneurial
pathway as a career option? Your entrepreneurial journey might travel several paths, each presenting
obstacles, twists, and turns before you reach your destination. Many of today's entrepreneurs have followed
different pathways--sometimes conventional, sometimes not--that have led to the creation of various
76  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

business structures matched to each entrepreneur's spirit. These businesses include established or adapted
business models that met a need, solved a problem, or developed a social solution.

Regardless of the type of entrepreneurial venture you may choose, many pathways can take you to your goal.
Venture types differ in their missions and visions. Their purposes range from earning income (for profit) to
meeting a community need through tax-exempt status (nonprofit) to solving a social or environmental
problem (social enterprise) to combinations of these types (hybrid). Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax,
and Risk Issues examines each type in depth.

Figure 2.21 There are many different pathways you can take on your entrepreneurial journey. (credit:
"Explorer" by Sakeeb Sabakka/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

For many established businesses, the pathway is not always as clear as the entrepreneurial process suggests.
This is because entrepreneurs are opportunists, leaders, and initiators: They take calculated risks to create or
adapt something to solve a problem or create a response for potential financial gain or intrinsic value. The
reality is that these situations or opportunities do not always occur in a logical sequence or or der. Instead,
entrepreneurial-focused individuals might encounter opportunities, offers, or options that spark a new
venture.

Opportunities and Options

If you are ready to launch a venture, you will find numerous situational opportunities to pursue your interests.
A situational opportunity is one that becomes available, depending on factors such as where you work, your
family obligations, your idea or invention, your unique creative expression, or a recent career search or job
change. The evolution of entrepreneurship, your own receptiveness to entrepreneurial thinking, and many
existing and emerging platforms make this possible.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  77

As you plan your venture, you should consider opportunities in these areas:

  · On the Job. Some workplaces offer intrapreneurial opportunities, or ventures created within the company,
      for entrepreneurial-minded individuals. The firm 3M, for example, has historically nurtured employee
      creativity and promoted innovative opportunities for employees. This environment inspired an employee
      project that resulted in the invention of Post-it notes. Even if a company does not support venture
      creation, there is also the possibility of taking the entrepreneurial idea out of the company to create your
      own venture.

  · Family Obligations. You might work in a family-owned business or take over after family members retire
      or transfer ownership to other family members.

  · Franchises. You might purchase an existing franchise, a license granted to an entrepreneur to operate
      under the franchise's name.

  · Web-Based Venture. You might launch a product venture through Etsy, Shopify, or another e-commerce
      web site.

  · Work for Hire, or Independent Contractor. You might launch a consulting business or work as an
      independent contractor to gain clients, experience, and income on a flexible schedule.

  · Unemployment. Being underemployed or unemployed might make entrepreneurship a pathway to
      economic freedom.

  · Purchase. You might purchase an existing business from a retiree, your current company, or a family that
      owns a business. As a business owner's life situations change, due to aging or new interests, the business
      becomes available for new ownership. Working for a company can offer the option of buying out the
      current owner to become the new owner. Purchasing an existing company provides historical financial
      data and decisions that support future successes. If you are employed by the company, you have the
      opportunity of learning details about how the business is managed, an advantage that could support your
      success in purchasing and managing the company.

  · Frustration. You might encounter a currently existing product or situation that needs improvement or a
      solution, and decide to tackle the situation yourself.

  · Serendipity. This is a situation in which various pieces come together to support the creation of a new
      company or product. The Entrepreneur in Action: Gordon Moore and Fairchild Semiconductor box
      describes how Gordon Moore (creator of Moore's Law on the exponential growth of a single silicon chip
      doubling every year) was working for Shockley Semiconductor in 1956. At that time, he had little-to-no
      knowledge of semiconductors. However, he quickly learned about semiconductors by applying his PhD in
      chemistry and physics from Caltech to the semiconductor industry. After one year of employment, Moore
      and seven other employees left to form Fairchild Semiconductor, financed by Sherman Fairchild. During
      his eleven-year employment with Fairchild Semiconductor, Moore published a paper describing what we
      now know as Moore's Law. His next move was based on recognizing the importance of the
      microprocessor in transforming the computer and related industries. After frustrations with Fairchild's
      lack of support for this new direction, Moore, along with a colleague from Fairchild Semiconductor, Robert
      Noyce, formed Intel, the second largest semiconductor chip manufacturing company in the world.
78  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Gordon Moore and Fairchild Semiconductor

   Sometimes the path to entrepreneurship doesn't occur as you might plan or think. Consider the story of
   Gordon Moore, a cofounder of Fairchild Semiconductor: "Like many other scientists and engineers who
   have ended up founding companies, I didn't leave Caltech as an entrepreneur. I had no training in
   business; after my sophomore year in college, I didn't take any courses outside of chemistry, math, and
   physics. My career as an entrepreneur happened quite by accident. There is such a thing as a natural-
   born entrepreneur....But the accidental entrepreneur like me has to fall into the opportunity or be
   pushed into it. Most of what I learned as an entrepreneur was by trial and error, but I think a lot of this
   really could have been learned more efficiently."[43]
   The combination of diversity in educational background and skills, the serendipity of being in the right
   place at the right time, and facing frustrations with the current situation can combine into recognizing an
   entrepreneurial opportunity. For Gordon Moore, learning about semiconductors, and creating the
   company Intel, was the furthest idea of what he pictured for his future. The serendipity of his
   experiences, knowledge, and intelligence combined to support the creation of Intel. Gordon Moore is
   reported to have a net worth as of October 2019 of $10.6 billion.

One core concern of entrepreneurship is how you will fund your venture and where you will find the necessary
resources. Although some businesses require significant startup funding, it might surprise you to learn that
many ventures have been launched by entrepreneurs who used their own capital, labor, connections, or other
resources to start--an approach known as bootstrapping. Some savvy bootstrapping strategies include
launching a venture part-time while maintaining a full-time job, using personal savings, bartering for services
and materials, and securing pre-orders. Some entrepreneurs seek financial support for their venture through
funding from angel investors, venture capitalists, or traditional loans or debt. The advantages and
disadvantages of these approaches are covered in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting, along with an in-
depth discussion of bootstrapping.

Finding Your Entrepreneurial Path

The process and pathways to entrepreneurship can be overwhelming. With so many choices and decisions
involved, entrepreneurial choices can seem intimidating, and the route you follow may sometimes produce
some anxiety. Before you get consumed with the technical aspects of launching a venture, it is important to
start with the most important foundation: finding your personal path to entrepreneurship.

Your Personal Path through Self-Reflection

Your decision to launch a venture should not be taken lightly. Entrepreneurship requires a lot of energy,
decision-making skills, tenacity, resourcefulness, and flexibility. As you consider entrepreneurship as a career,

43 Gordon E. Moore. "The Accidental Entrepreneur." Engineering & Science. Summer 1994. http://calteches.library.caltech.edu/3777/1/
Moore.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  79

you should complete some self-reflection to figure out how, why, and when entrepreneurship may be the right
professional path for you. For example, if your personality is introverted--that is, you often find it most
energizing to be alone--you might consider a venture that capitalizes on that scenario. (Recall your
entrepreneurial self-assessment Are You Ready?: Entrepreneurial Potential Self-Assessment.) It might be
helpful to study or meet other entrepreneurs with a venture you find interesting.

   WORK IT OUT

   Startup Ideas

   Visit Medium.com to check out this "Top 10 Business Ideas for Startups" article (https://openstax.org/l/
   52TenBusIdeas) and then review the startup ideas for introverted personality types
   (https://openstax.org/l/52IntrovertBus) at Small Business Trends.[44],[45] Review the lists of ideas. Next
   create a list of five or more of your own startup ideas. Often, we gain new insights by reading through
   other ideas. Your idea might be a spin-off of an original ideas. Or the information you gain could trigger
   a brand-new idea.

Your Personal Path through Research and Experiments

A key step to finding your personal pathway to entrepreneurship is to conduct research and try out roles
related to your desired venture. Researching the potential industry or entrepreneurial options available to you
will provide some level of comfort and validate your decisions about what you might do next. One concrete
way to do this is to "shadow" a professional in your desired field. This means arranging to be an observer
during a standard workday to see firsthand what is involved in running that type of business. You may also be
able to secure some experience by serving as an apprentice, intern, or lab assistant, or as an independent
contractor or freelancer, an individual who contracts to offer professional services or tasks for a negotiated
fee. Informational interviews--whether informal chats with new or established business owners at a trade
show or networking event, or a formal question session--can also provide insight.

Your Personal Path through a Soft Launch

One sure pathway to entrepreneurship is to jump in with both feet and experience the process by launching a
venture. Although this may seem like a big leap or you may feel you are not ready, remember that
entrepreneurship is an experiential discipline that can be understood fully only through hands-on experiences.
Launching a venture for a limited time frame or audience to gain experience, insights, and feedback about the
target market or consumer--a process known as a soft launch (or soft open)--will provide valuable feedback
on how to meet the consumer's needs or improve on your product to ensure success. You might explore a soft
launch by creating a sketch or sample of what you plan to offer and asking friends and potential customers
what they think, or by creating a website or app prototype to share with a limited number of people to see if it
works as planned (sometimes called a beta test) and get feedback.

44 Vikas Agarwal. "Top 10 Business Ideas for Startups," Medium. August 25, 2016. https://medium.com/
search?q=top%2010%20business%20ideas%20for%20startups
45 Annie Pilon. "50 Business Ideas for Introverts." Small Business Trends. October 4, 2016. https://smallbiztrends.com/2016/09/business-ideas-
for-introverts.html.
80  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

 2.4 Frameworks to Inform Your Entrepreneurial Path

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify common frameworks used to shape an entrepreneurial venture
  · Compare how some frameworks better fit certain venture types
  · Define an action plan and identify tools available for creating an action plan
  · Describe some common types of entrepreneurs

In designing a venture that is sustainable or capable of being self-funded, it is helpful to use specific tools to
manage information. One such tool is a framework--a structure or outlined process that can be used to
accomplish entrepreneurial goals through problem solving, idea generation and validation, and
brainstorming.

Selecting a Framework

You can choose any of several popular frameworks to help with the design and integration of your business
experience and entrepreneurial thinking. The most widely used frameworks that have been developed as
integrative tools to support entrepreneurial thinking include:

  · Business Model Canvas (BMC) offers a simple, one-page tool used to design an innovative business model
      that can be presented to key stakeholders (Figure 2.22). The business model canvas is discussed more
      fully in Business Model and Plan.

Figure 2.22 Here is an example of a Business Model Canvas with a framework to identify key components of
the venture. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

  · Lean Strategy Canvas is a spinoff of the BMC that introduces a potential customer feedback loop for
      continuous product or idea improvement to meet the market's needs (Figure 2.23). The lean strategy
      canvas is discussed more fully in Launch for Growth to Success.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                          81

Figure 2.23 Here is an example of Lean Strategy Canvas, a framework to assist in developing the business
model, and competitive advantage and related areas aligning the product and market for the venture.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

  · Design Thinking Process supports a systematic, logical approach for addressing and solving problems
      with multiple solutions (Figure 2.24). Design thinking was first applied in relation to STEM fields--science,
      technology, engineering, and mathematics. Due to the success of this process, design thinking has
      become popular in many other areas.

Figure 2.24 The design thinking process is a systematic approach for solving problems. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Design thinking approaches problem solving or the creation of a new venture from the perspective of the
customer. For example, Amazon provides easy-to-open packages after observing the challenges customers
had in opening the delivered products. Design thinking is covered in greater detail in Problem Solving and
Need Recognition Techniques with applications to starting an entrepreneurial venture, product design, and
82                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

improvements to existing products.

  · Four Lenses Strategic Framework is used for the development of social enterprises; assesses four
      strategic areas (stakeholder engagement, resource mobilization, knowledge development, and culture
      management) to address a social problem and provide sustainable social impact (Figure 2.25).

Figure 2.25 The Four Lenses Strategic Framework involves stakeholder engagement, culture management,
resource mobilization/application, and knowledge development, and can provide synergies and insights in
building compatible and aligned actions. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

The typical application of each framework is shown in Table 2.3. The process of selecting the most appropriate
framework for your entrepreneurial interests might help you understand how to develop your idea. We
recommend that you try all four frameworks before selecting one. Even though each framework is identified
for a general class of venture, each one provides a different perspective for developing your venture.

                        Frameworks

Framework  Description                                                            Typical Use

Business   A one-page tool that maps out nine                                     Helps prepare a sustainable business model
Model      basic building blocks that are necessary
Canvas     for a successful business model

Table 2.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                    83

                                                    Frameworks

Framework  Description                                          Typical Use

Lean       Outlines a quick feedback loop through   Used for fast-paced industries and quick idea
Startup    customer input                           validation

Design     Outlines a systematic, results-oriented  Used for the development of STEM fields with
Thinking   process to address and solve problems    expansion into entrepreneurial ventures,
Process                                             products, and processes; applicable to all areas

Four       A practitioner-driven model that         Used for the development of social ventures
Lenses     considers four perspectives to support
Strategic  and develop a client-focused ecosystem
Framework

Table 2.3

Applying the Framework through an Action Plan

At some point during your venture development process, it becomes critical to capture your thoughts and
intentions in a meaningful and productive way. Creating a customized action plan--an organized, step-by-
step outline or guide that pulls together the ideas, thoughts, and key steps necessary to help set the stage for
entrepreneurial success--at an early stage will make the entrepreneurial process much smoother and
potentially more successful in the long run. Applying an appropriate framework will provide you with a visible,
tangible, strong foundation for your future venture. In completing the framework, you should identify gaps as
well as ideas for further development, then add both to your action plan. Just as you can choose from several
types of frameworks, you can apply any of a variety of action plans. This section introduces some widely used
action-planning tools but is not exhaustive. These selected action plans are presented as a way to jumpstart
your thinking for the venture creation process.

Action Plans

You may have heard stories about potential entrepreneurs who hesitated to start a venture, largely out of fear
of creating a business plan. Historically, business plan creation has required significant amounts of time,
resources, and research. Although business plans are still enormously valuable (and are discussed in depth in
Business Model and Plan), some useful business-plan-like tools have emerged: These are essentially variations
on the development, content, and structure of a traditional business plan or one of its components. One other
concern about business plans is how entrepreneurs use them once they are completed. In many cases, when
the venture is launched, the entrepreneurial team discovers that the business plan does not reflect the
realities that the team faces. A wide range of variables can often negate the value of the business plan. The
true benefit of completing the business plan is that it forces the entrepreneurial team to think through their
decisions as reflected in the plan. Even if the venture and the business plan change, the process of creating the
business plan encourages critical thinking and improved decisions. In real time, you will need to make changes
84                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

to your business plan and your venture. Throughout the venture's life span, you should continue your
background research and projections to adapt the business plan.

Unlike with the business plan, the purpose of an action plan is to pull together the ideas, thoughts, and actions
necessary to help you set the stage for entrepreneurial success. Consider what kind of action plan you need to
prepare a holiday meal. We have a vision of the end result--friends and family gathered together to share a
delicious, festive meal. We will need to select the right location for the holiday meal, identify the guests to
invite, and create a financial budget for the related costs of the holiday meal. Then we would need to create
our action plan--similar to a business plan--to identify what actions are necessary to support the event. In our
action plan, we would include inviting guests to the event, drawing up a menu and a grocery list, designing a
timeline to ensure that all the dishes of the holiday meal are completed in the correct sequence: We want all
the food to be ready at the right time. Our action plan would also include the clean-up process and any after-
dinner activities that we want at our event. As you can see, both the business plan and the action plan are
necessary for success.

Once you select a framework and an action plan, you have the basic tools and information you need to outline
the path of your venture. The framework offers a big picture of what you want to create and the resources
required for that goal, whereas the action plan provides you with concrete actions for starting along your
entrepreneurial path and, later, for supporting the business plan.

Action plans can also result from using the tools listed in Table 2.4. These tools can help you visualize the
process necessary to reach your end goal by clarifying the necessary actions. They are also tangible guidelines
for innovating, exploring, and creating solutions to entrepreneurial problems or opportunities. You might also
use your action plan to get "unstuck" during any challenging phase of the entrepreneurial process. One word
of caution regarding these tools: You need to use them to get results. So be sure you are realistic about your
interests, abilities, and availability when you create your plans. For example, wireframing is a technique for
webpage design used early in the development process in which content, layout, and functionality are
identified prior to the actual creation of the webpage. Coincidentally, this is another application of design
thinking through the focus on the end user's interaction with the website. As you can see from this example,
searching for popular tools used within specific industries will provide you with support in building your
framework. Table 2.4 provides a few examples of action planning tools that are used to delve into the specific
topic.

        Tool                                 Action Plan Support Tools                        Use
Vision or Dream                                                                   Wireframing
Board                                               Description
Storyboard                                                                        Downloading
                 A visual tool to present the ideal situation that you are        method (IDEO)
Mind map         working towards achieving                                        Brainstorming

                 A scene-by-scene visual of the activity process from start to
                 finish

                 A visual tool that assists with categorizing brainstorming
                 types of ideas

Table 2.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                           85

        Tool                              Action Plan Support Tools                     Use
Hypothesis                                                                  Interviewing
                                                 Description
Logic Map                                                                   Questionnaires
              A proposition or statement as a basis for further testing or
              investigating

              Visual representation of relationships between various
              components or variables

Table 2.4

The action plan support tools presented in Table 2.4 are a sample list of representative tools that are useful in
motivating, inspiring, identifying, and clarifying needed actions. This list is not exhaustive; if you have
something that works for you, then use it. Several apps are also available to help you capture ideas to create
action plans, as shown in the Suggested Resources. The idea is to find and use a visual or tangible tool that
inspires you to get focused, organized, and committed to taking the actions necessary to turn your
entrepreneurial dream into a reality. Let's say you know that you want to start a venture that helps people
recover after some type of disaster. You could use one of these action plan support tools, such as a mind map,
to help you brainstorm possible needs resulting from a disaster in a city (Figure 2.26). You can categorize the
ideas to help people and animals, or to repair the city's infrastructure. After completing the mind map, you
would then consider which areas fit your interests, passions, and skills. From this point, you could identify the
type of venture you want to create and the necessary actions to move forward with your idea. Using these
types of tools assists in identifying actions that need to be addressed in your action plan.
86  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

Figure 2.26 From this mind map of disasters that occur and actions to take, we could focus on one action
area that matches our interests, passions and skills. After selecting an area of interest, we could create another
mind map focused on our area of interest to identify solution sets. Next, we could apply one of the frameworks
listed in Table 2.3. From there we could create an action plan of actions needed to become more informed
about the idea or solutions. As you can see, an action plan fits into multiple areas. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Types of Entrepreneurs

Recall from The Entrepreneurial Perspective that for some people, the entrepreneurial pathway is clear cut and
logical. For example, a career in a biomedical lab may involve research and clinical trials that lead to patent
applications for a product to sell in the marketplace, leading to a new venture. Others experience the
entrepreneurial pathway through nontraditional methods, as when an unexpected opportunity arises. As the
global marketplace continues to evolve, new entrepreneurial opportunities will open for individuals who are
open to opportunities that build on creativity and innovation.
Traditional entrepreneurs were perceived as individuals who did not fit in a typical organizational structure or
as people who had the brains, creativity, imagination, and money to launch out on their own. However, this
perception is changing with increasing support to reduce barriers to enable access to entrepreneurship for all
demographic groups. According to a 2018 Capitol Hill discussion on women, minorities, and entrepreneurship,
the current entrepreneurial demographics show that only 12 percent of US innovators are women and that US-
born minorities accounted for 8 percent, with African Americans making up only one-half of 1 percent of this
group.[46] According to a National Academies of Sciences report, as cited in the same Capitol Hill discussion,
women- and minority-owned small businesses received less than 16 percent of all Small Business Innovation

46 Information Technology & Innovation Foundation. "Promoting diversity in entrepreneurship." 2018. https://itif.org/events/2018/03/07/
promoting-diversity-entrepreneurship

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  87

Research (SBIT) program awards. Even though women account for 51 percent of the US population and own
29 percent of businesses, they received only 6 percent of SBIT awards.

Also cited at the Capitol Hill briefing, a 2015 report by the US Department of Commerce showed that women-
owned small businesses have a 21 percent lower rate of winning federal contracts. One result from this Capitol
Hill briefing was the passage of the Promoting Women in Entrepreneurship Act to require the National Science
Foundation to encourage entrepreneurial programs to recruit and support women in commercial activities
rather than purely laboratory-based activities. Some of the challenges identified in this discussion for groups
other than the traditional entrepreneurs described include life choices such as childbearing, access to funding,
and lack of support and follow-through to support women and minorities in their interests related to potential
entrepreneurial activities.

Other findings drawn from the Census Bureau data and reported by the Kauffman Foundation found that over
70 percent of Asian, Hispanic, and African American entrepreneurs relied on personal and family savings as
their main source of startup capital. Women also face challenges in funding, receiving just 2.2 percent of
venture capital funding in 2018.[47] A bill called the Support Startup Businesses Act, reintroduced in the US
Senate in 2019, would address these challenges by increasing overall funding to help startups, creating more
flexibility in funding, and expanding services for startups.[48] The panelists ended the Capitol Hill discussion by
noting that "bro culture" has proliferated at the expense of women- and minority-based entrepreneurial ideas.
Cultural barriers, including historical disenfranchisement of women, minorities, and immigrants, arise from
biases, with one speaker noting that investors ask more difficult and probing questions of male entrepreneurs
but pose more skeptical questions to women.

Today, opportunities have expanded for businesses and organizations that respond to current challenges,
which may include trying to improve a negative situation or finding a need in a positive situation, with an
increasing awareness of the benefits provided through entrepreneurial activities. As more global, cultural, and
economic issues and opportunities arise, more individuals will explore entrepreneurship as a response to
these challenges. For example, noting the challenges that women and minorities face in starting a new
venture, Alan Donegan and his team train people on how to turn their entrepreneurial visions into a reality
through his PopUp Business School. The point is that opportunities should be available to everyone, as long as
we keep an open mind when considering how change contributes to new venture creation.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Barriers to Funding

   Given this list of cultural factors and economic factors, what can you do to assist in solving the challenges
   related to biases? Consider how Alan Donegan's responded to the need to educate people on how to
   start their own business. He created a company to address this need. You may also consider reading
   statistical information such as census data and news reports to identify unique target markets and
   potential needs that could result in a new venture.

   The Kauffman Foundation reports these issues, summarized in Table 2.5.

47 Emma Hinchliffe. "Funding for Female Founders Stalled at 2.2% of VC Dollars in 2018. Fortune. January 28, 2019. https://fortune.com/2019/
01/28/funding-female-founders-2018/
48 Jason Rittenberg. "Startup Act Reintroduced Innovation Support." State Science & Technology Institute (SSTI). January 31, 2019.
https://ssti.org/blog/startup-act-reintroduced-would-expand-federal-innovation-support
88                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

                     Potential Barriers to Entrepreneurial Funding[49]

    Potential        Challenges
     Barrier

    Geographical     Close to 80 percent of about $21.1 billion in venture-capital funding in the first
    barriers         quarter of 2018 was disbursed in five regional clusters--San Francisco (North Bay
                     Area), Silicon Valley (South Bay Area), New England, New York City metro, and LA/
                     Orange County--with slightly more than 44 percent in the North and South Bay
                     Areas.

    Gender bias      Women are substantially less likely to start businesses than men. In 1996, the rate of
                     new entrepreneurs for women was 260 per 100,000 people, compared to 380 per
                     100,000 for men. In 2017, the rate of new entrepreneurs for women was 270 per
                     100,000 for men.

    Racial and       The landscape of entrepreneurship in the United States is marked by significant
    ethnic bias      differences across racial and ethnic groups. Minority-owned firms are found to face
                     significant barriers to capital. For example, minority-owned firms are
                     disproportionately denied when they need and apply for additional credit. One study
                     compared sources of finance and found that new black-owned businesses start with
                     almost three times less in terms of overall capital than new white-owned businesses,
                     and that this gap does not close as firms mature.

    Lack of initial  Low-income individuals without initial (pre-existing) wealth also face significant
    wealth           barriers to capital. Research on liquidity constraints showed that the top ninety-fifth
                     percentile of wealthy individuals in the United States is more likely to start
                     businesses than other income groups, and that personal and household wealth are
                     important drivers of entry. Research at the neighborhood level found that in New
                     York City, the richer third of neighborhoods had more than twice the rate of self-
                     employment than the poorest third. A higher household net worth of a founder is
                     linked to larger amounts of external funding received, even after accounting for
                     human capital, venture characteristics, and demand for funds.

    Shift in the     Large banks have become larger, while there are fewer small and medium-size
    banking          banks. Larger banks survived the Great Recession with balance sheets restored,
    industry         while small banks--the ones more likely to lend to entrepreneurs--were limited by
                     both economic conditions and new regulatory barriers

    Information The persistence of information asymmetry in capital markets between the supply of

    Table 2.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                                   89

  Potential                Potential Barriers to Entrepreneurial Funding
    Barrier
                                                                 Challenges
asymmetry
             capital (investors) and the demand for capital (entrepreneurs) gives rise to barriers
             faced by entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs face a larger challenge than established
             businesses in accessing capital because established businesses can leverage their
             longer track records and existing relationships.

Table 2.5

  · What challenges do you face in these areas?
  · What steps might you take to help mediate those challenges?

As the traditional view of entrepreneurship evolves, different types of entrepreneurship are emerging and are
worth noting as you contemplate your entrepreneurial journey. The types presented here are among the most
common today, each with its own unique opportunities and challenges.

  · College Entrepreneur: As the cost of higher education continues to rise, more college students are
      seeking ways to reduce reliance on tuition loans by launching a venture. The college entrepreneur might
      launch an enterprise while attending or after graduating from college. Entrepreneurship courses might
      require a student to create and launch a venture as part of the curriculum, and this can turn into an actual
      earnings opportunity.

  · Corporate Intrapreneur: If you work for a progressive company that seeks innovative solutions for growth
      and opportunities, you can become an intrapreneur by organizing the necessary resources to pursue a
      venture of organizational interest.

  · Franchise Entrepreneur: Since a franchise grants a license to an entrepreneur to trade under the
      franchise's name, a franchise entrepreneur gains a head start in an industry by launching the franchise.

  · Immigrant Entrepreneur: With increasing global unrest, more immigrants are traveling to new countries.
      In the United States, ethnic communities of immigrants welcome their compatriots and assist them in
      becoming independent through entrepreneurship. These communities pool together the necessary
      resources to support the new immigrant until the business is self-sustaining.

  · Internet Entrepreneur: As access to technology and its related platforms increases, so do opportunities
      for Internet-based businesses. Internet entrepreneurs utilize social media platforms, smartphones and
      tablets, applications (apps), and any other form of accessible technology as their product or venture. The
      critical structure for these ventures is the inclusion of an e-commerce or online payment processing
      capability.

  · Woman or Minority Entrepreneur: Women have a unique perspective and potential to capitalize on new
      or already existing niches in many entrepreneurial fields. Many cultural groups, such as Haitians, Cubans,
      or Jamaicans, also have unique marketplace skills and demands.

  · Part-time Entrepreneur: In response to economic downturns, underemployment, and unemployment,

49 Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation. Access to Capital for Entrepreneurs: Removing Barriers. April 2019.
https://www.kauffman.org/-/media/kauffman_org/entrepreneurship-landing-page/capital-access/capitalreport_042519.pdf
90                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

       more individuals are supplementing income through part-time activities, casually referred to as "side
       hustles." These individuals may launch businesses through multilevel marketing firms, such as Avon,
       Mary Kay, Stella & Dot, and others. This category may also include self-employed freelancers. Examples
       include writers, graphic designers, artists, web developers, and massage therapists.
    · Social Entrepreneur: Some entrepreneurs are driven to offer innovative solutions to existing and
       emerging social problems, such as poverty, hunger, human trafficking, and environmental degradation.
       Most social enterprises are structured as nonprofit entities. However, increased interest in for-profit
       entities that marry business and social goals has given rise to a subcategory has emerged known as a B-
       corp (see Business Structures Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues), or benefits corporation. The B-corp
       designation is a voluntary certification that is managed by the nonprofit group B Lab to ensure that
       corporations adhere to specific guidelines, rules, and accountability.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways  91

     Key Terms

action plan organized, step-by-step outline or guide that pulls together the ideas, thoughts, and key steps
     necessary to help set the stage for entrepreneurial success

benchmarking comparing one's own company's performance with an industry average, a leader within the
     industry, or a market segment

bootstrapping funding strategy that seeks to optimize use of personal funds and other creative strategies
     (such as bartering) to minimize cash outflows

breakeven point level of operations that results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs
business model plan for how venture will be funded; how the venture creates value for its stakeholders,

     including customers; how the venture's offerings are made and distributed to the end users; and the how
     income will be generated through this process
capitalism system in which individuals, people, and companies have the freedom to make decisions and own
     property as well as benefit from their own efforts, with government playing a secondary role in oversight
cash flow money collected by the business through revenue and funding versus money disbursed by the
     business through expenses
cash management management of cash inflows and outflows to support cash needs of the venture
corporate entrepreneurship development of new ideas, opportunities, or ventures through formal research
     and development processes that focused on the corporation's strategy and goals
creative destruction theory developed by Joseph Schumpeter stating that entrepreneurial innovation is the
     disruptive force that creates and sustains economic growth, though in the process, it destroys established
     companies and disrupts employment
due diligence conducting the necessary research and investigation to make informed decisions that
     minimize risk
e-commerce electronic transactions, particularly over the Internet, for the exchange of goods and services
entrepreneurial journey your exploration to discover if entrepreneurship is right for you
entrepreneurial process set of decisions or actions that can be outlined and followed as a guide to
     developing or adjusting a venture
entrepreneurial spirit describes a quality of those individuals who are productive self-starters focused on
     making changes happen
entrepreneurial venture any business, organization, project, or operation of interest that includes a level of
     risk in acting on an opportunity that has not previously been established
framework structure or outlined process that can be used to accomplish entrepreneurial goals through
     problem solving, idea generation and validation, and brainstorming
franchising form of licensing that allows the business (franchisor) to share its business model to expand
     through various distributors (franchisees) for a fee
independent contractor (also, freelancer) people or businesses that provide work similar to an employee
     without being part of the payroll for the contracting business, and who pay their own taxes and pay for
     their own benefits
innovation new idea, process, or product, or a change to an existing product or process
intrapreneur employee who acts as an entrepreneur within an organization, rather than going solo
milestone significant decision point or significant accomplishment
patent legal grant of protection for an inventor over the rights, usage, and commercialization of an
     invention for a set time period
serial entrepreneur entrepreneur who becomes involved in starting multiple entrepreneurial ventures
92                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

situational opportunity one that becomes available, depending on factors such as where you work, your
     family obligations, your idea or invention, your unique creative expression, or a recent career search or
     job change

soft launch (also, soft open) launching a venture for a limited time frame or audience to gain experience,
     insights, and feedback about the target market or consumer

target market specific group of consumers for which a company seeks to provide a good or service
venture startup company or organization that conducts business or is created to satisfy a need
vertical integration strategy of gaining control over suppliers of raw materials and distributors of finished

     products to expand or control the relevant supply chain

     Summary

2.1 Overview of the Entrepreneurial Journey
As you prepare for your journey into entrepreneurship, it is critical to consider the multiple aspects associated
with preparing for, experiencing, and completing a journey unique to you. The key is an honest and
introspective assessment of how you can make a journey that brings your desired outcomes and results. The
seven steps outlined in this section will provide you with a perspective of what you might encounter on your
entrepreneurial venture.

2.2 The Process of Becoming an Entrepreneur
The entrepreneurial process provides a flexible guideline for launching a venture with an individualized
approach. This process should be a fluid, not static, exercise that adjusts to market needs and demands until
you achieve an appropriate fit to reap the rewards of your investment. The material in this section will be
covered in greater depth as you progress through the rest of the chapters. For now, gaining a perspective on
the entire process provides you with a background understanding of what an entrepreneurial venture
involves, from ideation through creating the venture to harvesting the venture with the potential to begin the
process all over again with a new idea.

2.3 Entrepreneurial Pathways
Your pathway to entrepreneurship might arise out of necessity, opportunity, or a combination of situations.
Being open to the idea of becoming an entrepreneur provides you with the potential to identify a unique
opportunity that fits your interests and goals. Entrepreneurs learn to recognize when an opportunity presents
itself and how and when it fits with their goals and dreams.

2.4 Frameworks to Inform Your Entrepreneurial Path
You can connect your background, training, and discipline with your entrepreneurial pathway by using
frameworks that capture your developmental activities. To achieve your goals, you need some type of plan
that outlines the steps you need to take to reach them. Just as there are many types of ventures, there are
many versions and types of plans and tools that can assist you in developing the plan that best fits you. As
more global issues and opportunities continue to arise, many different types of entrepreneurs have emerged,
offering innovative solutions. The diversity of entrepreneurial types provides unique niches for opportunities
that might not fit the mainstream or traditional route to entrepreneurial success.

     Review Questions

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                        93

1. Why is interest in entrepreneurship growing among those entering or re-entering the workforce?
2. What is an entrepreneurial mindset?
3. What does the phrase "entrepreneurial venture" refer to?
4. What does the process of "cash management" entail for a business?
5. Why is the entrepreneurial process considered a fluid process rather than a rigid step-by-step guide?
6. What does the term "creative destruction" mean?
7. What is the difference between a corporate entrepreneur and an intrapreneur?
8. What are situational opportunities?
9. What does an entrepreneurial journey entail?
10. Under which circumstances might a person choose to bootstrap a venture?
11. What is an independent contractor?
12. What does the term "framework" mean in terms entrepreneurship?
13. What is an action plan? How is it different from a framework?
14. Why are action plans useful in the development or improvement of a venture?
15. What are the characteristics associated with traditional entrepreneurship?
16. What are some biases that minorities and women face in acquiring funding?

     Discussion Questions

1. What does it mean to have an entrepreneurial mindset?

2. Discuss the basis for defining a target market. How does a focus on a target market assist with the
development or adjustment of an idea?

3. Explain the importance of being self-reflective and honest before, during, and after starting an
entrepreneurial journey.

4. Using the information on the steps for an entrepreneurial journey, give your own example with connections
to this section's main concepts.

5. Consider the potential questions that you might ask yourself before you launch a venture. Discuss two or
three questions that resonate with you and your personal experiences. Why or how do these questions
influence you more than others?

6. Think about yourself within the context of the "nature or nurture," "born or made" argument. How do you
feel these perspectives combine in your own potential as an entrepreneur?

7. What are the similarities and differences between the life cycle stages of a person and a venture? How can
these two concepts assist you in creating a successful venture?
94  Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

8. Consider the historical information on entrepreneurship and innovation. How does our current economy,
which is based on technology and knowledge, support entrepreneurial activity?
9. Consider the multiple pathways to entrepreneurship. How might your own current situation reflect a
potential pathway to entrepreneurship?
10. Is there a difference between a soft launch and a soft open? Why are two different terms used?
11. What are the benefits of a soft launch? What are the negatives of a soft launch?
12. Outline your background and training, and then discuss the importance of connecting your background
and training with a potential entrepreneurial pathway.
13. How does creating an action plan help you become a successful entrepreneur?
14. What is the connection between an action plan and a framework? How are they different?
15. Why are more individuals pursuing nontraditional entrepreneurship opportunities?
16. What is the difference between an immigrant entrepreneur and a minority entrepreneur? What are the
similarities?

     Case Questions

1. Review the story of Sixto Cancel and his journey to developing the social venture Think of Us.
    A. Consider Sixto's entrepreneurial journey and the development of Think of Us. What types of challenges
          or obstacles do you think he had to overcome to complete his journey?
    B. Discuss some of the advantages and disadvantages related to Sixto Cancel's background and his
          experiences in developing an organization and board.
    C. Consider how Sixto Cancel developed his organization. Discuss how he followed or skipped any steps
          of an entrepreneurial journey.

2. Explore the websites of Cratejoy and Prospurly, which are discussed in Entrepreneurship in Action:
Prospurly. How did these venture founders follow the entrepreneurial journey?

3. After researching Man Crates, explain how Man Crates has followed the model in Figure 2.20?

4. What additional ideas can you think of for starting your own business, using Man Crates as a source of
inspiration?

5. Go back to the Work It Out: Startup Ideas Feature Box. Select either an idea that you've created or an idea
listed on either of the websites. Where could you go to gain more information about this idea? This might
mean finding a business where you could shadow someone, or perhaps an internship, or research conducted
in some other manner.

6. Return to the Work It Out: Startup Ideas Feature Box and revisit the links to business ideas, using the same
idea that you identified in question 1. What are five other businesses that could be spinoff ideas from your one
new idea?

7. Refer to the case questions in Entrepreneurial Pathways. Select one of the framework tools discussed in this
section and apply that framework to your idea.

8. Why did you select this framework over another framework?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways                                                     95

9. By applying the framework to your idea, what new information did you learn and what information is
lacking, or needs further development?

     Suggested Resources

2.1 Overview of the Entrepreneurial Journey
View the YouTube video "The Jitterbug Smart phone" at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tRGAL42gWco to

  see an example of a product endorsement that geared to a specific target market.
Visit the SBA website to learn more about the local organizations that might assist you to launch or manage a

  venture: https://www.sba.gov/tools/local-assistance
Caron Beesley. "8 Things You Can Do to Be Taken Seriously as a Young Entrepreneur": https://kitsapscore.org/

  2017/08/26/8-things-you-can-do-to-be-taken-seriously-as-a-young-entrepreneur/
"Surge Cities: These Are the 50 Best Places in America for Starting a Business": https://www.inc.com/surge-

  cities/best-places-start-business.html
"How I Built a Subscription Business That's Made over 50k in 6 Months": https://www.cratejoy.com/sell/blog/

  case-study-50k-6-months-subscription-business-2/
National Association of Women Business Owners: https://www.nawbo.org/resources/women-business-owner-

  statistics
Are you ready to start your entrepreneurial venture? Visit the SBA site and take the Small Business Readiness

  Assessment: https://eweb1.sba.gov/cams/training/business_primer/assessment.htm

2.2 The Process of Becoming an Entrepreneur
Are entrepreneurs BORN or MADE? (Lord Sugard #AND Robert Greene): https://www.youtube.com/

  watch?v=HNHUbrVcpRA
Learn about how Man Crates was created: https://www.mancrates.com
For more information about the Pembina tribe and entrepreneurial behavior: https://www.ndstudies.gov/gr4/

  frontier-era-north-dakota/part-2-fur-trade-red-river/section-2-red-river-fur-traders
For more information about Dr. Charles Drew: https://nmaahc.si.edu/blog-post/color-blood
For more information about the creation of the cotton gin: https://www.history.com/topics/inventions/cotton-

  gin-and-eli-whitney
For more information on how to start a business: https://www.pbs.org/newshour/show/this-free-program-

  trains-people-how-to-start-a-business-but-without-debt
For more information on Global Entrepreneurship: https://www.gemconsortium.org/
Take the Myers Briggs test to discover your personality type: https://www.idrlabs.com/test.php

2.3 Entrepreneurial Pathways
50 Business Ideas for Introverted Entrepreneurs: https://smallbiztrends.com/2016/09/business-ideas-for-

  introverts.html

2.4 Frameworks to Inform Your Entrepreneurial Path
YouTube Video: Business Model Canvas Explained: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoAOzMTLP5s
96                                                                                Chapter 2 The Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways

The Four Lenses Strategy Framework website: www.4lenses.org

Evernote, a cross-platform app that allows you to create, update, and synch notes: https://evernote.com/
  about

YouTube Video: We have a dream, B-corp overview and mission: https://www.youtube.com/
  watch?time_continue=3&v=V-VFZUFJwt4

Business Model Canvas Strategyzer: https://www.strategyzer.com/canvas

For more information on the diversity of entrepreneurs in the United States: https://www.entrepreneur.com/
  article/286574

For more information on entrepreneurship and resource providers supporting entrepreneurship:
  https://www.kauffman.org/eship-summit-2017/overview#1g

For a list of resources available to support entrepreneurship: https://www.kauffman.org/what-we-do/
  entrepreneurship/research/data-resources

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     3

              The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Figure 3.1 Photo of Martin Shkreli (left). Scrabble tiles spelling SHKRELI PRISON (right). (credit (left):
modification of "Martin Shkreli 2016" by House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform/Wikimedia
Commons, Public Domain; credit (right): modification of "Martin Shkreli sentenced to seven years in prison for
defrauding investors" by Marco Verch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        3.1 Ethical and Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship
        3.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship
        3.3 Developing a Workplace Culture of Ethical Excellence and Accountability

      Introduction

   Martin Shkreli, an aspiring pharmaceutical entrepreneur and former hedge fund manager, made headlines in
   2015 when he capitalized on a profitable and controversial business opportunity. As the founder and CEO of
   Turing Pharmaceuticals, Shkreli obtained the expired patent for a lifesaving drug used to combat HIV. He
   raised the US market price overnight from $13.50 to $750 per pill--a 5,000 percent increase. When criticism by
   the medical community, the public, and politicians led to demands for a return to the original pricing, Shkreli
   defended his decision as a smart business practice that contributed to his firm's bottom line. Eventually, he
   agreed to reverse the price but later reneged on his promise, offering instead to provide discounted pricing to
   hospitals.
   The damage to Shkreli's reputation, however, was already complete. The BBC described him as the "most-
   hated" CEO in America due to his business decisions, obnoxious behavior, and negative social media rants.[1]
   Infectious disease specialists and patient advocates rejected Shkreli's argument that his "price adjustment
   strategy" was helpful for patients since those being treated would need the drug long after being released

   1 Zoe Thomas and Tim Swift. "Who Is Martin Shrkeli--`The Most Hated Man in America'?" BBC News. August 4, 2017. http://www.bbc.com/
   news/world-us-canada-34331761
98  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

from the hospital. Although the pricing strategy was not illegal, Shkreli was eventually investigated and found
guilty of securities fraud that involved falsely raising money from hedge fund investors and stealing money
from his drug company to repay investors.[2]

 3.1 Ethical and Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Develop the ability to identify ethical and legal issues
  · Develop an approach to resolve ethical/legal dilemmas once identified

What does it mean to be both ethical and socially responsible as an entrepreneur? When Martin Shkreli
decided to increase the price overnight of a lifesaving HIV drug from $13.50 to $750 per pill, the public
immediately characterized his actions as unethical. However, he viewed his position as responsible behavior
that served the best interests of his company and his shareholders. Although Shkreli's decision to raise prices
was within legal limits, his actions were critically judged in the court of public opinion.

As an entrepreneur, should Shkreli's concerns be with ensuring the sustainability of his business or with
providing patients with a more affordable (less profitable) lifesaving drug? This fundamental question raises a
number of related questions about the ethics of the situation. Was the decision to raise the price of the HIV
drug by 5,000 percent in the best interest of the business? Was Shkreli aware of all aspects (ethical, legal,
financial, reputational, and political) of the decision he made? To critically examine the decisions of an
individual such as Shkreli, one needs an enhanced awareness of the multitude of stakeholders to be
considered, as opposed to only shareholders.

Stakeholders

A comprehensive view of business and entrepreneurial ethics requires an understanding of the difference
between shareholders, a small group who are the owners (or stockholders), and stakeholders, a large group
that includes all those people and organizations with a vested interest in the business. Serving the needs of
the shareholders, as perhaps Shkreli thought he was doing, is based on a limited view of organizational
purpose. This view, known as the "shareholder primacy" doctrine, stems from a famous Michigan Supreme
Court case involving the Ford Motor Company and two shareholders named the Dodge brothers (who would
go on to form the Dodge Motor Company).[3] This case established a precedent that lasted for decades, built
on the premise that the only thing that should matter to a CEO and their company is shareholder profits.
However, this concept has gradually been replaced by a more progressive viewpoint, mandating the
consideration of all stakeholders when making key business decisions that have potentially far-reaching
consequences. As an example of this new awareness, the Business Roundtable, a group of CEOs from the
biggest and most successful companies in the US, recently released a new statement addressing business
ethics. The CEOs prefaced this statement saying, "Together with partners in the public, private and non-profit
sectors, Business Roundtable CEOs are committed to driving solutions that make a meaningful difference for
workers, families, communities and businesses of all sizes."[4]

2 Dan Mangan. "'Pharma Bro' Martin Shkreli Found Guilty of 3 of 8 Charges, Including Securities Fraud." CNBC. August 4, 2017.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/08/04/pharma-bro-martin-shkreli-convicted-in-federal-fraud-case.html
3 Dodge v. Ford Motor Company, 204 Mich. 459, 170 N.W. 668 (1919).
4 "Leadership in Action." Business Roundtable. https://www.businessroundtable.org/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  99

   WORK IT OUT

   Business Roundtable Official Statement on the Purpose of a Corporation[5]

   Read the following statement on the purpose of a corporation from Business Roundtable:

           "Americans deserve an economy that allows each person to succeed through hard work and
           creativity and to lead a life of meaning and dignity. We believe the free-market system is the
           best means of generating good jobs, a strong and sustainable economy, innovation, a healthy
           environment and economic opportunity for all.

           Businesses play a vital role in the economy by creating jobs, fostering innovation and
           providing essential goods and services. Businesses make and sell consumer products;
           manufacture equipment and vehicles; support the national defense; grow and produce food;
           provide healthcare; generate and deliver energy; and offer financial, communications and
           other services that underpin economic growth.

           While each of our individual companies serves its own corporate purpose, we share a
           fundamental commitment to all of our stakeholders. We commit to:

              · Delivering value to our customers. We will further the tradition of American companies
                  leading the way in meeting or exceeding customer expectations.

              · Investing in our employees. This starts with compensating them fairly and providing
                  important benefits. It also includes supporting them through training and education that
                  help develop new skills for a rapidly changing world. We foster diversity and inclusion,
                  dignity and respect.

              · Dealing fairly and ethically with our suppliers. We are dedicated to serving as good
                  partners to the other companies, large and small, that help us meet our missions.

              · Supporting the communities in which we work. We respect the people in our
                  communities and protect the environment by embracing sustainable practices across our
                  businesses.

              · Generating long-term value for shareholders, who provide the capital that allows
                  companies to invest, grow and innovate. We are committed to transparency and effective
                  engagement with shareholders.

           Each of our stakeholders is essential. We commit to deliver value to all of them, for the future
           success of our companies, our communities and our country."

      · Question: Does it appear that Shkreli, in the preceding pharmaceutical example, considered all the
          stakeholders as the Business Roundtable Statement recommends, or did he follow the older
          shareholder primacy doctrine approach?

The aim of this chapter is twofold: first, to assist entrepreneurs in understanding the significance of ethics and
the role that entrepreneurs play in developing an ethical and responsible organization. This includes the ability
to recognize and identify both ethical dilemmas and legal issues that might arise. Second, we want to enable

5 "Business Roundtable Redefines the Purpose of a Corporation to Promote `An Economy That Serves All Americans.'" Business Roundtable. August 19, 2019.
https://www.businessroundtable.org/business-roundtable-redefines-the-purpose-of-a-corporation-to-promote-an-economy-that-serves-all-americans
100                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

entrepreneurs to develop a moral compass that allows them to lead their business organization in a manner
consistent with ethical and legal principles. An example of an ethical business organization is one that follows
the Statement of Purpose by the Business Roundtable. This means creating a business environment in which
each member of the organization is encouraged, enabled, and supported to develop the ethical capabilities to
habitually and systematically differentiate between right or wrong. This also means that the organization, as a
total system, provides consistent, meaningful, and timely consequences for unethical behavior and
irresponsible actions.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this article from Forbes to see a list of companies recently deemed the most ethical
   (https://openstax.org/l/52MostEthical) in the world.

Being an Ethical Entrepreneur

Whenever you think about the behavior you expect of yourself, in both your professional and personal life, you
are engaging in a philosophical dialogue with yourself to establish the standards of behavior you choose to
uphold--that is, your ethics. You may decide you should always tell the truth to family, friends, customers,
clients, and stakeholders, and if that is not possible, you should have very good reasons why you cannot. You
may also choose never to defraud or mislead your business partners. You may decide, as well, that while you
are pursuing profit in your business, you will not require that all the money earned comes your way. Instead,
there might be sufficient profits to distribute a portion of them to other stakeholders in addition to
yourself--for example, those who are important because they have helped you or are affected one way or
another by your business. This group of stakeholders might include employees (profit sharing), shareholders
(dividends), the local community (time), and social causes or charities (donations).

Being successful as an entrepreneur may therefore consist of much more than simply making money and
growing a venture. Success may also mean treating employees, customers, and the community at large with
honesty and respect. Success may come from the sense of pride felt when engaging in honest
transactions--not just because the law demands it, but because we demand it of ourselves. Success may lie in
knowing the profit we make does not come from shortchanging others. Thus, business ethics guides the
conduct by which entrepreneurs and their companies abide by the law and respect the rights of their
stakeholders, particularly their customers, clients, employees, and the surrounding community and
environment.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read the Ten Principles of the United Nations Global Compact (https://openstax.org/l/52TenPrinciples)
   that urges corporations to develop a "principled approach to doing business." The principles cover

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  101

human rights, labor, the environment, and corruption.

Nearly all systems of moral, ethical, spiritual, and/or religious beliefs stress the building blocks of engaging
others with respect, empathy, and honesty. These foundational beliefs, in turn, prepare us for the codes of
ethical behavior that serve as ideal guides for business. Still, we need not subscribe to any particular faith to
hold that ethical behavior in business is necessary. Just by virtue of being human, we all share obligations to
one another, and principal among these is the requirement that we treat others with fairness and dignity,
including in our commercial transactions.

For this reason, we use the words ethics and morals interchangeably in our discussion. We hold that "an ethical
person" conveys the same sense as "a moral person." Ethical conduct by entrepreneurs/business owners is
not only the right way to behave, but it also burnishes our own professional reputation as business leaders of
integrity.

Integrity--that is, unity between what we say and what we do--is a highly valued trait. But it is more than just
consistency of character. Acting with integrity means we adhere strongly to a system of ethical values. Such
values often serve as the foundation for the creation of ethical codes, or codes of conduct. A code of ethics
acts to guide conduct and may be derived from a variety of sources. It could be a personal, internal code of
conduct, or an official code adopted by a business organization. Or it could be an external code based on one's
profession (e.g., CPAs, attorneys, CFPs, and others have professional codes of ethics), or a more broadly
applicable external code such as that of the Business Roundtable or Business for Social Responsibility. Being a
professional of integrity means consistently striving to be the best person and professional that you can be in
all your interactions with others. Integrity in business brings many advantages, not the least of which is that it
is a critical factor in allowing businesses and society to function properly. It is also a fundamental basis for
developing and maintaining trust, which is vital to all contractual and informal commitments between
businesses and all their key stakeholders.

Successful entrepreneurs and the companies they represent will take pride in their enterprise if they engage in
business with transparency, intentionality, and integrity. To treat customers, clients, employees, and all those
affected by a venture with dignity and respect is ethical. In addition, ethical business practices serve the long-
term interests of businesses because customers, clients, employees, and society at large will be much more
willing to patronize a business and work hard on the business's behalf if that business is perceived as caring
about the community it serves. And what type of firm has long-term customers and employees? One whose
track record gives evidence of honest business practices.

Research on the performance of the World's Most Ethical Companies (WMEC) indicates a positive association
between ethical conduct and successful long-term financial performance. These businesses often outperform
their market expectations, both in periods of market growth and decline. The WMEC list of companies shows
an average annual excess return of more than 8 percent higher than expected profitability. This may be due to
a variety of reasons, including what researchers term a positive effect on business culture, stakeholders, and
reputation.[6] In other words, being ethical beneficially influences employees, investors, and customers.

6 Nelson Areal and Ana Carvalho. "The World's Most Ethical Companies: Does the Fame Translate into Gain?" Presented to the European
Financial Management Association (EMFA). n.d. https://efmaefm.org/0efmameetings/efma%20annual%20meetings/2012-Barcelona/papers/
EFMA2012_0401_fullpaper.pdf
102                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

   ARE YOU READY?

   Which Corporate Culture Do You Value?

   Imagine that upon graduation, you have the good fortune to face two entrepreneurial opportunities. The
   first is with a startup known to value a hard-nosed, no-nonsense business culture in which keeping long
   hours and working intensely are highly valued. At the end of each year, the company plans to donate to
   numerous social and environmental causes. The second entrepreneurial opportunity is with a nonprofit
   recognized for a very different culture based on its compassionate approach to employee work-life
   balance. It also offers the chance to pursue your own professional interests or volunteerism during a
   portion of every workday. The earnings plan with the first opportunity pays 20 percent more per year.

      · Which of these opportunities would you pursue and why?
      · In what ways might company contributions to a cause carry more power to impact the cause? In

          what ways might individual contributions be more powerful? Think of examples for each scenario.
      · How important an attribute is income, and at what point would a higher income override for you the

          nonmonetary benefits of the lower-compensated opportunity?

Many people confuse ethical and legal compliance. However, these concepts are not interchangeable and call
for different standards of behavior. The law is needed to establish and maintain a functioning society. Without
it, our society would be in chaos. Compliance with legal standards is mandatory. If we violate these standards,
we are subject to punishment as established by the law. Therefore, compliance generally refers to the extent
to which a company conducts its business operations in accordance with applicable regulations, statutes, and
laws. Yet this represents only a baseline minimum. Ethical observance builds on this baseline and reveals the
principles of an individual business leader or a specific organization. Ethical acts are generally considered
voluntary and personal--often based on our individual perception of what is right and wrong.

Some professions, such as medicine and the law, have traditional and established codes of ethics. The
Hippocratic Oath, for example, is embraced by most professionals in healthcare today as an appropriate
standard always owed to patients by physicians, nurses, and others in the field. This obligation traces its
lineage to ancient Greece and the physician Hippocrates. Businesses are different in not having a mutually
shared standard of ethics. This is changing, however, as evidenced by the array of codes of conduct and
mission statements many companies have adopted over the past century. These beliefs have many points in
common, and their shared content may eventually produce a code universally claimed by business
practitioners. What central point might constitute such a code? Essentially, a commitment to treat with
honesty and integrity customers, clients, employees, and others affiliated with a business.

The law is typically indebted to tradition and precedent, and compelling reasons are needed to support any
change. Ethical reasoning often is more topical and reflects the changes in consciousness that individuals and
society undergo. Often, ethical thought precedes and sets the stage for changes in the law.

Behaving ethically requires that we meet the mandatory standards of the law, but that is not enough. For
example, an action may be legal that we personally consider unacceptable (consider how many viewed
Shkreli's legal price hike). Entrepreneurs today need to focus not only on complying with the letter of the law
but also on going above and beyond that basic mandatory requirement to consider their stakeholders and do
what is right.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  103

   WORK IT OUT

   The Equifax Data Breach

   In 2017, from mid-May to July, hackers gained unauthorized access to servers used by Equifax, a major
   credit reporting agency, and accessed the personal information of nearly one-half of the US population.[7]
   Equifax executives sold off nearly $2 million of company stock they owned after finding out about the
   hack in late July, weeks before it was publicly announced on September 7, 2017, in potential violation of
   insider trading rules. The company's shares fell nearly 14 percent after the announcement, but few
   expect Equifax managers to be held liable for their mistakes, face any regulatory discipline, or pay any
   penalties for profiting from their actions. To make amends to customers and clients in the aftermath of
   the hack, the company offered free credit monitoring and identity-theft protection. On September 15,
   2017, the company's chief information officer and chief of security retired. On September 26, 2017, the
   CEO resigned, days before he was to testify before Congress about the breach. Numerous government
   investigations and hundreds of private lawsuits have been filed as a result of the hack. Equifax will pay at
   least $650 million, with the possibility of more, to resolve most claims stemming from the data breach.
   The settlement covers 147 million consumers, just under one-half of the population of the United
   States.[8]

      · Which elements of this case might involve issues of legal compliance? Which elements illustrate
          acting legally but not ethically? What would acting ethically and with personal integrity in this
          situation look like?

To return to the case of Martin Shkreli, let's examine it through some foundational theoretical lenses, based on
ethical theories. Normative theories of ethics are primarily concerned with establishing standards or criteria
that delineate what is considered ethical behavior. Common examples of normative ethical theories are
utilitarianism, duty-based ethics (also known as Kantian ethics and/or deontology), and virtue ethics. These
ethical theories, discussed in the following paragraph, provide a systematic means of examining and
evaluating business conduct.

From an ethical theory perspective, Kantian or duty-based ethics emphasizes the underlying intent or reason
behind a decision and whether that decision is good or bad. For example, if the decision to raise the price of a
lifesaving drug by 5,000 percent is moral and if it is intended to add value, then an individual is obligated to
raise the price. Utilitarian ethics focuses on the usefulness or utility of the decision. If the decision to raise the
price adds value and usefulness for shareholders, then that decision should be made. The Protestant work ethic
looks at the decision from the viewpoint of capitalism, free markets, and a sense of duty to ensure maximum
return on investment. If the decision deals with a change that is financially sound and beneficial, if there are an
adequate number of customers that need and value the HIV product and are willing to pay that price, then
that decision should be made. Proponents of virtue ethics claim that ethics consists of a series of innate but
latent virtues that an individual needs to develop over time. These virtues consist of trust and derivatives of
trust such as truthfulness. In this perspective, if the price hike is fair and equitable, if it is responsible to
behave in this way, and if it does not cause harm to the society, then the price should be raised.

7 Tyler Durden. "Massive Data Breach at Equifax: As Many As 143 Million Social Security Numbers Hacked." Zero Hedge. September 7, 2017.
http://www.zerohedge.com/news/2017-09-07/massive-data-breach-equifax-many-143-million-social-security-numbers-hacked
8 Stacy Cowley. "Equifax to Pay at Least $650 Million in Largest-Ever Data Breach Settlement." New York Times. July 22, 2019.
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/07/22/business/equifax-settlement.html
104                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

While it remains with the courts to determine the underlying intent, legal implications, and consequences of
Shkreli's decision, evidence from this and other case studies shows that some corporate leaders have not
developed ethical capabilities, or they have not internalized a moral compass that enables them to
differentiate between right and wrong.

Developing a Moral Compass

A moral compass is a state of mind where an individual has developed the needed capabilities to differentiate
between right and wrong, or between just and unjust in challenging circumstances. When individuals are able
to act in an ethical manner systematically, habitually, and without struggling to decide how to act or what to
do in difficult situations, they have internalized that moral compass. It can be said that these individuals
possess a good character, are able to earn trust, and have qualities that are deemed necessary for leadership.
To develop and internalize a moral compass, an entrepreneur and the members of the organization need to
continually exercise and develop their ethical "muscles." These ethics-based muscles include qualities such as
trust, truthfulness, respect, responsibility, commitment, care, love, and justice. However, as you will learn, an
entrepreneur needs to first provide the organizational framework and foundation in which individuals and
business units regularly exercise these qualities. This framework and foundation include that everyone receive
the right training, be given the opportunity to identify and close gaps in their behavior, receive recognition and
incentives that reinforce good ethical behavior, and receive consistent, timely, and substantial consequences
when they fail to act responsibly. These and other actions begin to help individuals develop and internalize an
ethical compass.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   A white-collar criminal convicted of fraud, this interview with Mark Faris (https://openstax.org/l/
   52MarkFaris) shows his admission that greed, arrogance, and ambition were motivating factors in his
   actions. He also discusses the human ability to rationalize our behavior to justify it to ourselves. Note his
   proposed solutions: practicing ethical leadership and developing awareness at an individual level via
   corporate training.

Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship

Unlike working in a large corporate environment with an established structure, entrepreneurs often create
and operate a new business venture by their own rules. The pressure to create a new venture, within
constraints and limitations, inspires entrepreneurs to find innovative ways to meet potential market demands.
At the same time, the challenge to meet these expectations can create temptations and ethical pressures as
entrepreneurs make a variety of decisions. Common areas rife with potential legal issues include contracts,
torts, employment, intellectual property, conflicts of interest, full disclosure/truthfulness in product or service
claims and performance, and antitrust/competition law (Figure 3.2).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  105

Figure 3.2 There are many legal issues facing entrepreneurs, including intellectual property, contracts,
antitrust laws, fraud, employment, and torts. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyrights, and Trademarks

There are multiple reasons why an entrepreneur should be aware of intellectual property rights under the law.
For example, if a new startup business comes up with a unique invention, it is important to protect that
intellectual property. Without such protection, any competitor can legally, even if not ethically, copy the
invention, put their own name or company brand on it, and sell it as if it were their own. That would severely
curtail the entrepreneur's ability to make money off a product that s/he invented. Intellectual property (IP)
rights are created by federal law and protect small businesses from problems such as this. IP law also helps
establish brand awareness and secure secondary revenue streams.

Intellectual property (IP) is the output or result of the creative work of one or more individuals to turn a
unique idea into a practical and value-added product/service; this manifestation of original ideas is legally
protected. IP applies to anything that is the exclusive right of a firm, will help differentiate that organization,
and will contribute to a sustained competitive advantage. This creative work can result in a product idea, a new
invention, an innovative pivot, or an improvement in an existing product or service. IP can take the form of a
patent, a copyright, a trademark, or a variation thereof called a trademark secret.

To develop a sustained competitive advantage, an entrepreneur is responsible to protect, provide the needed
safeguards, and continually grow a firm's IP. These responsibilities include understanding, differentiating
between, and dealing with the different types and technical aspects of a firm's IP. It also means that the
entrepreneur should be concerned with the nontechnical aspect of IP, which is to develop a culture of
106  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

creativity that enables the organization to deliver a continuous stream of new IP.

From a technical aspect, there are two different types of patents: utility and design patents (Figure 3.3). A
utility patent protects a brand-new product idea or invention under US law for a period of twenty years (see
the discussion on patents in Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways. A few examples of utility patents would be
Nikola Tesla's electric magnetic motor, dynamo-electric machine, electrical transmission of power, and his
system of electrical distribution patents. A design patent protects the ornamental aspects of a product idea.
Examples include the design of a new font, a soft drink bottle, or the design features of Apple's iPhone. In the
US, design patents are typically protected for a period of fourteen years.

Figure 3.3 (a) This drawing of Nikola Tesla's alternating-current motor was granted U.S. Patent 381968 and
represents a utility patent. (b) The design of the Coca-Cola soft drink bottle was granted a design patent.
(credit (a): modification of modification of "US Patent US381968A" b y Nikola Tesla/Google Patents, Public
Domain; credit (b): modification of "Coke bottle patent" by Unknown/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

Copyrights and trademarks are also protected IP (Figure 3.4). A copyright grants the creator of a work the
exclusive right to reproduction of the work for a specified period of time (usually the life of the author plus
seventy years). A trademark is a registration that provides the owner the ability to use a name, symbol,
jingle,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  107

or character in conjunction with a specific product or service, and prevents others from using those same
symbols to sell their products. A trademark can be protected for an unlimited number of ten-year renewable
terms as long as it is still in use. Finally, there is a special category of IP known as a trade secret. This concept
refers to proprietary information, processes, or other internal knowledge that contribute to an organization's
competitive advantage in a market. However, unlike patents, copyrights, and trademarks, a trade secret is not
included as a protected category under federal IP law. A trade secret is dependent on being kept a secret by
the business that owns it and is enforced through contract law.

Entrepreneurs should pay especially close attention to the legal implications of how patent law can affect a
business. Patent laws are strictly enforced and are intended to protect inventions. This protection is afforded
because a continuous stream of innovations can be a major source of revenue for a firm as well as a vehicle for
developing a sustained competitive advantage. A legal patent gives an exclusive right to its patent holder or
proprietor to use the invention in any shape or form they deem necessary. It also gives the patent holder the
exclusive right to block or withhold access to others, or to sell the right to use the patent. This period of
protection ranges from fourteen to twenty years, and is essentially a government-granted monopoly, after
which, protection usually expires and competition is opened up to anyone (e.g., generic drugs).

Regardless of its type, a firm has the exclusive rights to the ownership of its IP. To protect those rights, it is
important that a firm meticulously and immediately document each IP, the process and timeline by which each
IP was developed, the resources used to develop the IP, the details of who owns and has access to the IP, and
how others can obtain and use the IP.
108  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Figure 3.4 (a) Published texts and artwork are granted a copyright, which will expire over time (usually a
long period), as is the case with Thomas Paine's seminal work Common Sense. (b) McDonald's iconic golden
arches are a trademarked symbol, which usually do not expire unless abandoned. (credit (a): modification of
"Commonsense" by Niki K/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit (b): modification of work by
"JeepersMedia"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

An entrepreneur should consider these questions when growing and protecting a firm's IP.
  · Is IP law relevant to my business, and if so, how can it help me?
  · How do we identify what IP to protect?
  · What are the steps we need to take to get protection?

Less formally, the development of a culture of creativity and innovation is one of the most important
responsibilities of an entrepreneur. This responsibility will enable the entrepreneur to develop a sustained
competitive advantage. This means you should not be satisfied with an occasional spark of creativity from a
designated individual, department, or functional area within your organization (such as research and
development). You need to nurture an environment in which every member of your organization is able to be
creative, add value, and be engaged in the continuous improvement of the firm. One example of this dynamic
is the culture of continuous improvement at Toyota (Kaizen) (see Launch for Growth to Success). In this
culture, every member of the organization is expected to be creative and continually improve the processes
they are engaged with on a daily basis.
The story of Nikola Tesla--a Serbian-American inventor, engineer, and physicist--offers a cautionary tale for
why entrepreneurs need to be attuned to both the technical aspects of a venture's IP and its culture of

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                109

creativity. Having filed 300 patents, Tesla is considered by many to be one of the fathers of modern electricity.
After immigrating to the United States, Tesla was employed by the Continental Edison Company and began to
develop AC technology. However, Edison preferred DC technology and was not supportive of Tesla's ideas.
Tesla had to quit, teaming up with Westinghouse to open the Tesla Electric Light company, bringing his
valuable creativity and ideas with him to his new venture.[9] Eventually, Tesla's AC became the American
standard, not Edison's DC.

Contracts and Torts

Every entrepreneur enters into contracts, usually on a regular basis, and thus should have an understanding
of basic contract concepts. Likewise, most businesses are likely to have some involvement with tort law: that
area of law that protects the rights of people not to be harmed physically, financially, or in any other way, such
as a breach of privacy. Some areas of the business world involve a combination of tort law and contract law,
such as litigation involving the wrongful termination of an employee.

Contracts can be formal or informal agreements. Ideally, you should use written contracts whenever you enter
into a substantial transaction with another party. Oral agreements are enforceable in most situations;
however, proving their terms can be difficult. If you are in the midst of a startup, chances are you are moving
quickly. Perhaps you don't have the time, or the money, to hire a lawyer to prepare a formal written contract.
In that event, you should at least follow-up with all parties via traditional mail or email to document the key
terms of your agreement. That way, if a dispute arises, you'll have documentation to fall back on.

Torts are a potential area of risk for entrepreneurs. Financial liability often results from the assumption of and
exposure to risk; therefore, this is an important issue for entrepreneurs to manage. This is especially true for
the concept of vicarious liability, which is the area of the law that imposes responsibility upon one person for
the failure of another, with whom the person has a special relationship (e.g., employer and employee) to
exercise reasonable care. Most employers understand they run a risk that their employees may commit a tort,
and that they are responsible when employees cause harm to others (customers or coworkers) while on duty,
working on company property, and using company equipment. However, many employers are not aware that
employers can actually be liable for harm caused by an employee if that employee caused harm within the
scope of his or her job duties. For example, if an employer asks an employee to drop something off at FedEx or
UPS after work hours, and that employee negligently causes an auto accident, even if the employee is driving
their personal vehicle and not a company car, the employer could be liable for damages. It is an all-too-
common situation that could have serious liability consequences for an entrepreneurial business if adequate
insurance is not procured.

Antitrust

Antitrust laws (or competition laws) were developed to ensure that one competitor does not abuse its
position and power in the market to exclude or limit competitor access to the market. A few examples of
antitrust laws are the Sherman Act, the Clayton Act, the Federal Trade Commission Act, and the Bayh-Dole Act.
These acts were created to encourage competition and provide options for consumers. In effect, these laws
make it illegal for a competitor to make agreements that would limit competition in the market.

The antitrust concept is important to the entrepreneur's ability of entrepreneurs to form new startup
businesses that are able to compete with larger, more established corporations (which may try to discourage
competition). Table 3.1 summarizes the contributions of these acts to supporting antitrust efforts. It is

9 Nikola Tesla. My Inventions: The Autobiography of Nikola Tesla. (Austin: Hart Brothers, 1982).
110                                      Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

important to note that any deviation from these laws may result in long and costly legal problems.

                          Antitrust Act  Antitrust Acts
Sherman Act (1890)                                                                Protection
Clayton Act (1914)
Federal Trade Commission Act (1914)                 Prohibits attempts to monopolize
Bayh-Dole Act (1980)                                Prohibits price fixing, related practices
                                                    Prohibits unfair business practices
                                                    Encourages development of inventions

Table 3.1

An example of illegal competition would be the competition and patent war between Intel Corporation and
American Micro Devices (AMD). In 2009, AMD filed a suit against Intel claiming that the company had used
"leveraging dominance" to exclude AMD from effectively competing in the marketplace through exclusionary
pricing, discounts, and similar practices. This claim was later settled by the two firms and resulted in Intel
paying AMD $1.25 billion in damages.

Conflict of Interest

A conflict of interest occurs when an individual (or company) has interests in multiple areas (financial
investments, work obligations, personal relationships), and the interests may conflict with each other.
Employees, for example, have an interest in producing expected work for their employer. A conscious or
deliberate attempt to avoid, ignore, or marginalize that which is rightfully due an employer by addressing
other interests would be a conflict of interest. This could be as simple as using company time or resources to
work on a personal project that has not been sanctioned and will not add value to the company. It could also
mean using the tangible and intellectual resources of a company on something that will benefit your private
interests instead of your employer's. This action is unethical since you are not giving the employer what they
are due, which are your time, talents, and services in exchange for agreed-upon compensation. Consider the
example of Mike Arrington, a Silicon Valley lawyer and entrepreneur who created a blog called TechCrunch.
Arrington became the go-to source for tech enthusiasts and investors. His coverage of Silicon Valley-based
startup companies could help ensure the successful launch of a new business or product. However, he was
criticized for routinely covering stories about the companies he invested in and consulted for. Although he
provided full disclosures of his interests, rival critics challenged his conflicts of interest. How could he
simultaneously be both an investor and an independent journalist blogging about the very companies in
which he had a financial interest? He was in a classic conflict of interest position.[10] Similar cases involving
business reporters and potential conflicts of interest include The Wall Street Journal, Business Week, Time
magazine, and the L.A. Herald Examiner.

Another situation in which potential conflicts arise is in the area of professional services, which attracts many
young potential business owners. Perhaps you want to start your own CPA accounting firm, or CFP financial
advisory firm, or IT consulting firm. A professional must be very cautious about conflicts of interest, especially

10 Ira Basen. "Why Transparency Is Not Enough: The Case of Mr. Mike." Center for Journalism Ethics. University of Wisconsin-Madison. June 21,
2011. https://ethics.journalism.wisc.edu/2011/06/21/why-transparency-is-not-enough-the-case-of-mr-mike/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  111

in areas in which you owe a fiduciary duty to your clients. This requires a very high duty of conduct and full
disclosure, one that prohibits being involved in both sides of a transaction. For example, as an IT consultant,
do you recommend to a client that they buy a software product, when unknown to them, you own stock in that
company? Or as a financial advisor, are you getting commissions on both ends of a transaction?

Fraud: Truthfulness and Full Disclosure

Ethical entrepreneurs consistently strive to apply ethics-based concepts in practice, including truthfulness and
full disclosure. These two concepts are not only part of an ethical approach to doing business but are also
underlying requirements of several areas of law including fraud. A business that makes/sells a product or
service has responsibility for fully disclosing the truth about its products/services.

The underlying facts, reality, and evidence behind something are the truthfulness of a matter. An individual
who is being truthful is exercising the capability of being factual about a subject matter, dealing with reality,
and aware of evidence. Truthful individuals earn a level of credibility and reliability over time because what
they say and what they do are in alignment. A corollary of truthfulness is fairness, which means to be
impartial, unbiased, and in compliance with rules and standards of right and wrong behavior. Fairness deals
with doing what is right, just, and equitable. From the standpoint of application, the quality of being truthful
forms the foundation for fairness.

Disclosure describes sharing the needed facts and details about a subject in a transparent and truthful way.
This information should be adequate, timely, and relevant to allow the recipient to understand the purpose
and intent behind a product/service and to make a good decision about the value of that product/service. Any
deliberate attempt to hide, change, or bend the truth is an unethical and irresponsible action subject to
criminal investigation.

One example of a firm that has repeatedly run into several serious, embarrassing, and costly legal issues is Eli
Lilly. In one instance, this company admitted in court that they had illegally marketed Zyprexa, which was
primarily intended and approved by the US Food and Drug Administration office (FDA) to treat depression, to
be used for off-label (not cleared by FDA to market and advertise) ailments such as sleep disorders,
Alzheimer's disease, and dementia. As a result, in 2009, Eli Lilly was fined $1.4 billion by the office of criminal
investigation of the US Department of Justice.[11]

 3.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define and describe corporate social responsibility (CSR) and social entrepreneurship
  · Identify types of social entrepreneurship ventures, and the key values accompanying them

To understand the role of a socially responsible entrepreneur, it is important to first look at the major tenets of
corporate social responsibility (CSR) and the underlying reason why this concept was conceived. Few directives
in business can override the core mission of maximizing shareholder wealth, and today, that particularly
means increasing quarterly profits. Such an intense focus on one variable over a short time (i.e., a short-term
perspective) leads to a short-sighted view of what constitutes business success.
Measuring true profitability, however, requires taking a long-term perspective. We cannot accurately measure

11 Food and Drug Administration. Office of Criminal Investigations of the US Department of Justice. www.usdoj.gov/usao/pae
112  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

success within a quarter of a year; a longer time is often required for a product or service to find its market
and gain traction against competitors, or for the effects of a new business policy to be felt. Satisfying
consumers' demands, going green, being socially responsible, and acting above and beyond the basic
requirements all take time and money. However, the extra cost and effort will result in profits in the long run.
If we measure success from this longer perspective, we are more likely to understand the positive effect
ethical behavior has on all who are associated with a business.

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)

If you truly appreciate the positions of your various stakeholders, you will be well on your way to
understanding the concept of corporate social responsibility (CSR). CSR is the practice by which a business
views itself within a broader context: as a member of society with certain implicit social obligations and
environmental considerations and issues. As previously stated, there is a distinct difference between legal
compliance and ethical responsibility, and the law does not fully address all ethical dilemmas that businesses
face. CSR ensures that a company is engaging in sound ethical practices and policies in accordance with the
company's culture and mission, above and beyond any mandatory legal standards. A business that practices
CSR cannot have maximizing shareholder wealth as its sole purpose, because this goal would necessarily
infringe on the rights of other stakeholders in the broader society. For instance, a mining company that
disregards its CSR may infringe on the right of its local community to clean air and water if it pursues only
profit. In contrast, CSR places all stakeholders within a broader contextual framework.

An additional perspective of CSR is that ethical business leaders opt to do good at the same time that they do
well. This is a simplistic summation, but it speaks to how CSR plays out within any corporate setting. The idea is
that a corporation is entitled to make money, but it should not only make money. It should also be a good civic
neighbor and commit itself to the general prospering of society as a whole. It ought to make the communities
of which it is part better at the same time that it pursues legitimate profit goals. These ends are not mutually
exclusive, and it is possible--indeed, praiseworthy--to strive for both. When a company approaches business
in this fashion, it is engaging in a commitment to CSR.

An interesting example of an entrepreneurial company that is committed to CSR is the New Belgium Brewing
Company (NBBC), maker of Fat Tire Beer, among other brands. The NBBC is 100 percent employee owned,
which makes this company different from the more traditional corporation in which investors own the
company rather than the employees. This type of company with employee ownership means that the workers
benefit directly from the profits generated by their efforts for the company, a sort of democratized capitalism.
The NBBC is focused on sustainability. It has a brewery in Fort Collins, CO, where the brewery produces almost
20 percent of its own electricity--a large percentage for a commercial factory--through solar panels and
wastewater. It makes a corporate commitment to contribute to causes related to sustainability, for example, to
bicycle-related organizations supplying people with green personal transportation options. According to the
company's director of CSR, the NBBC considers social and environmental well-being to be a high priority of the
company.[12]

From a historical perspective, the development of CSR has been somewhat like a rollercoaster ride,
characterized by low points with extreme ethical failures (see Table 3.2) followed by high points in which
corporate conduct improved, largely as a result of statutory laws and/or agency regulations enacted in
response to failures. After such scandals, we also saw a number of voluntary ethics-based ideas begin to find
their way into the corporate world, such as CSR and corporate citizenship. While these concepts have provided

12 Clodagh O'Brien. "16 Brands Doing Corporate Social Responsibility Successfully." Digital Marketing Institute. 2019.
https://digitalmarketinginstitute.com/en-us/blog/corporate-16-brands-doing-corporate-social-responsibility-successfully

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                           113

strategies and tools to strengthen the ethical foundations of businesses, scandals do continue, and new
approaches to address them emerge. Ethical failures such as the Michael Milken/Drexel Burnham Lambert
scandal, the Enron collapse, and many others, including the recent 2008/2009 mortgage industry/derivatives
scandal, led Congress to enact new laws. Examples of statues enacted by the federal government in response
to ethical failures include laws such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, the Insider Trading and Securities Fraud
Enforcement Act, and the Dodd-Frank Act.

In addition to the enactment of statutory reforms, various government agencies have also promulgated new
regulations in an attempt to prevent companies from engaging in unethical, illegal, and otherwise damaging
activities. Examples of agencies that have created new regulations in response to ethical failures in the
business sector include the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Public Company Accounting
Oversight Board (PCAOB), the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB), and the Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority (FINRA).

The concept of doing what's right ethically, following the law, and giving back to society are closely related
concepts (see Table 3.2).

                        Corporate Social Responsibility, Ethics, and Law

Area of Responsibility              Desired Outcome                                           Compliance

Legal                   Comply with laws/regulations                Required by government

Financial               Profits                                     Required by shareholders

Ethical                 Act fairly/avoid doing harm                 Expected by stakeholders

Social/philanthropic    Be a good "corporate citizen"               Desired by society

Table 3.2 Notice which duties, or responsibilities, are mandatory versus discretionary.

Examples of organizations that have experienced ethical lapses causing serious and costly multi-billion-dollar
problems can be seen in Table 3.3. Each has had a profound and far-reaching impact on the lives of
individuals, on the communities and society in which they operate, and/or on the global environment. These
problems--which have resulted in loss of lives, loss of jobs, property damage, depletion of life savings, and
environmental devastation--resulted from issues of quality and ethics.

           Examples of Multi-Billion Dollar Corporate Responsibility Problems

                      Organization                                  Area of Failure

Chevron Corporation                                                 Amazonian toxic waste disposal disaster

Volkswagen Group                                                    Diesel emissions scandal

Takata Corporation                                                  Defective airbag problems

Table 3.3
114                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

                    Examples of Multi-Billion Dollar Corporate Responsibility Problems

                     Organization                                                 Area of Failure

General Motors                                                                    Defective ignition switch problem

Wells Fargo Financial Services                                                    Unethical banking practices

BP P.L.C. (British Petroleum)                                                     Gulf of Mexico oil spill disaster

ENRON Corporation                                                                 Illegal accounting practices

Union Carbide India                                                               Bhopal chemical disaster

Pfizer, Elli Lilly                                                                Fraudulent marketing practices

US Corps of Engineers                                                             Hurricane surge protection disaster

Toyota Motor Corporation                                                          Uncontrollable vehicle acceleration

Nike Corporation                                                                  Breach of code-of-conduct/labor laws

Intel Corporation                                                                 European union antitrust case

Flint Michigan                                                                    Flint, Michigan, water disaster

Phar-Mor, Inc.                                                                    Largest accounting fraud

Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities, LLC                                      Madoff Ponzi scheme

Table 3.3

One vulnerability in the corrective measures discussed to address the scandals listed in Table 3.3 is that they
do not necessarily prevent the repeat of ethical deviations because they are primarily compliance and fear
based. In some instances, instead of preventing unethical activity, the system has enabled unethical leadership
to take minimum actions and merely pay fines rather than correct their actions or change their approach.

     WORK IT OUT

     General Motors' Failure to Consider Stakeholders

     General Motors (GM) has struggled with its brands and its image. Over the years, it has jettisoned some
     of its once-popular brands, including Oldsmobile and Pontiac, sold many others, and climbed back from
     a 2009 bankruptcy and reorganization. The automaker was hiding an even bigger problem, however: The
     ignition switch in many of its cars was prone to malfunction, causing injury and even death. The faulty
     switches caused 124 deaths and 273 injuries, and GM was finally brought to federal court. In 2014, the

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  115

   company reached a settlement for $900 million and recalled 2.6 million cars.
   The case exemplifies the tension between the concept that "the only goal of business is to profit, so the
   only obligation that the business person has is to maximize profit for the owner or the stockholders" on
   one hand, and the ethical obligations a company owes to its other stakeholders on the other.[13] GM's
   failure to consider its stakeholders and consumers when choosing not to report the potential for
   malfunction of the ignition switches led to an ethical breakdown in its operations and cost the company
   and its customers dearly. In addition, by treating customers as only a means toward an end, the
   company turned its back on a generation of loyal buyers.

      · What virtues and values shared by its long-time customers did GM betray by failing to disclose an
          inherent danger built into its cars?

      · How do you think that betrayal affected the company's brand and the way car buyers felt about the
          firm? How might it have affected its shareholders' views of GM?

In recent years, many organizations have embraced CSR, in which the company's expected actions include not
only producing a reliable product, charging a fair price with fair profit margins, and paying a fair wage to
employees, but also caring for the environment and acting on other social concerns. Many corporations work
on prosocial endeavors and share that information with their customers and the communities in which they do
business. CSR, when conducted in good faith, is beneficial to corporations and their stakeholders. This is
especially true for stakeholders that have typically been given low priority and little voice, such as the natural
environment and community members who live near corporate sites and manufacturing facilities. CSR in its
ideal form focuses managers on demonstrating the social good of their new products and endeavors. It can be
framed as a response to the backlash that corporations face for a long track record of harming the
environment and communities in their efforts to be more efficient and profitable.
The trend to adopt CSR may represent an opportunity for greater engagement and involvement by groups
mostly ignored until now by the wave of corporate economic growth reshaping the industrialized world.

Social Entrepreneurship

Social entrepreneurship describes ventures launched by entrepreneurs who are first and foremost advocates
or champions for a social cause. However, they are able to leverage that cause as a platform to develop and
maintain an economically viable organization. These individuals are primarily driven and motivated by a higher
vision or grander purpose. This new breed of entrepreneur leverages the power of their position, their
standing in the community, and the potential synergy and wealth-creation power of an enterprise as a vehicle
or platform to advance their social goals and personal agenda. These social causes often include a solution for
a costly and chronic social problem or pain, a social wrong or injustice that must be corrected, or a global issue
that has been either overlooked or marginalized by society or organizations.
While the primary goal and end-state for a socially responsible entrepreneur is to generate wealth, the
dominant goal for a social entrepreneur is to serve a specific cause as they generate wealth to support that
cause. This means a social entrepreneur works to advance society instead of accumulating greater wealth for

13 Chelsea Bateman. "General Motors: A Recall Nightmare (2014)." Business Ethics Case Analyses. November 23, 2015.
http://businessethicscases.blogspot.com/2015/11/general-motors-recall-nightmare-2014_23.html
116  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

the shareholder. Social entrepreneurs often share qualities such as a selfless attitude, a sense of obligation
and responsibility towards someone or something, a strong commitment to make a change, and a resilience
to withstand failure.

There are numerous examples of companies that have embraced the concept of CSR. In fact, some
entrepreneurs have created startups based primarily on the idea of giving back, many of whose ventures have
become well-known. The list includes, to name a few, TOMS Shoes (discussed in a feature box in this chapter),
Bombas Socks, and Warby Parker Eyewear. Each of these companies follows a CSR approach and donates one
product for each one purchased, (shoes, socks, glasses). Some companies go the extra mile and become
officially certified as B-corporations, which is a CSR-type of designation. (See Business Structure Options: Legal,
Tax, and Risk Issues for more discussion of B-corps).

Environmental Entrepreneurship

Similar to social entrepreneurship, environmental entrepreneurship advocates for a meaningful and
beneficial social cause that is also economically viable. This environmental focus deals with such initiatives that
preserve our ecosystem such as clean and renewable energy, waste management, programs to counteract
climate change, improved water supplies, protection of biodiversity, and reduction of environmental
degradation and deforestation.[14] These initiatives are financially sound from a business standpoint and, at the
same time, don't pollute, waste, destroy, and leave a negative environmental footprint.

There are multiple ways in which an entrepreneur can demonstrate a commitment to environmental
awareness. One way is to own a company that directly helps clean up the environment, such as Ocean
Cleanup, the nonprofit started by a twenty-five-year-old entrepreneur to clean up the Great Pacific Garbage
Patch. Another option is to own a traditional private sector company that pledges to operate in an
environmentally responsible way, such as Patagonia, committed to responsible sourcing and other initiatives.
A third option is to become part of an advocacy organization, an example of which is E2. E2 is "a national,
nonpartisan group of business leaders, investors and others who advocate for smart policies that are good for
the economy and good for the environment."[15] This group strives to influence policies at the state, regional,
and federal levels dealing with energy, climate, oceans, water, transportation, and smart growth. These
policies are primarily intended to improve air, water, public health, as well as job creation in these areas. One
example of an initiative that has resulted from this group deals with passing the nation's first automobile
emissions standards.

In recent decades, corporations have responded to stakeholder concerns about the environment and
sustainability. In 1999, Dow Jones began publishing an annual list of companies for which sustainability was
important. Sustainability, in this context, is the practice of preserving resources and operating in a way that is
ecologically responsible in the long term.[16] The Dow Jones Sustainability Indices "serve as benchmarks for
investors who integrate sustainability considerations into their portfolios."[17],[18] There is a growing awareness
that human actions can, and do, harm the environment. Destruction of the environment can ultimately lead to
reduction of resources, declining business opportunities, and lowered quality of life.

Enlightened entrepreneurs realize that profit is only one positive effect of business operations. Operating a

14 Thaddeus McEwan. "Ecopreneurship as a Solution to Environmental Problems: Implications for College Level Entrepreneurship Education."
International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences 5, no. 3 (2013): 5. http://hrmars.com/admin/pics/1822.pdf
15 E2. www.e2.org
16 Victoria Knowles. "What's the Difference Between CSR and Sustainability?" 2degrees. March 25, 2014.
17 "Dow Jones Sustainability Indices." RobecoSAM. https://www.robecosam.com/csa/indices/djsi-index-family.html
18 "Results Announced for 2017 Dow Jones Sustainability Indices Review." Cision: PRNewswire. September 7, 2017.
https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/results-announced-for-2017-dow-jones-sustainability-indices-review-300515107.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                                             117

successful business creates opportunities for entrepreneurs to give back to society in responsible ways. In
addition to safeguarding the environment, other ethical contributions that entrepreneurs can consider include
establishing schools and health clinics in impoverished neighborhoods and endowing worthwhile
philanthropies in the communities in which companies have a presence.

During the last few decades, there has been an explosion of studies on how business activities affect our
planet. In one study, Tony Juniper points out that population growth, with its accompanying demand for
natural resources and the impact of environmental disasters, has had a profound and lasting impact on the
planet. Juniper states that we have increased our consumption of natural resources tenfold, increased grain
production fourfold, increased freshwater usage fivefold, increased fish capture fourfold, doubled our
consumption of earth's renewable production, and increased the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere.[19]

In prior sections, we briefly discussed the devastating environmental impact of oil companies such as Texaco
and Chevron. When you drill for oil in one of the most biodiverse corners of the world, the Ecuadorian
rainforest of the Amazon, and dump 18.5 billion gallons of oil byproducts and waste into the Amazon's
rainforest and streams, you are definitely leaving a negative footprint on our planet. If you meticulously study
the local wildlife, vegetation, and other natural characteristic of a region before clearing a region to conduct
your business (e.g., harvest the trees for lumber, plants for medication, or drill for oil) and then restore the
region to its original natural form when done, you are neutralizing your footprint on the planet. However, it
you enhance and strengthen the region, open up schools, provide jobs, educate the local population to
preserve and strengthen their natural resources, and take other actions to improve the region, you are in fact
leaving a positive footprint on the planet. Entrepreneurs should learn the impact made by all aspects of their
company, weigh the choices, and consider adopting a policy that does no harm and possibly leaves a positive
footprint on the planet.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Elon Musk, founder of the electric car manufacturer Tesla and other companies, recently spoke at a
   global conference held at the Panthéon-Sorbonne University in Paris. Watch this video of Musk
   explaining the effects of carbon dioxide emissions on climate change (https://openstax.org/l/
   52MuskEmissions) in clear and simple terms.

Sustainability

Sustainability deals with actions and a way of life that considers the continuity of future generations. It is
deeply rooted in doing what is moral/ethical. For example, it is unjust to take actions that benefit the current
generation at the detriment of future generations. What this means is that a sustainable entrepreneur is also
driven by and is an advocate for a socially responsible approach to owing and running a business, leveraging
the economic potential of renewable and readily available resources to add value to the world in which it
operates. However, sustainability means more than just environmental awareness. A simple definition of
sustainability is the ability to be maintained at a certain rate or level. This means not only the environment,

19 Tony Juniper. What's Really Happening to Our Planet?: The Facts Simply Explained. (London: DK/Penguin Random House, 2016).
118                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

but also natural resources, human resources, product supply chains, and multiple related concepts. Thus, as
an entrepreneur aware of issues related to sustainability, one would want to consider a wide range of issues.
Examples might include the responsible use of electricity or water, or participating in supplier diversity/
responsible sourcing programs, or funding worker wellness initiatives. The idea of sustainability, at its root, is
to think long term as opposed to short term.

Given the prominence of the sustainable environment movement worldwide, no well-managed business today
should be conducted without an awareness of the tenuous balance between the health of the environment
and corporate profits. It is quite simply good business practice for executives to be aware that their
enterprise's long-term sustainability, and indeed its profitability, depend greatly on their safeguarding the
natural environment. Ignoring this interrelationship between business and the environment not only elicits
public condemnation and the attention of lawmakers who listen to their constituents, but it also risks
destroying the viability of the companies themselves. Virtually all businesses depend on natural resources in
one way or another.

Responsible Entrepreneurs and Social Entrepreneurship Opportunities

The ability to establish a new venture is an exciting opportunity and privilege. To intentionally plan and
establish a new venture in a responsible manner promotes the continuation of a better world. Development of
a new venture that supports an awareness and sensitivity to immediate and long-term impacts reflects upon
the entrepreneur's personal and organizational values and goals.

Some entrepreneurs start businesses with a community project in mind. A community project venture
leverages the available power, synergy, talents, capabilities, and resources of the community to add value and
change the world in a positive way. This approach uses the creativity, viewpoints, and feelings of community
members to innovate and add value to the local area. An example is that of an entrepreneur who started a
company with the idea of giving back to the community.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   The Story of the TOMS Shoes Entrepreneur in His Own Words by Blake Mycoskie

   Read Blake Mycoskie's own telling of how he founded TOMS Shoes:

           "In 2006 I took some time off from work to travel to Argentina. I was twenty-nine years old
           and running my fourth entrepreneurial startup: an online driver's education program for
           teens. Argentina was one of the countries my sister, Paige, and I had sprinted through in 2002
           while we were competing on the CBS reality program The Amazing Race.

           I met a woman volunteering on a shoe drive who explained that many kids lacked shoes, even
           in relatively well-developed countries like Argentina, an absence that didn't just complicate
           every aspect of their lives--including essentials like attending school and getting water from
           the local well--but also exposed them to a wide range of diseases. Her organization collected
           shoes from donors and gave them to kids in need. Their complete dependence on donations
           meant that they had little control over their supply of shoes.

           My first thought was to start my own shoe-based charity, but instead of soliciting shoe

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  119

           donations, I would ask friends and family to donate money to buy the right type of shoes for
           these children on a regular basis. I have a large family and lots of friends, but it wasn't hard to
           see that my personal contacts could dry up sooner or later. And then what? These kids needed
           more than occasional shoe donations from strangers.

           Then I began to look for solutions in the world I already knew: business and entrepreneurship.
           An idea hit me: Why not create a for-profit business to help provide shoes for these children?
           Why not come up with a solution that guaranteed a constant flow of shoes, not just whenever
           kind people were able to make a donation?

           And for every pair I sell, I'm going to give a pair of new shoes to a child in need. There will be
           no percentages and no formulas. It was a simple concept: Sell a pair of shoes today, give a
           pair of shoes tomorrow.

           Something about the idea felt so right, even though I had no experience, or even connections,
           in the shoe business. I did have one thing that came to me almost immediately: a name for my
           new company. I called it TOMS. I'd been playing around with the phrase "Shoes for a Better
           Tomorrow," which eventually became "Tomorrow's Shoes," then TOMS. (Now you know why
           my name is Blake but my shoes are TOMS. It's not about a person. It's about a promise--a
           better tomorrow.)

           I got a break with an article about my new startup, TOMS, in the LA Times, it was a headline
           story. By the end of that day, we'd received 2,200 orders. That was the good news. The bad
           news was that we had only about 160 pairs of shoes left sitting in my apartment. On the
           website we had promised everyone four-day delivery. What could we do?

           Craigslist to the rescue. I quickly posted an ad for interns and soon I had selected three
           excellent candidates, who began working with me immediately. We ended up selling 10,000
           pairs of shoes that first summer--all out of my Venice apartment."

   Blake Mycoskie. "How I Did It: The TOMS Story." Entrepreneur. 2011. https://www.entrepreneur.com/
   article/220350

   (This excerpt from Entrepreneur magazine was written by Blake Mycoskie in his own words.)

There are multiple types of business entities that function with a social purpose in mind. Nonprofit
organization entrepreneurs (as well as those starting for-profit companies such as the TOMS story) have the
potential to look beyond their own financial gains. These organizations typically partner with federal, state, or
local government organizations, public and private institutions, foundations, or individuals with financial
means and community standing to serve the greater public. One example of a nonprofit initiative is the
National Kidney Foundation of Arizona.[20] This organization seeks solutions for kidney and urinary diseases
through education, prevention, and treatment.

A cooperative venture leverages the talents, finances, and intellectual resources of the members of an
organization to operate and deliver value to the members of the organization. One difference between a
cooperative and a nonprofit corporation is how money flows back into the community. In a nonprofit
organization, the managers cannot distribute profits to members or investors; the remaining money stays in
the nonprofit. In contrast, a cooperative generally can distribute profits to members based on member
participation/temporary ownership. One example of a cooperative would be the Unity One Credit Union, which
is a member-owned, not-for-profit cooperative, working for its members' benefit.

Two other types of entities that are essentially the same are known as social enterprises or social purpose

20 National Kidney Foundation of Arizona. www.azkidney.org
120  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

businesses. These entities are primarily driven by a meaningful social cause. Social entrepreneurs are able to
meet their strategic organizational goals and objectives by delivering a value-added product/service that
closes a gap, addresses a problem or pain, or corrects a social injustice. A social enterprise is typically designed
to be financially self-sufficient. One example of a social entrepreneur and a social enterprise is the Grameen
Bank founded by Muhammed Yunus, a Nobel Peace Prize laureate who defined the term micro-lending and
micro-finance. Grameen Bank thrives on giving small loans to those individuals who have very little to no
collateral and wish to start a business to support their family.[21]

A social purpose business is often referred to as a B- or benefit Corporation (also discussed in Business
Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues). The process of becoming a certified B-corporation is a formal
process that involves compliance with various standards and an audit of this compliance (managed by the B-
Corp organization).[22] The essence of these new B-corporations is that "they recognize the imperative to do no
harm and create positive impact throughout the value chain."[23] According to the B-Corp organization, these
certified businesses are legally required to consider the impact of their decisions on their workers, customers,
suppliers, community, and the environment. As of 2019, there are approximately 3,000 certified B-corps in 65
countries, covering 150 different industries.[24]

One example of a certified B- (or benefit) corporation is Kickstarter, the crowdfunding website. Kickstarter is
one of the world's largest funding communities for creative projects--everything from films, games,
restaurants, and music to art, design, and technology--and offers entrepreneurs a way to raise funds when
they cannot borrow from a bank.

A hybrid venture uses a combined business strategy to enable the organization to deliver profitable and socially
valued products and services. The hybrid business model attracts different investors and capitalizes on a
variety of investment opportunities, while supporting a mission centered on a socially meaningful cause and
grander purpose. One example is Embrace Innovations, a manufacturer of incubators for infants born
prematurely, originally established as a nonprofit entity. Embrace, an example of a relationship between
academic and business, was started as part of a special course at Stanford University. The Stanford Design for
Extreme Affordability Program consists of a course for student teams seeking further support (the Social
Entrepreneurship Lab and the Design Lab). This project was launched in 2007, the company was formed in
2008, and the first version of the product launched in 2011. The product is currently being distributed to clinics
in India, where dozens of babies have already benefited. Partnerships have been formed with several
multinational organizations to distribute the product.[25]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Female entrepreneur Stacey Edgar started Global Girlfriend (https://openstax.org/l/52GlobalGirl) on a
   very small budget and a larger social cause. Through hard work by a team of people, she built a business
   organization founded on the premise of wanting to have a social impact. The company eventually

21 Muhammad Yunus. Banker to the Poor: Micro-Lending and the Battle against World Poverty. New York: PublicAffairs, 2008.
22 Certified B-Corporations. https://bcorporation.net/
23 Network for Business Innovation and Sustainability. "B Corporations, Benefit Corporations, and Social Purpose Corporations: Launching a
New Era of Impact-Driven Companies." October 2012. http://nbis.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/
ImpactDrivenCompanies_NBIS_Whitepaper_Oct2012.pdf
24 Certified B-Corporations. https://bcorporation.net/
25 Design for Extreme Affordability. "Embrace." https://extreme.stanford.edu/projects/embrace/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                        121

supported up to 100 different women-led organizations in over thirty countries. Her goal was for the
company not only to touch the lives of end customers, but also change the supply chain of retail apparel
distribution. It is an example of a successful entrepreneurial startup spreading the message of women's
empowerment.

When launching a social enterprise, you need to consider both the technical aspects of launching an
enterprise as well as the underlying cause or purpose that has driven you to launch a social enterprise. As you
develop your business model, marketing strategy, and other elements to support your venture, it is crucial to
ensure your grander purpose remains the foundation of your business planning and decisions.

Identifying Your Values and Mission

The values we choose to honor are the essence of ourselves, and we carry them with us wherever we live,
work, and play. As we noted, the entrepreneurial path you choose should reflect your values, whether you
create a for-profit or nonprofit organization. It also is possible that you might establish a for-profit company
and volunteer extensively on your own or on behalf of your firm in the nonprofit sector. Whatever your
entrepreneurial path, it remains important not to let your well-considered values be diminished by others who
do not prize loyalty or industriousness, for instance. Entrepreneurship is not a contest in which the person who
finishes with the biggest portfolio or fastest jet skis wins anything other than an empty prize. It is far better to
treat others with integrity and respect, and be surrounded by the true emblems of a successful career--family,
friends, and colleagues who will attest to the dignity with which you have worked. In the final analysis, if you
achieve a life of honor, then you have succeeded.

How do you keep personal values like integrity, fairness, and respect close at hand? The best way is by writing
them down, prioritizing them, and fashioning them into a personal mission statement. Most companies have
mission statements, and people can have them, too. Yours will guide you on your path, clear away distractions
on the road, and help you correct any missteps. It should be flexible, too, to account for changes in yourself
and your goals. Your mission statement is not a global positioning system so much as a compass that guides
you toward discovering who you are and what drives you (Figure 3.5).

Figure 3.5 Entrepreneurs should develop a personal mission statement to avoid straying from the path they
have set for themselves. A personal mission statement can serve as an ethical/moral compass, guiding an
individual through his or her professional and personal life. (credit: modification of "Adventure Compass Hand
Macro" by "Pexels"/Pixabay, CC0)
122  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Let us write your mission statement. Because it will reflect your values, start by identifying a handful of values
that matter most to you. You can do this by answering the questions in Table 3.4; you may also find it
beneficial to keep a journal and update your answers to these questions regularly. Additionally, the US
Department of Labor has a free online self-assessment called the Interest Profiler. The Interest Profiler can
help you find out what your interests are and how they relate to the world of work. The Interest Profiler can
help you focus on avenues of interest that you might want to explore as an entrepreneur.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Click on the O*Net Profiler link (https://openstax.org/l/52ONetProfiler) and take the self-assessment. It's
   quick, fun, and easy.

                                                             Identifying Your Values

  1. Of all the values that matter to you (e.g., honesty, integrity, loyalty, fairness, honor, hope), list the five
  most important.

  2. Next, write down where you believe you learned each value (e.g., family, school, sports team, belief
  community, work).

  3. Write a real or potential challenge you may face in living each value. Be as specific as possible.

  4. Commit to an action in support of each value. Again, be specific.

Table 3.4
Now you can incorporate these values into your business mission statement, which can take the form of a
narrative or action. There are many formats you can follow, but the basic idea is to unite your values with the
goals you have set for your life and career. You can, for instance, link the benefit you want to create, the
market or audience for which you want to create it, and the outcome you hope to achieve.[26] Keep your
statement brief. Richard Branson, founder of the Virgin Group, wants "to have fun in [my] journey through life
and learn from [my] mistakes." Denise Morrison, CEO of Campbell Soup, aims "to serve as a leader, live a
balanced life, and apply ethical principles to make a significant difference."[27] Your own statement can be as
simple as, for instance, "to listen to and inspire others," or "to have a positive influence on everyone I meet."

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this blog, "The Ultimate Guide to Writing Your Own Mission Statement," by Andy Andrews
   (https://openstax.org/l/52BlogAndrews) for more information about creating a personal mission

26 Jessica Stillman. "Here Are the Personal Mission Statements of Musk, Branson, and Oprah (Plus 7 Questions to Write Your Own)." Inc., May
29, 2018. https://www.inc.com/jessica-stillman/how-to-write-your-own-personal-mission-statement-7-questions.html
27 Drew Hendricks. "Personal Mission Statement of 13 CEOs and Lessons You Need to Learn." Forbes. November 10, 2014.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                  123

statement.

Watch the TEDx talk "How to Know Your Life Purpose in Five Minutes" about the self and identifying
values (https://openstax.org/l/52TEDpurpose) to learn more.

Putting Your Values and Mission Statement to the Test

There may be no better place to put your personal values and mission to the test than in an entrepreneurial
role. Startups cannot be run on concepts alone. More than almost any other kind of venture, they demand
practical solutions and efficient methods. Entrepreneurs usually begin by identifying a product or service that
is hard to come by in a particular market or that might be abundantly available but is overpriced or unreliable.
The overall guiding force that inspires the startup then is the execution of the company's mission, which
dictates much of the primary direction for the firm, including the identification of underserved customers, the
geographic site for operations, and the partners, suppliers, employees, and financing that help the company
get off the ground and then expand. In a brand-new organization, though, where does that mission come
from?

The founder or founders of a firm develop the company's mission directly from their own personal beliefs,
values, and experience; this is particularly true for nonprofits. Sometimes the inspiration is as simple as the
recognition of an unmet need, such as the rising global demand for food. Bertha Jimenez, an immigrant from
Ecuador who was studying engineering at New York University, could not help but be concerned that while
craft breweries were riding a wave of popularity in her adopted city, they were also throwing away a lot of
barley grain that still had nutritional value but that no one could figure out how to reuse it. After a few
attempts, Jimenez and two friends, also immigrants, finally hit on the idea of making flour out of this barley
grain, and thus was born the Queens, New York-based startup Rise Products, whose website proclaims that
"Upcycling is the future of food."

Rise Products supplies local bakers and pasta makers with its protein- and fiber-packed "super" barley flour
for use in products from pizza dough to brownies. It has also sent product samples on request to Kellogg,
Whole Foods, and Nestlé, as well as to a top chef in Italy. Jimenez and her fellow cofounders say, "In the long
term, we can bring this to countries like ours. We want to look at technologies that won't be prohibitive for
other people to have."[28]

If we were to diagram the relationship between founders' values and the entrepreneurial mission, it would
look something like this:

                  personal values  personal mission statement  entrepreneurial mission statement
Just as a personal mission statement can change over time, so can the company mission be adapted to fit
changing circumstances, industry developments, and client needs. TOMS Shoes, profiled earlier, is an example
of a business that has expanded its mission to also offer eyeglasses and improved access to clean water to
people in developing countries, in addition to its original mission of shoes for the needy. It calls itself the "One
for One" company, promoting founder Blake Mycoskie's promise that "With every product you purchase,
TOMS will help a person in need."[29]

The point is, if you have clarified your personal values and mission statement, there is almost no limit to the

28 Larissa Zimberoff. "From Brewery to Bakery: A Flour That Fights Waste." New York Times. June 25, 2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/06/
25/dining/brewery-grain-flour-recycling.html; Rise Products. http://www.riseproducts.co/
29 TOMS. https://www.toms.com/
124  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

number of ways you can apply them to your business goals and decisions to "do good and do well" in your
entrepreneurial career. The purpose of business is relationships, and the quality of relationships depends on
our acceptance of self and concern for others. These are developed through the virtues of humility on one
hand and courage on the other. The demanding but essential task of life is to practice both. In that
way--perhaps only in that way--can we be truly human and successful business professionals.

 3.3 Developing a Workplace Culture of Ethical Excellence and Accountability

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe workplace challenges in an entrepreneurial culture
  · Distinguish between reactive and proactive approaches to managing ethics
  · Describe the foundations and framework of an organizational culture of ethical excellence
  · Define the components of an ethical workplace

Successful entrepreneurs understand that the workplace of 2020 is quite different from that of 2000, just
twenty years ago. As the heading to this section suggests, progressive entrepreneurs want to create a
workplace culture of ethical excellence. However, doing that means understanding a changing workforce, both
in terms of demographics and values. Millennials, born between 1983 and 1995, now outnumber baby
boomers in the workforce, and by 2025, will compose three-quarters of all workers on a global basis.[30]
Entrepreneurs and managers who are in a position to hire and supervise millennial workers must adjust to the
differing expectations and demands of a mid-twenty-first century workplace. This is especially true with regard
to CSR/ethics. What matters most to millennials, according to a recent New York Times article, is that work
aligns with their values.[31]

Approximately 60 percent of millennial workers would agree to work for 15 percent less money just for the
chance to work for a company whose business values parallel their personal values.[32] It turns out that
millennials don't just want a job, they want a job that matters--one in which they can do rewarding work that
achieves a worthwhile outcome. In other words, they want the work they do to mean something. Furthermore,
according to an article in the Texas Bar Journal by career coach and consultant Martha Newman, millennial
workers place a high value on workplace policies that promote open communication, collaboration, and
participation in short- and long-term decision making with their employer.[33] Newman also says that
millennials expect a degree of work-life balance; career isn't all that matters in their life.

What this means for entrepreneurs who manage employees is that they must adjust. For example, an owner
can create a workplace in which there is a culture ensuring that people matter as much as money, where there
is work-life balance with things like flexible scheduling, and where good work is recognized and rewarded.
There's an adage that says, "People don't quit their job, they quit their bosses." If you don't want a very high
turnover rate among your workforce, be the kind of boss that millennials want to work for and with.

30 Deloitte Reports. 2019. https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/about-deloitte/articles/millennialsurve y.html
31 Elizabeth Olsen. "Graying Firms Wrestle with Making Room for Younger Lawyers." New York Times. November 4, 2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/05/business/dealbook/graying-firms-wrestle-with-making-room-for-younger-lawyers.html
32 Elizabeth Olsen. "Graying Firms Wrestle with Making Room for Younger Lawyers." New York Times. November 4, 2015.
https://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/05/business/dealbook/graying-firms-wrestle-with-making-room-for-younger-lawyers.html
33 M. Newman, "Decoding Millennial Lawyers," Texas Bar Journal 82, no. 8 (2019): 639.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  125

Entrepreneurial Culture

A fairly common characteristic of successful startups is charismatic, driven founders with competitive
mentalities. After all, it takes a thick skin and powerful ego to get through the inevitable disappointments that
confront a startup leader. Often, however, companies discover that a different leadership ethos is necessary as
they grow. Could entrepreneurs still succeed if they also embraced a humanistic leadership style at the outset,
or would this invariably undermine the already low initial odds of success? It is a difficult problem with which
many firms wrestle. Dedicated employees may be put off by demanding leaders who are harsh, giving little
back to loyal workers even after achieving success. New employees may decide the working climate is less
congenial than they anticipated and simply leave.
One question an ethical entrepreneur should ask is this: Do my employees feel like they can speak freely? In
reality, at many companies, according to SHRM (Society for Human Resource Management), human resources
departments often find it difficult to get employees to complete employee workplace climate (satisfaction)
surveys.[34] Workers often believe that if management really wants to find out who said what, they easily could,
although the surveys are supposed to be anonymous. The difference between ethical and unethical
entrepreneurial management is whether they want to find out. Whether it involves small, mid-size, or large
companies, management should encourage employees to speak out, whether as an anonymous whistleblower
or in person to their supervisor. Absence of this type of encouragement often allows unethical business
practices to flourish, such as was seen in the Wells Fargo case example.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Although no single set of traits identifies the ideal startup leader, a demanding, driven nature is a fairly
   common characteristic. Consider these brief profiles of entrepreneurs: first, a profile on Walt Disney
   (https://openstax.org/l/52WaltDisney) and then video showing a contrasting view from Kerrie Laird
   (https://openstax.org/l/52KerrieLaird) at Vodafone.
   After watching the videos, consider this thought experiment: Suppose the cult of the charismatic--but
   dogmatic--entrepreneurial leader such as Walt Disney or Steve Jobs were replaced by one steeped in a
   commitment to employee empowerment that Kerrie Laird claims for Vodafone? Could this change the
   culture at startups? If it could, do you believe that change would be for the better or worse?

These observations identify what may be unique to entrepreneurial culture. This is a combination of
personality and management style often identified with those business leaders who strike out on their own,
bring a startup to life, and shape its initial business practices and culture on the job. If the enterprise is
successful, the principles and philosophy of the founder become enshrined in the lore of the company, so that
long after his or her departure, succeeding leaders find themselves beholden to the management philosophy
exemplified from the early days of the firm.[35] As you seek the right leadership style to implement in your

34 Dana Wilkie. "Employee Engagement Surveys: Why Do Workers Distrust Them?" Society for Human Resource Management. January 5,
2018. https://www.shrm.org/resourcesandtools/hr-topics/employee-relations/pages/employee-engagement-surveys.aspx
35 Steven Byars. Personal statement. Dr. Byars worked for many years in the 1980s in human resources at the Walt Disney Company at its
corporate site in Burbank, California. A popular training course offered in-house to employees new to professional or managerial roles was
"Disney Way," in which the leadership culture of the company was traced back to its founding in 1926 and how that culture had remained
greatly intact over the intervening years.
126                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

entrepreneurial plans, begin by asking precisely what kind of leader you would prefer to work for if you were
not the boss. The answer you provide may very well be the best model to follow as you develop your own
leadership personality.

The first employees of a startup realize what is at stake as the company tiptoes into new entrepreneurial
waters. The founder may be the boss, but those associated with him or her sense a collaborative spirit that
directly joins them to the founder as well as to each other. There can be a genuine fraternity among those who
have been with the firm since day one or shortly thereafter. Founding members of an entrepreneurial
business are also often willing to undergo the strains and rigors attached to a startup in return for an
ownership stake in the company that allows them to profit handsomely from its later growth and success.

Newer staff, however, may not share this mindset. They may simply be seeking a secure position with a
growing business rather than a chance to get in on the ground floor of a risky startup. They will not necessarily
have the tolerance for the demanding hours, chaos, and abrasive personalities that can characterize the early
days of an enterprise. Can entrepreneurial founders shape a company's culture so that it can accommodate
talented employees who are looking for a corporate culture that supports some work-life balance?

Consider also the ethical practices of an entrepreneur and the ethical expectations of employees. Suppose that
one of the distinguishing features woven into the fabric of the startup is the respect extended to customers or
clients. An entrepreneur typically promises always to hold customers in the highest regard, never lie to them,
and serve them well. Furthermore, suppose this entrepreneur successfully instills this same ethos among all
employees from the outset. Respect for customers is intended to become a distinguishing feature of the
business; even if it causes monetary loss to the company, this entrepreneur will neither cheat a client nor
misrepresent the company's services. Finally, presume that this ethos is embedded into the culture of the
company while it is still in startup mode.

Now suppose the company becomes successful. This may signal the hardest time of all for the entrepreneur.
Growth often accompanies success, and growth means, among other things, more employees. Not all these
new hires will be as committed to the same degree of responsibility for customers. They will not necessarily set
out to cheat clients, but they might lack the founder's enthusiasm for the most honorable treatment of
customers. How can an entrepreneur ensure that the initial commitment carries over to the second generation
of leadership? He or she cannot simply order it to happen--human nature usually does not respond so easily.
So entrepreneurs must do their best to ensure that their version of customer service, one that prioritizes
respect for clients, is passed along to new employees. It may be ingrained in the longest-serving employees,
but it must be nurtured to the point where it has the same significance for the newest hires.

As a leader, you need to plan and follow-up to ensure your organization follows the values and ethical
principles you uphold. This planning process goes beyond taking a few simple actions such as hiring the right
people, providing consequences, or setting expectations. It goes beyond communicating a few niceties and
encouraging sound bites such as establishing trust and working with uncompromising integrity. It needs more
than the application of a few popular concepts and slogans such as CSR, conscious capitalism, or servant
leadership. It also needs more than the effective communication of a few success criteria and expectations.

There are effective techniques that can support the infusion of ethical principle into the daily work life of
employees. Sometimes known as anchoring strategies, ethical values can become part of the business
culture through the implementation of employee training, and reward/recognition programs. The Society for
Human Resource Management (SHRM) website has a toolkit for entrepreneurs and managers that provides
useful ideas on infusion and anchoring strategies.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  127

   LINK TO LEARNING

   View the toolkit for understanding and developing organizational culture (https://openstax.org/l/
   52OrgCulToolkit) to learn more.

While the use of popular management approaches can be successful, they can be inadequate to stop unethical
behavior. Instead, you need a plan to nurture and develop a culture where ethical qualities and capabilities
such as truthfulness, justice, responsibility, and compassion are developed and internalized as a moral
compass. It also demands that these qualities and capabilities are infused into the fabric of organization,
adhered to habitually, and are integrated into the organization's daily operations.

Proactive versus Reactive Approaches

Creation of an ethical workplace environment has both reactive and proactive components. The reactive side
enables an entrepreneur to identify and address reckless behavior, irresponsible actions, and ethical
deviations as they occur. However, there may be times that a reactive approach, which can be heavy-handed,
may not be the best approach for addressing ethical deviations.
In contrast, a proactive approach to developing an ethical workplace strives to prevent reckless behavior,
irresponsible actions, and ethical deviations by establishing and nurturing a culture of ethics, responsibility,
and compliance. It also demands that you establish a workplace environment of ethics where every member
of the organization is able to proactively develop, internalize, and apply a moral compass. This approach
serves to operationalize popular--but often silent or nebulous--concepts such as truthfulness, fairness, trust,
integrity, commitment, innovation, and excellence, leading to a sustained competitive advantage.

Developing the Foundation and Framework of an Ethically Responsible Organization

An entrepreneur must build a foundation for developing an organization grounded in ethics and
responsibility. Foundational building blocks enable an entrepreneur to systematically add the greatest value to
society, and to do so responsibly. Additionally, for entrepreneurs modifying their businesses or taking over
new ventures, building a foundation of ethical conduct should neither disrupt normal business operations nor
add significant overhead, since the main concepts are infused into the fabric of the organization.
To develop an organization's foundation for ethics and a framework for management, an entrepreneur needs
to incorporate three essential ethical qualities--trust, fairness, and excellence--into the organization's core
values (see Figure 3.6). Additional ethical qualities, dependent on the enterprise's specific goals, might include
responsibility, commitment, compassion, and so on. The entrepreneur should infuse these qualities into all
aspects of organizational governance and daily operations, and track these values to ensure they are being
integrated into planning, and are met and enforced by all business units.[36],[37],[38] The application and
implementation of these three core qualities will begin to shape the framework and establish a foundation of

36 Mehran Ferdowsian. "Total Business Excellence--A New Management Model for Operationalizing Excellence," International Journal of
Quality & Reliability Management 33, no. 7 (2016): 942-984. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJQRM-08-2014-0109
37 Thomas A. Hemphill and Waheeda Lillevik. "The Global Economic Ethics Manifesto: Implementing a Moral Values Foundation in the
Multinational Enterprise." Journal of Business Ethics 101, no. 2 (2011): 213-230. doi: 10.1007/s10551-010-0718-4.
128  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

ethics and responsibility.

Figure 3.6 illustrates and approach to building a foundation for ethics-based behaviors, principles, and
effective collaboration.

Figure 3.6 Ethical entrepreneurs/managers have these foundational qualities. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Second, the organization should consider what ethical principles it wants to prioritize. Examples of ethical
principles might include:

  · Service and advancement of society
  · Collaborative excellence
  · Gender equity
  · Elimination of prejudices
Once the framework and foundation for an ethical and high-performing organization has been established,
other qualities and principles can easily be integrated as needed to further strengthen this framework,
differentiate the organization, and develop a sustained competitive advantage. It also enables leadership to
align other aspects of organizational governance with ethics and responsibility. For example, if leadership
wants to leverage the power of diversity to develop a sustained competitive advantage, they would adopt the
principles of equality of sexes, the elimination of prejudices, and the principle of oneness of humanity. If
leadership wants to develop and use teamwork and collaboration as a strategic competitive advantage, they
would integrate the behaviors and principles for collaborative excellence and working cohesively as one.
The framework and foundation of ethics and responsibility will enable the entrepreneur to consistently

38 Hans Küng. "The Global Economic Crisis Requires a Global Ethic: The Manifesto for a Global Ethics." Symposium on the Global Economic
Ethics, United Nations Headquarters, New York, NY. October 6, 2009. https://www.bbvaopenmind.com/en/articles/the-global-economic-crisis-
requires-a-global-ethic/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  129

manage the needed qualities and principles for success in all aspects of daily operations. These aspects
include research and development, engineering, manufacturing, sales, marketing, planning, decision-making,
problem solving, conflict management, and other aspects of organizational governance. To demonstrate what
this means in practice, the leadership of each of functional area could serve as role models, raise awareness,
and encourage individuals to internalize a line of ethical reasoning, asking questions such as, "Is my decision
right or wrong (good or bad)?" "Am I dealing with factual information or is conjecture?" "What is the
consequence of my action?" "Is my decision fair and equitable?" "Did I give the individual what they are due?"
"Would I want to be treated this way?" "Will this action help me achieve the best results for the collective?"
This mindset, line of reasoning, and congruence between individual and organizational ethics is often lacking,
which leads to ethical deviations.[39],[40],[41],[42],[43],[44] Establishing the foundation outlined here enables each
member of the organization to exercise sound moral judgment, develop ethical capabilities, and internalize a
moral compass. It also allows employees to be aligned with the company's grander purpose, vision, mission,
and values that then translates into actions.

Develop a Grander Purpose

Once the entrepreneur has designed and configured the organization to develop a sustained competitive
advantage in a responsible manner, he/she needs to develop a higher vision or a grander purpose for the
organization. This grander purpose is not the same as a mission or vision (although they may overlap). It is not
financially motivated, it is not product/service centric, and it is not shareholder driven. Instead, the grander
purpose defines and highlights the reasoning for a firm's long-term existence and success; it provides
guidance and direction during decision-making, problem solving, and conflict resolution; it provides the
motivation for individuals to achieve excellence and the sense of urgency for social change; and it enables
individuals to be part of a larger cause. For example, the integration of the right grander purpose into the
operations of an organization could have prevented the manufacturing of toys made with lead-based paint or
the poisoning of the Flint, Michigan, water supply. The grander purpose provides a mechanism to help
individuals calibrate their day-to-day activities against a more meaningful and stable target.[45]

Develop a Culture of Collaborative Excellence

The establishment of a framework and foundation for ethical behavior opens up the organization for effective
and meaningful teamwork and collaboration. Many existing approaches to collaboration, while demonstrating
successes and benefits, also are sometimes inadequate in addressing complex group interactions dealing with
mistrust, competition, politics, and ideological differences. A successful culture of collaboration should

39 Mehran Ferdowsian. "Total Business Excellence--A New Management Model for Operationalizing Excellence." International Journal of
Quality & Reliability Management 33, no. 7 (2016): 942-984. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJQRM-08-2014-0109
40 Shannon Bowen. "Organizational Factors Encouraging Ethical Decision-Making: An Exploration into the Case of an Exemplar." Journal of
Business Ethics 52, no. 4 (2004): 311-324.
41 Muel Kaptein. "Developing and Testing a Measure for the Ethical Culture of Organizations: The Corporate Ethical Virtues Model." Journal of
Organizational Behavior 29 (2008): 923-947. Muel Kaptein. "The Ethics of Organizations: A Longitudinal Study of the US Working Population."
Journal of Business Ethics 92, no. 4 (2009): 601-618. Muel Kaptein and F. Bons. "The Business Codes of the Fortune Global 200--What the Largest
Companies in the Work Say and Do." Findings of a whitepaper from a study conducted by KPMG in conjunction with the RSM Erasmus
University. 2014.
42 B. Elango, Karen Paul, and Shishir K. Paudel. "Organizational Ethics, Individual Ethics, and Ethical Intentions in International Decision-
Making." Journal of Business Ethics 97, no. 4 (2010): 543-561.
43 Ding-Yu Jiang, Yi-Chen Lin, and Lin-Chin Lin. "Business Moral Values of Supervisors and Subordinates and Their Effect on Employee
Effectiveness." Journal of Business Ethics 100, no. 2 (2010): 239-252.
44 Robert J. Sternberg. "Ethics from Thought to Action." Educational Leadership 68, no. 6 (2011): 34-39.
45 Mehran Ferdowsian. "Total Business Excellence--A New Management Model for Operationalizing Excellence." International Journal of
Quality & Reliability Management 33, no. 7 (2016): 942-984. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJQRM-08-2014-0109
130                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

convince individuals to find the best ideas, leverage diversity, grow new solutions, gain wholehearted support,
develop champions of change, nurture a safe environment, and encourage people to express all ideas.

An effective process for encouraging collaboration takes time to build; however, it's worth it because it will
provide the inspiration and motivation needed to accomplish tasks and exceed expectations. The organization
should also have consequences in place for ineffective collaboration, which may be evidenced in gossip,
backstabbing, self-centered behavior, and biases or prejudices. Such consequences could include probation
plans and one-on-one meetings that work to determine the root cause and identify steps forward.

Creativity is also key for a team to think differently. There must be freedom in the workplace for creativity to
blossom. When developing a culture of creativity, entrepreneurs should consider these issue and challenges:

  · How can we creative a culture of creativity and innovation?
  · How can we encourage the members of the organization to collaborate and leverage each other's

      creativity?
  · How can we reward and recognize people for their creativity?

Human Resources Development

A human resources development plan enables a company to continually grow its intellectual resources,
enables individuals to develop ethical capabilities, strengthens individual creativity and organizational
innovation, provides a steady stream of capable human resources for its leadership pipelines, and enables the
firm to leverage and harvest those human resources to advance society in a responsible manner. This is
achieved by providing a new employee assessment process where every member of the organization is given
the needed opportunities and is expected to collaborate with their superior(s) to own and manage their
lifelong development plan (LDP). At a minimum, an LDP should:

  · Include short-term and long-term career goals and objectives
  · Help identify, continually develop, and leverage individual strengths
  · Enable individuals to identify and measurably close gaps in deliverables, behavior, and professional

      improvement
  · Clarify major deliverables and success indicators

In sum, an LDP becomes the primary instrument to assist individuals to achieve excellence by raising
performance, closing gaps in assessment, and aligning the individual with the grander purpose, vision,
mission, goals, needs, and objectives.

   WORK IT OUT

   Growing Collaboration and Creativity

   Entrepreneurs are entrusted with the growth and development of their people. This growth and
   development should not be stopped, delayed, or marginalized in any shape or form. Instead, an
   entrepreneur needs to learn how to use the available resources to systematically train, develop, and
   deliver a steady stream of responsible individuals who are able to grow within the company as well as
   grow the company. List three strategies an entrepreneur could use to achieve the following major
   objectives:

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                                                     131

1. Develop the best, the brightest, and most creative and motivated people who have a strong sense of
     right and wrong

2. Develop individuals who have a strong sense of ownership, responsibility, and commitment to
     achieve and sustain a competitive edge

3. Leverage these intellectual forces and the synergy within the organization to generate the greatest
     value and wealth for all stakeholders.

Develop Ethical and Responsible Leadership/Management

Significant research shows that the culture of the organization is mostly shaped by its leadership values--by
how leaders develop the bonds of trust, by how they motivate their people, by their responsible decisions and
actions, and by how they empower, delegate, and monitor tasks. A recent Harvard Business Review article, by a
group of professors and entrepreneurs, synthesized the research of experts including Edgar Schein, Shalom
Schwartz, Geert Hofstede, and other leading scholars on this topic.[46] The article indicates that the attributes
of a business's leaders define that organization's culture. A business's culture is essentially defined as the
social order within an organization that helps shape attitudes and behaviors--delineating what type of
behavior is encouraged and/or discouraged.

While it is possible for a company to hire individuals who possess these attributes, the organization should
have a plan in place to systematically train and develop responsible leaders. At minimum, this should include
the development and management of a leadership pipeline, the nurturing of ethical and intellectual
capabilities, and rewards and consequences that enable a leader to develop and internalize a moral compass.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Entrepreneurs Must Not Just Talk the Talk but Walk the Walk

   As both a leader and an entrepreneur, you need to have a good understanding of ethics and
   responsibility, and be able to apply the major tenets of concepts such as CSR. To build and maintain trust,
   it is important that these concepts not start and end with mere empty words and gestures. Rather,
   entrepreneurs need to exemplify and model these concepts, and apply them through meaningful,
   consistent, and timely actions. In sum, an entrepreneur needs to live the values they wish to see in
   others. They need to become the embodiments of trust, respect, responsibility, commitment, and other
   key qualities. These core values need to be infused into the fabric of the organization.

   Entrepreneurs have been placed in a position of power and responsibility. They need to use their
   position, power, social standing, and the synergy of the vast financial and intellectual resources at their
   disposal to move and shake the world in a meaningful way. For example, imagine for a moment using
   the resources of companies such as Apple, Google, Microsoft, Amazon, and Facebook, whose combined
   worth is estimated to be close to $2.2 trillion, to address complex and difficult global issues dealing with
   education, poverty, hunger, and other chronic problems.

46 Boris Groysberg, Jeremiah Lee, Jesse Price, and J. Yo-Jud Cheng. "The Leader's Guide to Corporate Culture." January/February 2018.
Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2018/01/the-culture-factor
132  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Develop Internal/External Organizational Alignment and Cohesion

Key to ethical organizational success is the alignment and cohesion between individuals, groups, and the
enterprise as a whole. This alignment starts with the development of a grander purpose that enables the
entrepreneur and the organization to serve, add value, and advance the society in which it operates. It ensures
individuals and units within the company understand the grander purpose, mission, vision, and the goals and
objectives of the company, and it provides each member or the organization the opportunity to serve and fit
into that grander purpose, mission, and vision. It is further strengthened by asking individuals to achieve
excellence in their own right instead of competing with each other. It sets clear expectations about how people
are to treat and deal with each other to deliver results. It deals with the alignment of corporate values with the
espoused values, and the alignment between what leadership says and does. When combined, these and
other alignments can enable individuals and groups to stay on track and reach the company's goals efficiently.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Unilever "Enhancing Livelihoods" through Project Shakti

     According to management guru Peter Drucker, whose ideas significantly contributed to the foundations
     of thought about the workings of the modern business corporation, workers "need to know the
     organization's mission and to believe in it." How do organizations ensure this commitment? By satisfying
     workers' values.[47] A program undertaken by Unilever, the Dutch-British multinational company co-
     headquartered in Rotterdam and London, illustrates the kind of values-oriented corporate endeavor
     Drucker describes. Project Shakti is a Unilever CSR initiative in India that links CSR with financial
     opportunities for local women.[48] It is considered a leading example of micro-entrepreneurship, and it
     expands the concept of sustainability to include not only environmental issues but also economic
     opportunities and financial networking in underdeveloped areas.

     The goal, according to Unilever, is to give rural Shakti women the ability to earn money for themselves
     and their families as micro-entrepreneurs. Unilever's subsidiary in India, Hindustan Lever, has started
     training programs for thousands of women in small towns and villages across India to help them
     understand how to run their own small sole proprietorships as distributors of the company's products.
     With support from a team of rural sales managers, women who had been unable to support themselves
     are now becoming empowered by learning how a supply chain works, what products Hindustan Lever
     produces, and how to distribute them. The sales managers also act in a consulting capacity to help with
     business basics, money management, negotiations, and related skills that help the women run their
     businesses effectively.

     Project Shakti has enlisted more than 100,000 rural participants, which includes about 75,000 women.
     The project has changed their lives in ways that are profound, and not only because of the income
     earned. The women now have increased self-esteem based on a sense of empowerment, and they finally
     feel they have a place in Indian society. According to the Unilever Sustainable Living Plan, Project Shakti
     is one of the best and most sustainable ways the company can address women's social concerns. It
     allows Unilever to conduct business in a socially responsible manner, helping women help themselves
     while extending the reach of its products.

47 Rick Wartzman. "What Peter Drucker Knew About 2020." The Harvard Business Review. October 16, 2014. https://hbr.org/2014/10/what-
peter-drucker-knew-about-2020

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                                                   133

· Do you believe Unilever sponsors the Shakti program to help women, boost its own profits, or both?
   Explain your answer.

· How is this program an example of both corporate and personal sustainability?

Develop a Culture of Creativity and Innovation

The next building block is developing a culture of creativity and innovation. This means going beyond a spark
of creativity from select individuals or business units, and instead nurturing a culture where every member of
the organization is continually creative and the organization is innovative. This also means providing the
means and opportunities for individuals to be engaged, creative, and contributing members on a full-time
basis. What makes this possible results from the prior building blocks. Innovation requires good leadership
and management; a meaningful and effective process for teamwork and collaboration; a culture of learning
and improvement; a consistent and measurable process to encourage, recognize, compensate, and track
innovation; and company-wide focus on the training and development of the sense of creativity.[49]

Develop a Culture of Delivering Responsible Results

Measurable results compose the final building block of a framework for ethics and responsibility. This involves
developing systems and indicators that will demonstrate how your business is achieving ethical standards and
progressively improving as it adds value to society. While the details of which indicators to select is left up to
the discretion of the entrepreneur, this building block defines success in terms of ten dimensions of business
excellence, shown in Figure 3.7.

48 Unilever. https://www.unilever.com/sustainable-living/values-and-values/
49 Mehran Ferdowsian. "Total Business Excellence--A New Management Model for Operationalizing Excellence." International Journal of
Quality & Reliability Management 33, no. 7 (2016): 942-984. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJQRM-08-2014-0109
134  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Figure 3.7 Delivering responsible results involves multiple considerations. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Figure 3.7 serves as an easy-to-understand guide for entrepreneurs seeking to create a culture of excellence.
Focusing on these ten dimensions can help a business achieve excellence, from which a company may derive
multiple benefits. Examples of reasons why a company strives to achieve excellence include strengthening
alignment between company values and those of stakeholders, balancing goals versus measures of success,
clarifying strategic focus versus operational concerns, selecting areas within the company wherein
improvement is needed, and shifting from a preoccupation with daily activities and processes to focus on
outcomes. Companies seek excellence with regard to internal and external outcomes, both of which are
important. Thus, whether examining internal aspects such as finance and operations, or external aspects such
as product quality and customer service, each of these ten areas is an ingredient of company excellence.

Creating an Ethical and Responsible Workplace Environment

A safe, healthy, and productive workplace is an environment in which an individual has a high level of trust and
confidence that if they give their best, they will see a number of results and be afforded a number of things in
exchange for their hard work. This concept resembles an employer-employee contract. This contract includes
the following employee expectations:

 1. They are treated with the respect, dignity, and courtesy they deserve as a human being.
 2. They are given the needed support, equal opportunities, and resources to excel.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  135

 3. They are given what they deserve and what they are due in a fair and equitable way.
 4. They are provided a safe, secure, and prejudice-free work environment.
 5. They are not pushed, pressured, or expected to behave irresponsibly.

This type of workplace environment enables individuals to continually grow and develop to their full potential
and then leverage that potential to add value to their own lives, careers, and society. This type of environment
is one in which individuals are not afraid to speak their mind; they feel safe to discuss problems and concerns,
and feel free to question and reject that which is wrong.

Prejudice

Prejudice is often thought of as a negative attitude and/or feeling toward an individual based solely on one's
membership in a particular group. Prejudice is common against people who are members of unfamiliar
cultural groups. In employment, it can be the root cause of unfair discrimination.[50] One factor essential to the
development of a safe and healthy work environment is that it strives to be a place free of prejudice. This is an
environment where everyone is treated with the respect and dignity they deserve and are afforded equal
opportunities for growth, development, and advancement both within and outside of the organization. For
example, it is important to look at the merit or value of the work done by an individual and the manner by
which those results have been delivered. It is unethical to treat people differently based on their race, gender,
age, nationality, and other differentiating factors. To develop trust and respect, everyone needs to be afforded
the same opportunities.

Competition and Collaboration

Effectively managing a workforce includes a systematic approach to appraisal of employee performance. A
manager/entrepreneur must decide how to do this within their company. A forced ranking system is one in
which scoring employee performance is competitive and can pit employees against each other instead of
fostering a collaborative work environment. Some employers have switched to a system that does not require
forced rankings and attempts to downplay the competitive nature of assessment, focusing instead on
individual continuous improvement. There is a legitimate difference of opinion on this issue. According to a
Wall Street Journal article by the accounting and consulting firm Deloitte,[51] executives are split on whether it is
an effective practice. Jack Welch, former CEO at General Electric, was a proponent of it, whereas others see it
as counterproductive. Companies that have discontinued the process include Microsoft and GE.

In an environment of collaborative excellence, individuals are encouraged to express their ideas and
viewpoints in an unfettered and respectful way, where the merit of each idea is weighed against the merit of
other ideas. In this environment, individuals are not reprimanded for being creative, taking calculated and
reasonable risks, or challenging management or leadership.

50 Paul C. Holinger. "Understanding Bias, Prejudice, and Violence." Psychology Today. June 6, 2017. https://www.psychologytoday.com/us/
blog/great-kids-great-parents/201706/understanding-bias-prejudice-and-violence
51 Deloitte CIO Journal. "It's Official: Forced Ranking Is Dead." Wall Street Journal. 2014. https://deloitte.wsj.com/cio/2014/06/10/its-official-
forced-ranking-is-dead/
136  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

   WORK IT OUT

   Anonymous Whistleblower Hotlines

   Most large companies now have anonymous hotlines that employees may call to report ethical
   violations. What are some other concrete and actionable ways you can develop a safe environment
   where every member of your organization is able to question authority, point out a wrong, and stop an
   unethical decision/action?

One example of a problem that can arise in an overly competitive environment or culture created by an
organization would be the faulty ignition switch scandal at GM. According to Valdes-Depena, and Yellin,[52] GM
knew about this problem in 2001. However, it took the company over twelve years, more than 100 deaths, and
30 million vehicles being recalled to finally admit that there was a problem. In 2014, GM admitted that a faculty
ignition switch may result in the engine of a vehicle being shut down while in drive, resulting in accidents,
severe injuries, or death.[53] If GM had developed an effective environment of collaboration, individuals from
leadership, management, sales, marketing, engineering, manufacturing, and human resources, as well as
major stakeholders, might have collaborated and prevented the ignition switch problem.

Diversity

Entrepreneurs need to appreciate, respect, and learn to effectively leverage the unique and diverse qualities
that each individual brings to the table. These qualities can be used to innovate, make better decisions, solve
complex problems/conflicts, move an organization cohesively in a single direction, or rapidly change direction
when needed. If used correctly, these differences enable an entrepreneur to develop a sustained competitive
advantage by looking at the different thoughts, ideas, and viewpoints to make better and more informed
decisions.
Diversity, in terms of a legal concept, deals with innate characteristics such as an individual's sex, color, race,
national origin, religion, and age. It might also include educational background, cultural background,
socioeconomic background, and potentially even political affiliations. However, diversity in terms of an ethical
concept rather than purely a legal one also deals with a number of not-so-obvious characteristics such as the
diversity of behavior, thought-process, comprehension, attitudes, temperaments, and learning styles.
Combined, these differences can be beneficial to a business organization and result in high-level performance
by the workforce as a whole.
Diversity may be an actual legal requirement depending upon what type of business an entrepreneur enters.
For example, if you plan on doing any government contracting work, whether local, state, or federal, the
chances are that your business will have to meet a diversity standard. Many private companies also have
diversity clauses in the supply chain contracts related to supplier diversity initiatives.

52 Peter Valdes-Dapena and Tal Yellin. "GM: Steps to a Recall Nightmare." CNN Money. March 19, 2014. http://money.cnn.com/infographic/pf/
autos/gm-recall-timeline/
53 Arthur W. Page Society. "General Motors' Corporate Culture Crisis: An Assessment of the Ignition Switch Recall." 2015 Case Study
Completion. January 16, 2016. https://page.org/attachments/1edd5184509636aabbdc07ef0c3546e0facf5c0c/store/
00f8d9b37cec4d725c881b7235467635aeab21b4d2333398c819839d426b/General-Motors-Case-Study-2015.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                           137

WORK IT OUT

Building Diversity

For each of the following, identify two examples of a concrete action or activity an entrepreneur could
implement to achieve the stated goal.

 1. Introduce the concept of diversity and highlight the significance, the value, and the benefits of a
      diverse work environment.

 2. Set clear expectations for individuals to value diversity, the concept of unity in diversity, and show
      how others can leverage the power of diversity to innovate.

 3. Exemplify, role model, and live good ethical behavior that strengthens diversity such as the
      elimination of prejudice of all kinds and expect others to do the same around you.

 4. Ensure that you design the hiring process, including job descriptions, recruiting, interview questions,
      and other related steps, with diversity in mind.

 5. Provide training to educate people on the concept of prejudice, the different forms of prejudices,
      and the negative aspects of prejudices.

 6. Provide opportunities for building ethical capacities such as becoming truthful, trustworthiness, and
      a just individual.

 7. Provide consistent, meaningful, substantial, and timely consequences for prejudicial behavior in
      organizations.

Gender Equality

As an entrepreneur, you need to recognize the significance, value, and impact of the principle of equality of
men and women on developing a sustained competitive advantage. Then you need to incorporate this
principle into the fabric of your organization. Aside from being the right thing to do, one reason why this
principle is so important is that close to one-half of the planet is female (and has traditionally been
marginalized in the business world).[54],[55] If you overlook this fact, you will also be potentially overlooking one-
half of the talent that can help you excel and develop a sustained competitive advantage. In turn, this will
result in a loss of trust and confidence. A second and more important reason would be that any deviation from
this principle goes against the whole concept of ethics and responsibility. Moreover, this principle will help
your organization attract the best and brightest employees.

The principle of gender equality does not deny differences between men and women. This principle primarily
asks that we give each member of society fair and equal opportunities for growth, development, and
advancement. It also recognizes that women have been historically marginalized or excluded from the
business world. This claim holds true today and is applicable to even to the most advanced countries in the
world (e.g., the discrepancy of pay between women and men in Western societies). Therefore, women need to
be afforded the same opportunities for education, rewards, recognitions, and promotions as men.

54 R. A. Fisher. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. (Clarendon, Oxford, 1930).
55 W. D. Hamilton, "Extraordinary Sex Ratios," Science 156 (1967): 477-488.
138  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

Trust and Ethical Accountability

Finally, the development of safe environments also deals with an environment where individuals are able to
develop unbreakable bonds of trust, where they don't feel they have to constantly watch their backs, where
individuals are free to point out misconduct without being reprimanded, and where individuals feel they will
be given what they are due or deserve. This dimension of the development of a safe work environment deals
with making sure individuals feel they are being treated in a fair and equitable manner and that their need for
the development of an ethical and moral work environment is being met.

     WORK IT OUT

     Sherron Watkins and Enron

     Enron is one of the most infamous examples of corporate fraud in US history. The scandal that destroyed
     the company resulted in approximately $60 billion in lost shareholder value. Sherron Watkins, an officer
     of the company, discovered the fraud and first went to her boss and mentor, founder and chairperson
     Ken Lay, to report the suspected accounting and financial irregularities. She was ignored more than once
     and eventually went to the press with her story. Because she did not go directly to the SEC, Watkins
     received no whistleblower protection. (The Sarbanes-Oxley Act was not passed until after the Enron
     scandal. In fact, it was Watkins's circumstance and Enron's misdeeds that helped convince Congress to
     pass the law.[56])

     Now a respected national speaker on the topic of ethics and employees' responsibility, Watkins talks
     about how an employee should handle such situations. "When you're faced with something that really
     matters, if you're silent, you're starting on the wrong path...go against the crowd if need be," she said in
     a speech to the National Character and Leadership Symposium (a seminar to instill leadership and moral
     qualities in young men and women).

     Watkins talks openly about the risk of being an honest employee, something employees should consider
     when evaluating what they owe their company, the public, and themselves. "I will never have a job in
     corporate America again. The minute you speak truth to power and you're not heard, your career is
     never the same again."

     Enron's corporate leaders dealt with the looming crisis by a combination of blaming others and leaving
     their employees to fend for themselves. According to Watkins, "Within two weeks of me finding this
     fraud, [Enron president] Jeff Skilling quit. We did feel like we were on a battleship, and things were not
     going well, and the captain had just taken a helicopter home. The fall of 2001 was just the bleakest time
     in my life, because everything I thought was secure was no longer secure."

       · Did Watkins owe an ethical duty to Enron, to its shareholders, or to the investing public to go public
           with her suspicions? Explain your answer.

       · How big a price is it fair to ask a whistleblowing employee to pay?

Ideally, it is best that entrepreneurs exemplify good ethical behavior, expect their people to do the same, and
help the members of the organization develop a moral compass. However, it is equally as important that

56 Shaheen Pasha. "Enron's Whistle Blower Details Sinking Ship." CNN Money. March 16, 2006. http://money.cnn.com/2006/03/15/news/
newsmakers/enron/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  139

business owners take action and put in place the right checks and balances that verify that the organization's
people are complying with its policies and principles of ethical behavior.

Organizations should set up systems that monitor compliance. In addition, you should develop a leadership
pipeline that ensures that individuals would be placed in the pipelines only if they exhibit good ethical
behavior, working with each business unit manager to ensure this is happening. Individual assessments
should clearly assess ethical behavior and provide rewards, recognitions, and promotions for good ethical
behavior, and consequences and training/solutions for actions that do not meet company standards. You
should provide meaningful, substantial, and timely consequences for lack of acceptable behavior, such as
removing an executive from a leadership pipeline when it has been established that they will not govern
responsibly.

Importantly, members of the organization should not be intimidated to blindly follow or accept the existing
monitoring system without question. An entrepreneur needs to cultivate an environment where they expect,
support, and encourage every member of their organization to be inquisitive, be creative, question authority,
and search for the underlying truth in all matters. It must be noted that questioning authority does not mean
anything goes; it simply means that employees are expected to think on their own. Accountability should be
encouraged; it is both an ethical and legal issue.

An example of a system of accountability that is appropriate for entrepreneurs is one proposed by an article in
the Harvard Business Review.[57] A sound approach to accountability requires a multistep process that includes
establishing expectations, ensuring employees have the capability to do it, measurement of results, feedback,
and consequences for unethical behavior. In addition to an ethical approach, remember that there are federal
laws mandating accountability. The most well-known of these is the Sarbanes-Oxley Act,[58] discussed
elsewhere in this chapter, and other chapters in this text. Also called the Corporate and Auditing
Accountability, Responsibility, and Transparency Act, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act requires publicly traded
companies to have an internal system of control that emphasizes transparency and accountability.

If You Make a Mistake

If you or your organization makes a mistake or misstep, you must decide how to address it. In general, you are
faced with the choice of paying now or paying a hundredfold later. A closer look at the largest, most expensive,
and most devastating corporate failures of our times shows that these failures have resulted in the loss of life,
property, and/or monumental environmental disasters. For the most part, these corporate failures have been
caused by one or more ethical deviations on behalf of leadership. To combat these problems, entrepreneurs
need to start by first being responsible, accepting their failures, and admitting when they have made mistakes.
This admittance needs to be genuine, transparent, prompt, truthful, and authentic if they wish stakeholders to
accept and believe their remorse. Once that first step is taken, they need to take immediate steps to
proactively address the problems they have caused. Many leaders or entrepreneurs have learned the hard way
that they need to be open and transparent with their stakeholders at the outset. Failure to rapidly admit
mistakes can and has resulted in paying a very steep price when exposed. The actions that an entrepreneur
needs to take include:

 1. Admitting their mistakes, failures, and shortcomings to all stakeholders
 2. Effectively communicating the nature of the problem to major stakeholders
 3. Informing the stakeholders of the impact, side effect, and causes of the problem

57 Peter Bregman. "The Right Way to Hold People Accountable." Harvard Business Review. January 11, 2016. https://hbr.org/2016/01/the-right-
way-to-hold-people-accountable
58 Pub.L. 107-204. https://legcounsel.house.gov/Comps/Sarbanes-oxley%20Act%20Of%202002.pdf
140  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

 4. Taking necessary and immediate steps to address the issue and stop the bleeding
 5. Conducting a thorough and unbiased root-cause analysis to identify the underlying cause
 6. Addressing any people and systemic gaps that caused the problem in the first place
 7. Putting in place measures that will prevent the repeat of the same mistakes

To summarize, the best approach is that you admit your mistakes and shortcomings, pay the price, fix and
uproot the problem, and systematically prevent the repeat of the same mistakes. A few examples of corporate
mistakes and shortcomings that were quickly addressed before turning into severe problems would be the
Tylenol poisoning and the customer accounts stolen at Target. A few examples of a problem that were not
handled correctly and resulted in multi-billion-dollar problems are GM's faulty ignition switch problem,
Volkswagen's emission control fraud, and Wells Fargo's account fraud.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Taking the Ethical High Road

   To go beyond a glowing commitment report, a shining website, or a few meaningless words in a code-of-
   conduct on corporate responsibility, an entrepreneur needs to follow the rule of law, the spirit of the law,
   and do the right thing at all times and under all circumstances. To achieve this, entrepreneurs need to
   develop and internalize a moral compass that prevents them from doing the wrong and unethical thing
   despite the consequences.

   One classic example of doing the right thing which has been studied as a case study in business schools
   is attributed to Johnson & Johnson (J&J). In 1982, J&J found out that someone had tampered with and
   laced their Tylenol capsules with potassium cyanide.[59] To address this problem, safeguard their brand
   name, and prevent negative press, J&J removed all of their Tylenol products from the shelves.

59 Dan Fletcher. "A Brief History of the Tylenol Poisoning." Time. February 9, 2009. http://content.time.com/time/nation/article/
0,8599,1878063,00.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs  141

     Key Terms

anchoring strategies in the ethical context, the process of making ethics a foundation (anchor) of your
     business so that decision makers act keeping in mind key ethical considerations

antitrust laws prevent companies from abusing position or power in the market through exclusion or
     limitation of competitor access to the market

business ethics conduct by which companies and their agents abide by the law and respect the rights of
     their stakeholders, particularly their customers, clients, employees, and the surrounding community and
     environment

conflict of interest when an individual or organization has interests in multiple areas that come into conflict
     with each other

copyright grants the creator of a work the exclusive right to reproduce the work, typically for a specified
     period of time

corporate social responsibility (CSR) practice in which a business views itself within a broader context, as a
     member of society with certain implicit social obligations and responsibility for its own effects on
     environmental and social well-being

design patent protects product design
disclosure sharing the needed facts and details about a subject in a transparent and truthful way
diversity inclusion of many types of employees, regardless of differences (race, religion, gender, disability,

     LGTBQ, socioeconomic, cultural)
environmental entrepreneurship entrepreneurial ventures focused on identifying an environmental

     problem and creating a product or process to solve that problem
ethics standards of behavior to which we hold ourselves in our personal and professional lives
fairness impartial, unbiased compliance with rules and standards of what is right, just, and equitable
integrity adherence to a code of moral values implying trustworthiness and incorruptibility because there is

     unity between what we say and what we do
intellectual property legally protected result of creative work to turn a unique idea into a product or service
prejudice way of thinking about or treating employees in a manner that favors or hinders one person or

     group over another, usually in a way considered to be unfair
social entrepreneurship entrepreneurial ventures focused on identifying a societal problem and creating a

     product or process to solve that problem
sustainability practice of preserving resources and operating in a way that is ecologically responsible in the

     long term
trade secret proprietary information, processes, or other internal knowledge that contribute to an

     organization's competitive edge in a market
trademark registration that provides the owner the ability to use a name, symbol, jingle, or character in

     conjunction with a specific product or service, and prevents others from using those same symbols to sell
     their products
truthfulness underlying facts, reality, and evidence on a matter
utility patent protects product ideas

     Summary

3.1 Ethical and Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship

The first section of this chapter explores the relationship between entrepreneurship, ethics, social
142                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

responsibility, and the law. At times, ethical conduct and legal conduct may seem intertwined; in other
circumstances, they are quite different. This section discusses how ethical considerations can provide a moral
compass for entrepreneurs seeking to find a balance between making money and doing the right thing. Keep
in mind, however, that unlike legal mandates, following ethical business practices is more often a voluntary
matter for business owners and operators. On the other hand, laws are important to follow, or you and your
business might well be held legally liable (civilly or criminally). Sometimes, making a mistake is only an ethical
lapse; other times, the mistake also constitutes a violation of the law (e.g., the Equifax case discussed).

3.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship
This section explored examples of entrepreneurship in which social responsibility plays a key role in the
organization. Causes such as sustainability/environmental awareness are often important to an entrepreneur
and his/her workforce. Most startup businesses want to make money, and in fact, as this section
demonstrates, it's quite possible to make money and carry out a social responsibility goal simultaneously.
Some social entrepreneurship companies go the extra mile and become certified B-corporations, as opposed
to C-corps or S-corps, which are tax distinctions. If an entrepreneur elects to become a B-corporation, it means
that it has satisfied an outside organization's audit, proving that he/she truly acts in a socially responsible
manner.

3.3 Developing a Workplace Culture of Ethical Excellence and Accountability
This section of the chapter covers the area of employment. We explored how entrepreneurs can make their
company one for which people want to work: where being ethical is a highly regarded trait. This type of
approach to employment includes both ethical and legal considerations, such as no discrimination, fair pay,
encouraging/rewarding ethical behavior, and creating an atmosphere of collegial teamwork. This approach to
creating a socially responsible workplace requires a long-term commitment to being an ethical employer,
which is not always easy. For example, it may mean, even though you are the boss or owner, admitting you
made a mistake, accepting responsibility for it, and correcting it. You do not want to be the type of boss who
can never say I got that wrong, and I'll do better next time.

     Review Questions

1. Full and truthful disclosure ________.
     a. is often required under tort law
     b. is a matter of ethics, not a legal requirement
     c. is a risky business practice because it helps the competition
     d. is a strictly personal choice

2. Common IP law-mandated periods of protection are ________.
     a. copyrights are protected for twenty years
     b. patents are protected for fifty years
     c. trademarks are protected for renewable ten-year periods
     d. trade secrets are protected for fifteen years

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                            143

3. Acting ethically includes acting with which of the following?
     a. integrity
     b. disclosure
     c. transparency
     d. All of these options are correct.

4. Antitrust law:
     a. may help small entrepreneurs by ensuring big companies do not have monopolies
     b. may hurt small entrepreneur by requiring them to disclose trade secrets
     c. only applies to businesses with over 500 employees
     d. None of these options are correct.

5. Patents ________.
     a. are similar to trade secrets under IP law
     b. allow a temporary monopoly for an invention
     c. are protected under IP law for a period of ninety-nine years
     d. None of these options are correct.

6. An example of a company(s) that have been fined millions of dollars for legal/ethical violations includes
________.

     a. Enron
     b. TOMS
     c. British Petroleum
     d. a and c

7. The B-corporation moniker ________.
     a. requires government certification
     b. requires no certification
     c. can only be used after an audit and certification by the B-corp organization
     d. is a social media concept used primarily for marketing purposes

8. What differentiates a social entrepreneurial enterprise from a traditional entrepreneur?
     a. commitment to reduce pollution
     b. pledge to undertake sustainable supply chain sourcing
     c. effort to recycle water, waste, and other byproducts
     d. All of these options are correct.

9. Core qualities for building a foundation of ethics-based behaviors include ________.
     a. trust
     b. fairness
     c. excellence
     d. All of these options are correct.

10. Millennial workers ________.
     a. often do not place salary as their first priority
     b. want work-life balance
     c. usually expect their employer to have an ethical value system
     d. All of these options are correct.
144                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

11. A diverse workforce ________.
     a. is always optional
     b. is usually required for government contracting
     c. is always required under Title VII
     d. is never required

     Discussion Questions

1. How can ethics-based concepts such as truthfulness and fairness be integrated into the fabric of the
organization?

2. How can we nurture an environment where each member of the organization develops and internalizes a
moral compass?

3. Evaluate how an entrepreneurial business startup might benefit from the enforcement of antitrust laws
against a large competitor.

4. Discuss ways in which intellectual property, such as trademarks, can add value to a small business. How
would you protect your ability to monetize intellectual property?

5. In this section of the chapter, there is an example of a customer data breach via computer hacking. Discuss
the biggest risks of storing customer or company information online. What are some of the steps you would
take to prevent a data breach?

6. Can a social enterprise work on a social issue and at the same time be profitable?

7. How will you ensure that your organization learns to develop and deliver products and services that reduces
your carbon footprint?

8. Referring to Table 3.3 listing cases of corporate fraud, which company example do you think is one of the
worst examples of unethical conduct? Is this because it involved the most money stolen, the most people
cheated, or the most devious methods?

9. If an entrepreneur values sustainability and environmental awareness, does that mean the bottom line will
suffer? Alternatively, is there a way to protect the environment and still make a profit?

10. You have learned about B-corporations. If you started a new business, would you commit to the rather
stringent audit process necessary to become a B-corporation? Why or why not?

11. How can an entrepreneur maximize the benefits of a diverse workforce to develop a competitive
advantage?

12. How can you combat the negative impact of biases and prejudices in your organization?

13. What would you do, as an entrepreneur, to make your employees feel you value their input and that they
are free to speak honestly?

14. Explain why diversity is something that should matter to an owner. What would you do to try to achieve it?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                                                     145

15. Some small entrepreneurs do not have the budget for a full-fledged human resources department;
however, that makes compliance with employment laws challenging. What steps would you take to comply
with federal and state employment law if you do not have a full-time attorney or human resources specialist
on staff?

     Case Questions

1. In 2017, it became apparent that Wells Fargo had created over 2 million falsified customer accounts without
the customers' consent, approval, or knowledge. John Stumpf, Wells Fargo CEO, who resigned amid this
scandal, denied any leadership involvement and wrongdoing. He blamed his employees and fired over 5,300
employees over this scandal. Research this case and answer the following questions.

    A. What organizational and company-culture factors convinced employees to create false accounts?
    B. Why did the employees not question leadership?

2. In 2017, the US Environmental Protection Agency found that Volkswagen had installed a "defeat
device"--software in the vehicle that detects that an emissions test is in progress, controls the engine, reduces
emissions, and enables the vehicle to pass the test for US emissions standards. Martin Winterkorn, CEO of
Volkswagen, denied any wrongdoing, was later forced to resign, and admitted they had cheated. Research this
case and answer the following questions.

    A. What organizational and cultural factors convinced Volkswagen employees to cheat?
    B. Why did the workforce not question leadership?

3. If you were to create a top-ten list of the world's greatest corruption scandals, the problems of Petrobras
(Petróleo Brasileiro) in Brazil surely would make the list. The majority state-owned petroleum conglomerate
was a party to a multibillion-dollar scandal in which company executives received bribes and kickbacks from
contractors in exchange for lucrative construction and drilling contracts. The contractors paid Petrobras
executives upward of 5 percent of the contract amount, which was funneled back into slush funds. The slush
funds, in turn, paid for the election campaigns of certain members of the ruling political party, Partido dos
Trabalhadores, or the Workers Party, as well as for luxury items like race cars, jewelry, Rolex watches, yachts,
wine, and art.[60] The original investigation into these practices was known as Operation Car Wash (Lava Jato)
and began in 2014 at a gas station and car wash in Brasília, where money was being laundered. It has since
expanded to include scrutiny of senators, government officials, and the former president of the republic, Luiz
Inácio Lula da Silva. The probe also contributed to the impeachment and removal of Lula's successor, Dilma
Rousseff. Lula and Rousseff are members of the Workers Party. The case is complex, revealing Chinese
suppliers, Swiss bank accounts where money was hidden from Brazilian authorities, and wire transfers that
went through New York City and caught the eye of the US Department of Justice. In early 2017, the Brazilian
Supreme Court justice in charge of the investigation and prosecution was mysteriously killed in a plane crash.
It is hard to imagine a more tragic example of systemic breakdown and individual vice. The loss of trust in
government and the economy still affects ordinary Brazilians. Meanwhile, the investigation continues.

    A. Is this Brazilian company scandal unique to that culture?

60 Jonathan Watts. "The Long Read Operation Car Wash: Is This the Biggest Corruption Scandal in History?" The Guardian. June 1, 2017.
146  Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

4. In the fall of 2016, Samsung Electronics experienced a massive public relations disaster when its Galaxy Note
7 smartphones started exploding due to faulty batteries and casings. Initially, the company denied there were
any technical problems. Then, when it became obvious the exploding phones posed a safety and health threat
(they were banned from airplanes), Samsung accused its suppliers of creating the problem. In reality, the rush
to beat Apple's iPhone 7 release date was the most likely reason corners were cut in production. Samsung
finally owned up to the problem, recalled more than two million phones worldwide, and replaced them with
new, improved Galaxy Note 7s. The company's response and its replacement of the phones went a long way
toward defusing the disaster and even boosting the company's share price. Samsung focused on the customer
(i.e., customer safety and satisfaction) with the motive of doing the ethically responsible thing.

    A. Although some might argue the company could have done far more and much more quickly, perhaps
          it still acted reasonably. What do you think?

5. Sometimes engaged employees go above and beyond in the interest of customer service, even if they have
no "customers" to speak of. Kathy Fryman is one such employee. Fryman was a custodian for three decades at
a 100-year-old school in the Augusta (KY) Independent School District. She was not just taking care of the
school building, she was also taking care of the people inside.[61] Fryman fixed doors that would not close,
phones that would not ring, and alarms that did not sound when they should. She kept track of keys and swept
up dirty floors before parents' night. That was all part of the job of custodian, but she did much more. Fryman
would often ask the nurse how an ill student was doing. She would check with a teacher about a kid who was
going through tough times at home. If a teacher mentioned needing something, the next day it would show
up on his or her desk. A student who needed something for class would suddenly find it in his or her backpack.
Speaking of Fryman, district superintendent Lisa McCrane said, "She just has a unique way of making others
feel nurtured, comforted, and cared for." According to Fryman, "...I need to be doing something for
somebody." Fryman's customers were not there to buy a product on which she would make a commission.
Her customers were students and teachers, parents and taxpayers. Yet she provided the kind of service that all
employers would be proud of, the kind that makes a difference to people every day.

    A. Is there a way for a manager to find, develop, and encourage the next Fryman, or is the desire to "do
          something good for somebody" an inherent trait in some employees that is missing in others?

    B. Employees who display Fryman's zeal often do so for their own internal rewards. Others may simply
          want to be recognized and appreciated for their effort. If you were the superintendent in her district,
          how would you recognize Fryman? Could she, for example, be invited to speak to new hires about
          opportunities to render exceptional service?

6. Please view the video ABC Nightline-IDEO Shopping Cart (https://openstax.org/l/52IDEOShopCart) on
YouTube. This video demonstrates how an entrepreneurial mindset combined along with a collaborative
process can be used to deliver the most innovative products.

    A. After watching the IDEO YouTube video, list the different factors that has enabled IDEO to become an
          industry example for corporate innovation.

    B. What top principles and behaviors that has contributed to the development of a culture of
          collaborative excellence?

     Suggested Resources

61 Brenna Kelly. "Augusta Schools Custodian Kathy Fryman Takes Care of Building and the People Inside; Gets Fred Award." Northern
Kentucky Tribune. September 23, 2017. http://www.nkytribune.com/2017/09/augusta-schools-custodian-kathy-fryman-takes-care-of-building-
and-the-people-inside-gets-fred-award/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs                                          147

3.1 Ethical and Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship
SBREFA Small Business Resource Center. This is a great site for help with understanding legal requirements

  and regulatory compliance.
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/business-operations-center/osdbu/compliance-assistance
US Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration & Management.

3.2 Corporate Social Responsibility and Social Entrepreneurship
List of Social Enterprise Business Models or Frameworks: http://www.thesedge.org/socent-spotlights/

  22-awesome-social-enterprise-business-ideas
TedTalk video: Carol Sanford at TEDxBerkeley 2014. "The Responsible Entrepreneur: Four Game Changing

  Archetypes": https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dqza5Uo1cFE
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM): www.gemconsortium.org
Social Enterprise and Entrepreneurship (SEE) the Change: https://seethechange.ca

3.3 Developing a Workplace Culture of Ethical Excellence and Accountability
Society for Human Resource Management: https://www.shrm.org
148                                                                               Chapter 3 The Ethical and Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     4

              Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

Figure 4.1 Creativity comes in many forms. It can be messy, but creativity is an essential element of
innovation and inventiveness, both of which can drive entrepreneurship. (credit: modification of "On
creativity" by Linus Bohman/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        4.1 Tools for Creativity and Innovation
        4.2 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention: How They Differ
        4.3 Developing Ideas, Innovations, and Inventions

      Introduction

   We enter the world as curious beings. However, as we grow up, we are told to color inside the lines and that
   real animals can't talk--direction that can squelch creativity. Many successful entrepreneurs work to unlearn
   some of those messages in order to tap into creative thinking. What do you do when you are given a task that
   requires you to be creative? Do you get out your art supplies and start drawing? Do you pull out your phone or
   get on your computer and head straight for a search engine? Steve Jobs, the Apple founder and well-known
   innovator, had a preference when it came to creative contemplation, and it had nothing to do with art supplies
   or smartphones. Jobs did some of his best creative thinking when he went on a walk, or a walking chat.
   Why did Jobs prefer walking as a way to develop new ideas? A Stanford University study found that walking
   improves creative thinking.[1] When you launch an entrepreneurial journey and set out to innovate and create,
   or when you hit a sticking point that requires a creative solution, it may be time to take a walk. Better yet, if
   you can find a friend, walk and talk. It might energize your creativity and lead to innovation and, possibly, to
   invention.

   1 Marily Oppezzo and Daniel Schwartz. "Give Your Ideas Some Legs: The Positive Effect of Walking on Creative Thinking." Journal of
   Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition 40, no. 4 (2014): 1142-1152.
150  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

 4.1 Tools for Creativity and Innovation

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe popular, well-supported, creative problem-solving methods
  · Understand which innovation or problem-solving methods apply best in different settings
  · Know where to look for emerging innovation practices, research, and tools

Creativity, innovation, and invention are key concepts for your entrepreneurial journey. Fostering creativity
and innovation will add essential tools to your entrepreneurial toolkit. In this chapter, first you'll learn about a
few practical tools that can assist you in your efforts to create and innovate. Then, we'll define and distinguish
creativity, innovation, and invention, and note the differences between pioneering and incremental innovation.
Finally, we'll cover models and processes for developing creativity, innovation, and inventiveness. The science,
study, and practice of creativity and design thinking are constantly evolving. Staying on top of well-
documented, successful approaches can give you a competitive advantage and may remind you that
entrepreneurship can be fun, exciting, and refreshing, as long as you keep your creative spirit alive and in
constant motion.

Creative Problem-Solving Methods

Creative thinking can take various forms (Figure 4.2). This section focuses on a few creative thinking exercises
that have proven useful for entrepreneurs. After discussing ideation practices that you can try, we conclude
with a discussion of an in-depth innovation exercise that can help you develop a habit of turning creative ideas
into innovative products and services. In this section, outcomes are vital.

Figure 4.2 When your process hits a sticking point, a walk--or a walk and talk--can help boost your
creativity in thinking through solutions. (credit: "beard business city colleague" by "rawpixel"/Pixabay, CC0)

Three ideation practices are discussed here. Several others are offered in links at the end of this section. The
first ideation practice comes from Stanford's Design School.[2] The objective is to generate as many ideas as
possible and start to develop some of those ideas. This practice is the quintessential design thinking
practice,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  151

or human-centric design thinking exercise, and it consists of five parts: accessing and expressing empathy,
defining the problem, ideating solutions (brainstorming), prototyping, and testing (Figure 4.3). Empathy is the
human ability to feel what other humans are feeling, which in the context of creativity, innovation, and
invention is essential to beginning a process of human-centric design. Practicing empathy enables us to relate
to people and see the problem through the eyes and feelings of those who experience it. By expressing
empathy, you can begin to understand many facets of a problem and start to think about all of the forces you
will need to bring to bear on it. From empathy comes the ability to proceed to the second step, defining the
problem. Defining the problem must be based on honest, rational, and emotional observation for human-
centric design to work. Third in the process is brainstorming solutions. The other two ideation exercises or
practices in this section delve more deeply into brainstorming (also discussed in Problem Solving and Need
Recognition Techniques), what it means, and how you can brainstorm creatively beyond the basic whiteboard
scribbling in almost every organization. Designing for other people means building a prototype--the fourth
step--and to test it. Once you apply this process to developing a product or service, you need to return to the
empathetic mindset to examine whether you have reached a viable solution and, thus, an opportunity.

Figure 4.3 The empathetic design cycle is human-centric. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

2 Stanford d.school. https://dschool.stanford.edu/
152  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video on human-centered design (https://openstax.org/l/52HumnCntDesign) for more
   information, including an explanation of the phases involved.

To delve more deeply into ideation as a practice, we introduce here the Six Thinking Hats method
(Figure 4.4).[3] There are different versions of this ideation game, but all of them are quite useful for
encouraging thought by limiting the mindset of those involved in the game. Being encouraged to embody one
mode of thinking frees you from considering other aspects of a problem that can limit creativity when you are
looking for a solution. The six hats are:

  · White Hat: acts as information gatherer by conducting research and bringing quantitative analysis to the
      discussion; sticks to the facts

  · Red Hat: brings raw emotion to the mix and offers sensibilities without having to justify them
  · Black Hat: employs logic and caution; warns participants about institutional limitations; also known as the

      "devil's advocate"
  · Yellow Hat: brings the "logical positive" of optimism to the group; encourages solving small and large

      problems
  · Green Hat: thinks creatively; introduces change and provokes other members when needed; new ideas

      are the purview of the Green Hat
  · Blue Hat: maintains the broader structure of the discussion and may set the terms by which progress will

      be judged; makes sure the other hats play by the rules, or stay in their respective lanes, so to speak

Figure 4.4 The Six Thinking Hats exercise is designed to have each participant focus on a particular
approach to the problem or discussion. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

You can apply the Six Thinking Hats exercise to force structure on a discussion where, without it, several
members of the group might try to wear several hats each. This game is not always easy to implement. If
members cannot follow the rules, the process breaks down. When it works best, the Blue Hat maintains
control and keeps the practice moving quickly. What you and your group should experience is a peculiar

3 "10 Creative Techniques for You and Your Team." MiroBlog. n.d. https://miro.com/blog/creative-techniques/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  153

freedom arising from the imposition of limitations. By being responsible for only one mode of thinking, each
participant can fully advocate for that point of view and can think deeply about that particular aspect of the
solution. Thus, the group can be deeply creative, deeply logical, deeply optimistic, and deeply critical. This
practice is meant to move entire groups past surface-level solutions. If you practice this exercise well, the
challenges of implementing it are well worth the effort. It gives you the opportunity to vet ideas thoroughly
while keeping many personality clashes at bay. If the participants stay in character, they can be accused only
of acting in the best interests of their hat.

Your instructor may have your group members try different hats in different ideation exercises so you all can
more fully develop each mindset.[4] This exercise forces you out of your most comfortable modes of thinking.
You and your classmates can recognize in each other skills that you may not have realized you possess.

The third ideation practice is quite simple. If stagnant thinking has begun to dominate an ongoing discussion,
it can be helpful to inject an ideation framework. This is the "statement starters" method.[5] Ask, "How might
we ________?" or "What if we ________?" in order to open up new possibilities when you seem to have reached
the limits of creativity. This method is more than simply asking "Why not?" because it seeks to uncover how a
problem might be solved. For entrepreneurs, the simplest form of framing a problem in the form of a question
can be eye opening. It assumes open possibilities, invites participation, and demands focus. Statement starters
assume that, at least, there might be a solution to every problem. Ideation is about starting down new paths.
This mode of thought applies to social problems as well as consumer pain points (discussed later). Creating a
list of statement starters can help entrepreneurs examine different possibilities by simply adopting different
points of view when asking questions. For example, the question, "How might we keep rivers clean?" is similar
to the question, "How might we prevent animal waste runoff from entering our city's waterways?" but the
implications of each question are different for different stakeholders. Recall that stakeholders are individuals
who have a vital interest in the business or organization. Statement starters almost always lead to a discussion
of stakeholders and how they might be involved in finding solutions, offering support, and perhaps one day
purchasing or contributing to dynamic, disruptive inventions or changes in social practice.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Are you curious about ways to improve your ability to think creatively? Consider trying out some of the
   creative thinking exercises (https://openstax.org/l/52CreateThinkEx) provided at this site.

Matching Innovation Methods to Circumstances

Searching for innovation methods will often reveal many of the same, or similar, creativity exercises as we've
just discussed. To go beyond ideation exercises, we will conclude with a foundation of thinking that can help
when you are tackling all sorts of innovation problems. Simply put, open innovation involves searching for
and finding solutions outside of the organizational structure. Open innovation is somewhat difficult to pin
down. The educator and author Henry Chesbrough was one of the first to define it: "Open innovation is `the

4 "Six Thinking Hats." The de Bono Group. n.d. http://www.debonogroup.com/six_thinking_hats.php
5 Michelle Ferrier. "Ideation." Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship. n.d. https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-
entrepreneurship/chapter/ideation-2/
154            Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

use of purposive inflows and outflows of knowledge to accelerate internal innovation, and expand the markets
for external use of innovation, respectively.'"[6] In other words, firms built on a structure of open innovation
look beyond their own research and development capabilities to solve problems. This outlook can guide all
sorts of product and service development processes. Open innovation models also allow innovations to be
shared widely so that they can seed other innovations outside the original firm or institution.

Open innovation takes an optimistic view of sharing information and ideas across a society connected by
instantaneous communication networks. It is also a shift from the classic research and development model. In
a sense, you allow others to solve problems in your business, startup, or social entrepreneurship project. In
this reciprocal world, you are open to the reality that information is difficult to keep under wraps. You may
seek patents for your intellectual property, particularly in fixed product or service practice form, but you
should expect, or even encourage, the widespread circulation of key elements of your solutions. This makes
sense: If, as an entrepreneur or an innovative corporation, you are going to look beyond your own ideation,
research, and development capabilities for solutions, you must expect that others will look to your solutions
for ideas to borrow.

The open innovation model is far easier to describe in idealistic terms than it is to put into practice without
ethical consequences. Unfortunately, industrial and corporate espionage, theft of intellectual property, and
lawsuits are commonplace. Nevertheless, inspiration in innovation can come from myriad sources when
constant streams of information are available to anyone with a high-speed data connection. Open innovation
is a simple but essential framework for future innovation and for managing, even possibly guiding, disruption
in an industry as discussed previously (i.e., disruptive innovation). Table 4.1 provides some examples of
companies using disruptive technology.

  Company                               Examples of Disruptive Technology
Amazon
                                                              Disruptive technology
Uber and Lyft
               Speed based delivery
Bitcoin        Multiple delivery processes from drones to strategically located fulfillment centers
Toyota E-      Disruptive technology including processing the customer order before the customer has
Palette        even finished the purchase, so that the product is already moving toward delivery

               Ride sharing versus taxi driving
               Apps and Beacon and Amp-color coded alert communication system disrupted the taxi
               system

               Digital currency not connected to a specific country or monetary standard
               Value based on market forces

               Remote controlled driverless electric shuttle that brings the service to the customer
               rather than the customer going to the service

Table 4.1
Another element of the open innovation model is the connection between academic research and practical

6 Henry Chesbrough. "Everything You Need to Know about Open Innovation." Forbes. March 21, 2011. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
henrychesbrough/2011/03/21/everything-you-need-to-know-about-open-innovation/#1861dd5275f4

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  155

solutions. Reciprocal influence between academia, which often moves slowly, and leading corporate and
entrepreneurial forces, which often focus too narrowly on short-term gains, could offer the balance this rapidly
changing world needs. If you can manage to plug into the exchange of ideas between longstanding
institutions and disruptive technological innovators, you may be positioned to effect positive change on
society and to develop products that are received as useful and elegant, wildly new and creative, and essential
to the human experience at the same time.

Staying on Top of Emerging Practices

Consider searching for ideation and innovation practice links using a web browser and comparing those
results to what you can find in the academic literature via Google Scholar or other academic databases. To
adopt a truly open innovation mindset, it is essential to leave yourself open to all sorts of influences, even if it
demands time and much cognitive energy. The financial, social, and personal rewards may be great.

 4.2 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention: How They Differ

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between creativity, innovation, and invention
  · Explain the difference between pioneering and incremental innovation, and which processes are best

      suited to each

One of the key requirements for entrepreneurial success is your ability to develop and offer something unique
to the marketplace. Over time, entrepreneurship has become associated with creativity, the ability to develop
something original, particularly an idea or a representation of an idea. Innovation requires creativity, but
innovation is more specifically the application of creativity. Innovation is the manifestation of creativity into a
usable product or service. In the entrepreneurial context, innovation is any new idea, process, or product, or a
change to an existing product or process that adds value to that existing product or service.

How is an invention different from an innovation? All inventions contain innovations, but not every innovation
rises to the level of a unique invention. For our purposes, an invention is a truly novel product, service, or
process. It will be based on previous ideas and products, but it is such a leap that it is not considered an
addition to or a variant of an existing product but something unique. Table 4.2 highlights the differences
between these three concepts.

 Concept                               Creativity, Innovation, and Invention
Creativity                                                           Description

Innovation  ability to develop something original, particularly an idea or a representation of an idea, with
            an element of aesthetic flair
            change that adds value to an existing product or service

Table 4.2
156        Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

 Concept                              Creativity, Innovation, and Invention
Invention                                                           Description

           truly novel product, service, or process that, though based on ideas and products that have
           come before, represents a leap, a creation truly novel and different

Table 4.2

One way we can consider these three concepts is to relate them to design thinking. Design thinking is a
method to focus the design and development decisions of a product on the needs of the customer, typically
involving an empathy-driven process to define complex problems and create solutions that address those
problems. Complexity is key to design thinking. Straightforward problems that can be solved with enough
money and force do not require much design thinking. Creative design thinking and planning are about
finding new solutions for problems with several tricky variables in play. Designing products for human beings,
who are complex and sometimes unpredictable, requires design thinking.

Airbnb has become a widely used service all over the world. That has not always been the case, however. In
2009, the company was near failure. The founders were struggling to find a reason for the lack of interest in
their properties until they realized that their listings needed professional, high-quality photographs rather
than simple cell-phone photos. Using a design thinking approach, the founders traveled to the properties with
a rented camera to take some new photographs. As a result of this experiment, weekly revenue doubled. This
approach could not be sustainable in the long term, but it generated the outcome the founders needed to
better understand the problem. This creative approach to solving a complex problem proved to be a major
turning point for the company.[7]

People who are adept at design thinking are creative, innovative, and inventive as they strive to tackle different
types of problems. Consider Divya Nag, a millennial biotech and medical device innovation leader, who
launched a business after she discovered a creative way to prolong the life of human cells in Petri dishes.
Nag's stem-cell research background and her entrepreneurial experience with her medical investment firm
made her a popular choice when Apple hired her to run two programs dedicated to developing health-related
apps, a position she reached before turning twenty-four years old.[8]

Creativity, innovation, inventiveness, and entrepreneurship can be tightly linked. It is possible for one person
to model all these traits to some degree. Additionally, you can develop your creativity skills, sense of
innovation, and inventiveness in a variety of ways. In this section, we'll discuss each of the key terms and how
they relate to the entrepreneurial spirit.

Creativity

Entrepreneurial creativity and artistic creativity are not so different. You can find inspiration in your favorite
books, songs, and paintings, and you also can take inspiration from existing products and services. You can
find creative inspiration in nature, in conversations with other creative minds, and through formal ideation
exercises, for example, brainstorming. Ideation is the purposeful process of opening up your mind to new
trains of thought that branch out in all directions from a stated purpose or problem. Brainstorming, the

7 "How Design Thinking Transformed Airbnb from Failing Startup to Billion Dollar Business." First Round Review. n.d. https://firstround.com/
review/How-design-thinking-transformed-Airbnb-from-failing-startup-to-billion-dollar-business/
8 "Divya Nag, 26." Fortune. n.d. http://fortune.com/40-under-40/2017/divya-nag-27/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  157

generation of ideas in an environment free of judgment or dissension with the goal of creating solutions, is
just one of dozens of methods for coming up with new ideas.[9]

You can benefit from setting aside time for ideation. Reserving time to let your mind roam freely as you think
about an issue or problem from multiple directions is a necessary component of the process. Ideation takes
time and a deliberate effort to move beyond your habitual thought patterns. If you consciously set aside time
for creativity, you will broaden your mental horizons and allow yourself to change and grow.[10]

Entrepreneurs work with two types of thinking. Linear thinking--sometimes called vertical thinking--involves
a logical, step-by-step process. In contrast, creative thinking is more often lateral thinking, free and open
thinking in which established patterns of logical thought are purposefully ignored or even challenged. You can
ignore logic; anything becomes possible. Linear thinking is crucial in turning your idea into a business. Lateral
thinking will allow you to use your creativity to solve problems that arise. Figure 4.5 summarizes linear and
lateral thinking.

Figure 4.5 Entrepreneurs can be most effective if they use both linear and lateral thinking. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

It is certainly possible for you to be an entrepreneur and focus on linear thinking. Many viable business
ventures flow logically and directly from existing products and services. However, for various reasons,
creativity and lateral thinking are emphasized in many contemporary contexts in the study of
entrepreneurship. Some reasons for this are increased global competition, the speed of technological change,
and the complexity of trade and communication systems.[11] These factors help explain not just why creativity
is emphasized in entrepreneurial circles but also why creativity should be emphasized. Product developers of

9 Rikke Dam and Teo Siang. "Introduction to the Essential Ideation Techniques Which Are the Heart of Design Thinking." Interaction Design
Foundation. April 2019. https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/article/introduction-to-the-essential-ideation-techniques-which-are-the-
heart-of-design-thinking
10 Dawn Kelly and Terry L. Amburgey. "Organizational Inertia and Momentum: A Dynamic Model of Strategic Change." Academy of
Management Journal 34, no. 3 (1991): 591-612.
11 Ian Fillis and Ruth Rentschler. "The Role of Creativity in Entrepreneurship." Journal of Enterprising Culture 18, no. 1 (2010): 49-81.
158              Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

the twenty-first century are expected to do more than simply push products and innovations a step further
down a planned path. Newer generations of entrepreneurs are expected to be path breakers in new products,
services, and processes.

Examples of creativity are all around us. They come in the forms of fine art and writing, or in graffiti and viral
videos, or in new products, services, ideas, and processes. In practice, creativity is incredibly broad. It is all
around us whenever or wherever people strive to solve a problem, large or small, practical or impractical.

Innovation

We previously defined innovation as a change that adds value to an existing product or service. According to
the management thinker and author Peter Drucker, the key point about innovation is that it is a response to
both changes within markets and changes from outside markets. For Drucker, classical entrepreneurship
psychology highlights the purposeful nature of innovation.[12] Business firms and other organizations can plan
to innovate by applying either lateral or linear thinking methods, or both. In other words, not all innovation is
purely creative. If a firm wishes to innovate a current product, what will likely matter more to that firm is the
success of the innovation rather than the level of creativity involved. Drucker summarized the sources of
innovation into seven categories, as outlined in Table 4.3. Firms and individuals can innovate by seeking out
and developing changes within markets or by focusing on and cultivating creativity. Firms and individuals
should be on the lookout for opportunities to innovate.[13]

        Source                Drucker's Seven Sources of Innovation[14]
The unexpected                                                      Description

The incongruity  Looking for new opportunities in the market; unexpected product performance;
Process need     unexpected new products as examples
Changes in       Discrepancies between what you think should be and what is reality
industry/market  Weaknesses in the organization, product, or service
Demographics     New regulations; new technologies
Changes in
perceptions      Understanding needs and wants of target markets
New knowledge    Changes in perceptions of life events and values

                 New technologies; advancements in thinking; new research

Table 4.3
One innovation that demonstrates several of Drucker's sources is the use of cashier kiosks in fast-food

12 P. F. Drucker. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practices and Principles. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1986.
13 P. F. Drucker. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practices and Principles. (New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1986), 35.
14 P. F. Drucker. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practices and Principles. New York: Harper & Row Publishers, 1986.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  159

restaurants. McDonald's was one of the first to launch these self-serve kiosks. Historically, the company has
focused on operational efficiencies (doing more/better with less). In response to changes in the market,
changes in demographics, and process need, McDonald's incorporated self-serve cashier stations into their
stores. These kiosks address the need of younger generations to interact more with technology and gives
customers faster service in most cases.[15]

Another leading expert on innovation, Tony Ulwick, focuses on understanding how the customer will judge or
evaluate the quality and value of the product. The product development process should be based on the
metrics that customers use to judge products, so that innovation can address those metrics and develop the
best product for meeting customers' needs when it hits the market. This process is very similar to Drucker's
contention that innovation comes as a response to changes within and outside of the market. Ulwick insists
that focusing on the customer should begin early in the development process.[16]

Disruptive innovation is a process that significantly affects the market by making a product or service more
affordable and/or accessible, so that it will be available to a much larger audience. Clay Christensen of Harvard
University coined this term in the 1990s to emphasize the process nature of innovation. For Christensen, the
innovative component is not the actual product or service, but the process that makes that product more
available to a larger population of users. He has since published a good deal on the topic of disruptive
innovation, focusing on small players in a market. Christensen theorizes that a disruptive innovation from a
smaller company can threaten an existing larger business by offering the market new and improved solutions.
The smaller company causes the disruption when it captures some of the market share from the larger
organization.[17],[18] One example of a disruptive innovation is Uber and its impact on the taxicab industry.
Uber's innovative service, which targets customers who might otherwise take a cab, has shaped the industry
as whole by offering an alternative that some deem superior to the typical cab ride.

One key to innovation within a given market space is to look for pain points, particularly in existing products
that fail to work as well as users expect them to. A pain point is a problem that people have with a product or
service that might be addressed by creating a modified version that solves the problem more efficiently.[19] For
example, you might be interested in whether a local retail store carries a specific item without actually going
there to check. Most retailers now have a feature on their websites that allows you to determine whether the
product (and often how many units) is available at a specific store. This eliminates the need to go to the
location only to find that they are out of your favorite product. Once a pain point is identified in a firm's own
product or in a competitor's product, the firm can bring creativity to bear in finding and testing solutions that
sidestep or eliminate the pain, making the innovation marketable. This is one example of an incremental
innovation, an innovation that modifies an existing product or service.[20]

In contrast, a pioneering innovation is one based on a new technology, a new advancement in the field, and/
or an advancement in a related field that leads to the development of a new product.[21] Firms offering similar

15 Blake Morgan. "5 Fresh Examples of Customer Service Innovation." Forbes. July 17, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/blakemorgan/
2017/07/17/5-fresh-examples-of-customer-experience-innovation/#3ae5a46e5c18
16 Tony Ulwick. "Reinventing Innovation for 25 Years." Strategyn. n.d. https://strategyn.com/tony-
ulwick/?network=g&matchtype=p&keyword=tony%20ulwick&creative=268244402567&device=c&devicemodel=&placement=&position=1t1&campaignid=1394486829&ad
BEiPWHKfd6R6mnW4XCHuhXbX_JhUof76IdXh6joIzlWRoCqJAQAvD_BwE
17 Chris Larson. "Disruptive Innovation Theory: What It Is & 4 Key Concepts." Harvard Business School. November 15, 2016.
https://online.hbs.edu/blog/post/4-keys-to-understanding-clayton-christensens-theory-of-disruptive-innovation
18 Rosamond Hutt. "What Is Disruptive Innovation?" World Economic Forum. June 25, 2016. https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/06/what-
is-disruptive-innovation/
19 Lloyd Waldo. "What's a Pain Point? A Guide for Startups." StartupYard Seed Accelerator. December 1, 2016. https://startupyard.com/whats-
pain-point/
20 Abdul Ali, Manohar U. Kalwani, and Dan Kovenock. "Selecting Product Development Projects: Pioneering versus Incremental Innovation
Strategies." Management Science 39, no. 3 (1993): 255-274.
160  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

products and services can undertake pioneering innovations, but pioneering the new product requires
opening up new market space and taking major risks.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Pioneering Innovation in the Personal Care Industry

   In his ninth-grade biology class, Benjamin Stern came up with an idea to change the personal care
   industry. He envisioned personal cleaning products (soap, shampoo, etc.) that would contain no harsh
   chemicals or sulfates, and would also produce no plastic waste from empty bottles. He developed Nohbo
   Drops, single-use personal cleansing products with water-soluble packaging. Stern was able to borrow
   money from family and friends, and use some of his college fund to hire a chemist to develop the
   product. He then appeared on Shark Tank with his innovation in 2016 and secured the backing of investor
   Mark Cuban. Stern assembled a research team to perfect the product and obtained a patent (Figure 4.6).
   The products are now available via the company website.

   Figure 4.6 This is part of the patent application for Nohbo drops. (credit: modification of "US Patent
   US20170014313A1" by Nohbo LLC/Google Patents, Public Domain)

Is a pioneering innovation an invention? A firm makes a pioneering innovation when it creates a product or
service arising from what it has done before. Pokémon GO is a great example of pioneering innovation.
Nintendo was struggling to keep pace with other gaming-related companies. The company, in keeping with its
core business of video games, came up with a new direction for the gaming industry. Pokémon GO is known
worldwide and is one of the most successful mobile games launched.[22] It takes creativity to explore a new
direction, but not every pioneering innovation creates a distinctly new product or capability for consumers and

21 Abdul Ali. "Pioneering versus Incremental Innovation: Review and Research Propositions." Journal of Product Innovation Management 11,
no. 1 (1994): 46-61.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention                                                                                   161

clients.

Entrepreneurs in the process of developing an innovation usually examine the current products and services
their firm offers, investigate new technologies and techniques being introduced in the marketplace or in
related marketplaces, watch research and development in universities and in other companies, and pursue
new developments that are likely to fit one of two conditions: an innovation that likely fits an existing market
better than other products or services being offered; or an innovation that fits a market that so far has been
underserved.

An example of an incremental innovation is the trash receptacle you find at fast-food restaurants. For many
years, trash cans in fast-food locations were placed in boxes behind swinging doors. The trash cans did one
job well: They hid the garbage from sight. But they created other problems: Often, the swinging doors would
get ketchup and other waste on them, surely a pain point. Newer trash receptacles in fast-food restaurants
have open fronts or open tops that enable people to dispose of their trash more neatly. The downside for
restaurants is that users can see and possibly smell the food waste, but if the restaurants change the trash
bags frequently, as is a good practice anyway, this innovation works relatively well. You might not think twice
about this everyday example of an innovation when you eat at a fast-food restaurant, but even small
improvements can matter a lot, particularly if the market they serve is vast.

Invention

An invention is a leap in capability beyond innovation. Some inventions combine several innovations into
something new. Invention certainly requires creativity, but it goes beyond coming up with new ideas,
combinations of thought, or variations on a theme. Inventors build. Developing something users and
customers view as an invention could be important to some entrepreneurs, because when a new product or
service is viewed as unique, it can create new markets. True inventiveness is often recognized in the
marketplace, and it can help build a valuable reputation and help establish market position if the company can
build a future-oriented corporate narrative around the invention.[23]

Besides establishing a new market position, a true invention can have a social and cultural impact. At the social
level, a new invention can influence the ways institutions work. For example, the invention of desktop
computing put accounting and word processing into the hands of nearly every office worker. The ripple effects
spread to the school systems that educate and train the corporate workforce. Not long after the spread of
desktop computing, workers were expected to draft reports, run financial projections, and make appealing
presentations. Specializations or aspects of specialized jobs--such as typist, bookkeeper, corporate
copywriter--became necessary for almost everyone headed for corporate work. Colleges and eventually high
schools saw software training as essential for students of almost all skill levels. These additional capabilities
added profitability and efficiencies, but they also have increased job requirements for the average
professional.

Some of the most successful inventions contain a mix of familiarity and innovation that is difficult to achieve.
With this mix, the rate of adoption can be accelerated because of the familiarity with the concept or certain
aspects of the product or service. As an example, the "videophone" was a concept that began to be explored
as early as the late 1800s. AT&T began extensive work on videophones during the 1920s. However, the
invention was not adopted because of a lack of familiarity with the idea of seeing someone on a screen and

22 JV Chamary. "Why `Pokémon GO' Is the World's Most Important Game." Forbes. February 10, 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
jvchamary/2018/02/10/pokemon-go-science-health-benefits/#2b6f07fd3ab0
23 Morten Thanning Vendelø. "Narrating Corporate Reputation: Becoming Legitimate through Storytelling." International Studies of
Management & Organization 28, no. 3 (1998): 120-137.
162  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

communicating back and forth. Other factors included societal norms, size of the machine, and cost. It wasn't
until the early 2000s that the invention started to take hold in the marketplace.[24] The concept of a black box is
that activities are performed in a somewhat mysterious and ambiguous manner, with a serendipitous set of
actions connecting that result in a surprisingly beneficial manner. An example is Febreeze, a chemical
combination that binds molecules to eliminate odors. From a black box perspective, the chemical engineers
did not intend to create this product, but as they were working on creating another product, someone noticed
that the product they were working on removed odors, thus inadvertently creating a successful new product
marketed as Febreeze.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Did Henry Ford Invent the Assembly Line?

   Very few products or procedures are actually brand-new ideas. Most new products are alterations or new
   applications of existing products, with some type of twist in design, function, portability, or use. Henry
   Ford is usually credited with inventing the moving assembly line Figure 4.7(a) in 1913. However, some
   800 years before Henry Ford, wooden ships were mass produced in the northern Italian city of Venice in a
   system that anticipated the modern assembly line.

   Various components (ropes, sails, and so on) were prefabricated in different parts of the Venetian
   Arsenal, a huge, complex construction site along one of Venice's canals. The parts were then delivered to
   specific assembly points Figure 4.7(b). After each stage of construction, the ships were floated down the
   canal to the next assembly area, where the next sets of workers and parts were waiting. Moving the ships
   down the waterway and assembling them in stages increased speed and efficiency to the point that long
   before the Industrial Revolution, the Arsenal could produce one fully functional and completely equipped
   ship per day. The system was so successful that it was used from the thirteenth century to about 1800.

   Henry Ford did not invent anything new--he only applied the 800-year-old process of building wooden
   ships by hand along a moving waterway to making metal cars by hand on a moving conveyor
   (Figure 4.7).

24 Thomas J. Fitzgerald. "For the Deaf: Communication without the Wait." The New York Times. December 18, 2003. https://www.nytimes.com/
2003/12/18/technology/for-the-deaf-communication-without-the-wait.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  163

   Figure 4.7 (a) Workers assemble car parts on an early Ford factory assembly line. (b) The Venetian
   Arsenal was an early "assembly line" where workers could build a complete ship in a single day. (credit
   (a): modification of "Ford assembly line - 1913" by "Hohum"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit
   (b): modification of "venice-arsenal-italy" by "irenetriches1"/Pixabay, CC0)

   Opportunities to bring new products and processes to market are in front of us every day. The key is
   having the ability to recognize them and implement them. Likewise, the people you need to help you be
   successful may be right in front of you on a regular basis. The key is having the ability to recognize who
   they are and making connections to them. Just as those ships and cars moved down an assembly line
   until they were ready to be put into service, start thinking about moving down the "who I know" line so
   that you will eventually have a successful business in place.

The process of invention is difficult to codify because not all inventions or inventors follow the same path.
Often the path can take multiple directions, involve many people besides the inventor, and encompass many
restarts. Inventors and their teams develop their own processes along with their own products, and the field in
which an inventor works will greatly influence the modes and pace of invention. Elon Musk is famous for
founding four different billion-dollar companies. The development processes for PayPal, Solar City, SpaceX,
and Tesla differed widely; however, Musk does outline a six-step decision-making process (Figure 4.8):

 1. Ask a question.
 2. Gather as much evidence as possible about it.
 3. Develop axioms based on the evidence and try to assign a probability of truth to each one.
 4. Draw a conclusion in order to determine: Are these axioms correct, are they relevant, do they necessarily

      lead to this conclusion, and with what probability?
 5. Attempt to disprove the conclusion. Seek refutation from others to further help break your conclusion.
 6. If nobody can invalidate your conclusion, then you're probably right, but you're not certainly right.
In other words, the constant underlying Musk's decision process is the scientific method.[25] The scientific
method, most often associated with the natural sciences, outlines the process of discovering an answer to a
question or a problem. "The scientific method is a logical organization of steps that scientists use to make
deductions about the world around us."[26] The steps in the scientific method line up quite nicely with Musk's

25 Abby Jackson. "Elon Musk Uses This 6-Step Process to Make Decisions." Business Insider. November 16, 2017. https://www.inc.com/
business-insider/how-elon-musk-makes-decisions-rolling-stone.html
164  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

decision-making process. Applying the scientific method to invention and innovation makes sense. The
scientific method involves becoming aware of a problem, collecting data about it by observing and
experimenting, and coming up with suggestions on how to solve it.

Figure 4.8 Elon Musk's six-step decision making process follows a sequence of steps similar to the scientific
method. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Economists argue that processes of invention can be explained by economic forces. But this hasn't always
been the case. Prior to 1940, economic theory focused very little on inventions. After World War II, much of the
global economy in the developed world needed to be rebuilt. New technologies were developing rapidly, and
research and development investment increased. Inventors and economists alike became aware of consumer
demand and realized that demand can influence which inventions take off at a given time.[27] However,
inventors are always up against an adoption curve.[28]
The Rogers Adoption Curve was popularized through the research and publications of the author and scientist

26 Joan Whetzel. "Formula for Using the Scientific Method." Owlcation. February 11, 2017. https://owlcation.com/academia/
FormulaForUsingScientificMethod
27 N. Rosenberg. "Science, Invention and Economic Growth." The Economic Journal 84, no. 333 (1974): 90-108.
28 Everett M. Rogers. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  165

Everett Rogers.[29] He first used it to describe how agricultural innovations diffused (or failed to) in a society. It
was later applied to all inventions and innovations. This curve illustrates diffusion of an innovation and when
certain people will adopt it. First is the question of who adopts inventions and innovations in society: The main
groups are innovators, early adopters, early and late-majority adopters, and "laggards" (Rogers's own
term).[30] The innovators are the ones willing to take a risk on a new product, the consumers who want to try it
first. The early adopters are consumers who will adopt new inventions with little to no information. Majority
adopters will adopt products after being accepted by the majority. And finally, laggards are often not willing to
readily adopt change and are the hardest to convince to try a new invention.[31]

Rogers's second way of looking at the concept is from the point of view of the invention itself. A given
population partially or completely adopts an invention or rejects it. If an invention is targeted at the wrong
population or the wrong population segment, this can dramatically inhibit its chances of being adopted widely.
The most critical point of adoption often occurs at the end of the early adoption phase, before the early
majority steps in and truly confirms (or not) the diffusion of an invention. This is called the diffusion chasm
(though this process is usually called the diffusion of innovations, for our purposes, it applies quite well to new
inventions as we define them here).

Figure 4.9 The diffusion curve shows the adoption lifecycle according to the research of Everett Rogers. The
diffusion chasm occurs during early adoption. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)

The diffusion curve depicts a social process in which the value of an invention is perceived (or not) to be worth
the cost (Figure 4.9). Early adopters generally pay more than those who wait, but if the invention gives them a
perceived practical, social, or cultural advantage, members of the population, the popularity of the invention
itself, and marketing can all drive the invention over the diffusion chasm. Once the early majority adopts an

29 John-Pierre Maeli. "The Rogers Adoption Curve & How You Spread New Ideas Throughout Culture." The Political Informer. May 6, 2016.
https://medium.com/the-political-informer/the-rogers-adoption-curve-how-you-spread-new-ideas-throughout-culture-d848462fcd24
30 Everett M. Rogers. Diffusion of Innovations, 5th ed. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2010.
31 Wayne W. LaMorte. "Diffusion of Innovation Theory." September 9, 2019. http://sphweb.bumc.bu.edu/otlt/MPH-Modules/SB/
BehavioralChangeTheories/BehavioralChangeTheories4.html
166  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

innovation (in very large numbers), we can expect the rest of the majority to adopt it. By the time the late
majority and the laggards adopt an innovation, the novelty has worn off, but the practical benefits of the
innovation can still be felt.

Inventors are constantly trying to cross the diffusion chasm, often with many products at a time. Crossing the
diffusion chasm is a nearly constant concern for business-focused or outcomes-focused inventors. Inventors
put many of their resources into an invention during the innovation and early adoption stages. Inventions may
not turn a profit for investors or the inventors themselves until they are well into the early majority stage of
adoption. Some inventors are pleased to work toward general discovery, but most in today's social and
cultural context are working to develop products and services for markets.

One shortcoming of the diffusion of innovations model is that it treats inventions and innovations as though
they are finished and complete, though many are not. Not all inventions are finished products ready for
market. Iterative development is more common, particularly in fields with high levels of complexity and in
service-oriented ventures. In the iterative development process, inventors and innovators continuously
engage with potential customers in order to develop their products and their consumer bases at the same
time. This model of business learning, also known as the science of customer development, is essential.[32]
Business learning involves testing product-market fit and making changes to an innovation or invention many
times over until either investment funding runs out or the product succeeds. Perhaps the most accurate way
to summarize this process is to note that many inventions are hit-or-miss prospects that get only a few
chances to cross the diffusion chasm. When innovators follow the build-measure-learn model (discussed in
detail in Launch for Growth to Success), they try to work their way across the diffusion chasm rather than
making a leap of faith.

   WORK IT OUT

   Razors

   The safety razor was an innovation over the straight razor. Safety razor blades are small enough to fit
   inside a capsule, and the location and type of handle was altered to suit the new orientation of handle to
   blade (Figure 4.10). Most contemporary razors are themselves innovations on the safety razor, whether
   they have two, three, four, or more blades. The method of changing razor blades has evolved with each
   innovation on the safety razor, but the designs are functionally similar.

   The electric razor is a related invention. It still uses blades to shave hair off the face or body, but the
   blades are hidden beneath a foil or foils. Hairs poke through the foils when the razor is pressed against
   the skin, and blades moving in various directions cut the hairs. Although electric razors use blades as do
   mechanical razors, the new design and the added technology qualified the electric razor as an invention
   that offered something new in the shaving industry when Jacob Schick won the patent for a shaving
   machine in 1930.[33] Still other innovations in the shaving genre include gender-specific razors, beard
   trimmers, and, more recently, online clubs such as Dollar Shave Club and Harry's Shave Club.

32 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup: How Today's Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses. Largo, Maryland:
Crown Books, 2011.
33 "Jacob Schick Invents the Electric Razor." Connecticut History. May 13, 2017. https://connecticuthistory.org/jacob-schick-invents-the-electric-
razor/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  167

   Figure 4.10 (a) The straight razor is still in use, but there are newer innovations that are more popular.
   (b) The safety razor is an innovation over the straight razor. (c) The electric razor is an innovation related
   to the safety razor. (credit (a): modification of "barber-beard-razor-shaving" by "jackmac34"/Pixabay,
   CC0; credit (b): modification of "Safety Razor vs Cartridge Razor" by "Tools of Men"/Creative Commons,
   CC BY 2.0; credit (c): modification of "Philips 8290 shaver unboxing" by "renaissancechambara"/Creative
   Commons, CC BY 2.0)

   Think about the conceptual difference between innovation and invention. Is the safety razor a pioneering
   innovation or an incremental one? What makes the electric razor an invention, as we define it here? What
   makes it stand out as a leap from previous types of razors? Do you think the electric razor is a "sure
   thing"? Why or why not? Consider the availability of electricity at the time the first electric razors were
   being made. Why do you think the electric razor made it over the diffusion chasm between early
   adopters and early majority adopters? Do you think the electric razor was invented iteratively with small
   changes to the same product in response to customer preferences? Or did it develop in a series of black
   box inventions, with each one either diffusing or not?

 4.3 Developing Ideas, Innovations, and Inventions

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe and apply the five stages of creativity
  · Discuss innovation as a system for problem solving and much more
  · Outline the sequence of steps in developing an invention

The previous section defined creativity, innovation, and invention, and provided examples. You might think of
creativity as raw; innovation as transforming creativity into a functional purpose, often meant to eradicate a
pain point or to fulfill a need; and invention as a creation that leaves a lasting impact. In this section, you will
learn about processes designed to help you apply knowledge from the previous section.

The Creative Process: The Five Stages of Creativity

Raw creativity and an affinity for lateral thinking may be innate, but creative people must refine these skills in
order to become masters in their respective fields. They practice in order to apply their skills readily and
consistently, and to integrate them with other thought processes and emotions. Anyone can improve in
168  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

creative efforts with practice. For our purposes, practice is a model for applied creativity that is derived from
an entrepreneurial approach (Figure 4.11).[34] It requires:

 1. Preparation
 2. Incubation
 3. Insight
 4. Evaluation
 5. Elaboration

Figure 4.11 These are the five stages of creativity, according to Graham Wallas in The Art of Thought.[35]
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Preparation

Preparation involves investigating a chosen field of interest, opening your mind, and becoming immersed in
materials, mindset, and meaning. If you have ever tried to produce something creative without first absorbing
relevant information and observing skilled practitioners at work, then you understand how difficult it is. This
base of knowledge and experience mixed with an ability to integrate new thoughts and practices can help you
sift through the ideas quicker. However, relying too heavily on prior knowledge can restrict the creative
process. When you immerse yourself in a creative practice, you make use of the products or the materials of
others' creativity. For example, a video-game designer plays different types of video games on different
consoles, computers, and online in networks. She or he may play alone, with friends in collaboration, or in
competition. Consuming the products in a field gives you a sense of what is possible and indicates boundaries
that you may attempt to push with your own creative work. Preparation broadens your mind and lets you
study the products, practice, and culture in a field. It is also a time for goal setting. Whether your chosen field
is directly related to art and design, such as publishing, or involves human-centric design, which includes all
sorts of software and product design efforts, you need a period of open-minded reception to ideas. Repetitive
practice is also part of the preparation stage, so that you can understand the current field of production and
become aware of best practices, whether or not you are currently capable of matching them. During the
preparation stage, you can begin to see how other creative people put meaning into their products, and you
can establish benchmarks against which to measure your own creative work.

Incubation

Incubation refers to giving yourself, and your subconscious mind in particular, time to incorporate what you
learned and practiced in the preparation stage. Incubation involves the absence of practice. It may look to an
outsider as though you are at rest, but your mind is at work. A change of environment is key to incubating
ideas.[36] A new environment allows you to receive stimuli other than those directly associated with the creative
problem you are working on. It could be as simple as taking a walk or going to a new coffee shop to allow your

34 Aleza D'Agostino. "5 Stages of the Creative Process with James Taylor." CreativeLive. December 28, 2015. https://www.creativelive.com/
blog/5-stages-of-the-creative-process-with-james-taylor/
35 Eugene Sadler-Smith. "Wallas' Four-Stage Model of the Creative Process: More Than Meets the Eye?" Creativity Research Journal 27, no. 4
(2015): 342-352.
36 Eugene Sadler-Smith. "Wallas' Four-Stage Model of the Creative Process: More Than Meets the Eye?" Creativity Research Journal 27, no. 4
(2015): 342-352.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  169

mind to wander and take in the information you gathered in the previous stage. Mozart stated, "When I am, as
it were, completely myself, entirely alone, and of good cheer--say, traveling in a carriage, or walking after a
good meal, or during the night when I cannot sleep; it is on such occasions that my ideas flow best and most
abundantly."[37] Incubation allows your mind to integrate your creative problem with your stored memories
and with other thoughts or emotions you might have. This simply is not possible to do when you are
consciously fixated on the creative problem and related tasks and practice.

Incubation can take a short or a long time, and you can perform other activities while allowing this process to
take place. One theory about incubation is that it takes language out of the thought process. If you are not
working to apply words to your creative problems and interests, you can free your mind to make associations
that go deeper, so to speak, than language.[38] Patiently waiting for incubation to work is quite difficult. Many
creative and innovative people develop hobbies involving physical activity to keep their minds busy while they
allow ideas to incubate.

Insight

Insight or "illumination" is a term for the "aha!" moment--when the solution to a creative problem suddenly
becomes readily accessible to your conscious mind. The "aha!" moment has been observed in literature, in
history, and in cognitive studies of creativity.[39] Insights may come all at once or in increments. They are not
easily understood because, by their very nature, they are difficult to isolate in research and experimental
settings. For the creative entrepreneur, however, insights are a delight. An insight is the fleeting time when
your preparation, practice, and period of incubation coalesce into a stroke of genius. Whether the illumination
is the solution to a seemingly impossible problem or the creation of a particularly clever melody or turn of
phrase, creative people often consider it a highlight in their lives. For an entrepreneur, an insight holds the
promise of success and the potential to help massive numbers of people overcome a pain point or problem.
Not every insight will have a global impact, but coming up with a solution that your subconscious mind has
been working on for some time is a real joy.

Evaluation

Evaluation is the purposeful examination of ideas. You will want to compare your insights with the products
and ideas you encountered during preparation. You also will want to compare your ideas and product
prototypes to the goals you set out for yourself during the preparation phase. Creative professionals will often
invite others to critique their work at this stage. Because evaluation is specific to the expectations, best
practices, and existing product leaders in each field, evaluation can take on many forms. You are looking for
assurance that your standards for evaluation are appropriate. Judge yourself fairly, even as you apply strict
criteria and the well-developed sense of taste you acquired during the preparation phase. For example, you
might choose to interview a few customers in your target demographics for your product or service. The
primary objective is to understand the customer perspective and the extent to which your idea aligns with
their position.

Elaboration

The last stage in the creative process is elaboration, that is, actual production. Elaboration can involve the

37 Neal Zaslaw, "Mozart As a Working Stiff," in James M. Morris, ed., On Mozart (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994), 109.
38 Steven M. Smith, Thomas B. Ward, and Ronald A. Finke, eds., The Creative Cognition Approach. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
39 Eugene Sadler-Smith. "Wallas' Four-Stage Model of the Creative Process: More Than Meets the Eye?" Creativity Research Journal 27, no. 4
(2015): 342-352.
170  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

release of a minimum viable product (MVP). This version of your invention may not be polished or complete,
but it should function well enough that you can begin to market it while still elaborating on it in an iterative
development process. Elaboration also can involve the development and launch of a prototype, the release of
a software beta, or the production of some piece of artistic work for sale. Many consumer-product companies,
such as Johnson & Johnson or Procter & Gamble, will establish a small test market to garner feedback and
evaluations of new products from actual customers. These insights can give the company valuable information
that can help make the product or service as successful as possible.
At this stage what matters most in the entrepreneurial creative process is that the work becomes available to
the public so that they have a chance to adopt it.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Test marketing can reveal much information about the potential users of a product. Visit the Drive
   Research site on test markets (https://openstax.org/l/52TestMarkets) for more information.

Innovation as More than Problem Solving

Innovative entrepreneurs are essentially problem solvers, but this level of innovation--identifying a pain point
and working to overcome it--is only one in a series of innovative steps. In the influential business publication
Forbes, the entrepreneur Larry Myler notes that problem solving is inherently reactive.[40] That is, you have to
wait for a problem to happen in order to recognize the need to solve the problem. Solving problems is an
important part of the practice of innovation, but to elevate the practice and the field, innovators should
anticipate problems and strive to prevent them. In many cases, they create systems for continuous
improvement, which Myler notes may involve "breaking" previous systems that seem to function perfectly
well. Striving for continuous improvement helps innovators stay ahead of market changes. Thus, they have
products ready for emerging markets, rather than developing projects that chase change, which can occur
constantly in some tech-driven fields. One issue with building a system for constant improvement is that you
are in essence creating problems in order to solve them, which goes against established culture in many firms.
Innovators look for organizations that can handle purposeful innovation, or they attempt to start them. Some
innovators even have the goal of innovating far ahead into the future, beyond current capacities. In order to
do this, Myler suggests bringing people of disparate experiential backgrounds with different expertise
together. These relationships are not guarantees of successful innovation, but such groups can generate ideas
independent of institutional inertia. Thus, innovators are problem solvers but also can work with forms of
problem creation and problem imagination. They tackle problems that have yet to exist in order to solve them
ahead of time.

Let's examine one multilevel approach to innovation (Figure 4.12). The base is problem solving. The next level
up in the pyramid, so to speak, is prevention. The next level is working toward continuous improvement, and
at the top of such efforts is creating the capacity to direct the future of your industry or multiple industries so

40 Larry Myler. "Innovation Is Problem Solving . . . And a Whole Lot More." Forbes. June 13, 2014. https://www.forbes.com/sites/larrymyler/
2014/06/13/innovation-is-problem-solving-and-a-whole-lot-more/#3f11abe533b9

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention                       171

that you can weather disruption in your career or even to create it.

Figure 4.12 The innovation pyramid is one multileveled approach to innovation. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Even if you are not interested in shaping the future of whole industry sectors, developing future-focused
innovation practices still is a good idea. It will help you prepare for disruption. The pace of technological
change is such that workers at all levels need to be prepared to innovate. Innovation leaders, such as the
marketing guru Guy Kawasaki, have built on psychological principles to suggest new ways to approach
innovation. According to Kawasaki, innovative products include five key qualities: deep, indulgent, complete,
elegant, and emotive--DICEE (Figure 4.13).[41] You can strive to infuse individual innovations with these
qualities in practical ways.

Figure 4.13 Innovative products are deep, indulgent, complete, elegant, and emotive. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Deep

Deep products are based on the logic of innovation that we've just established and anticipate users' needs
before they have them. These types of innovations often have masterful designs that are intuitive for new

41 Guy Kawasaki. "Guy's Golden Touch." Guy Kawasaki. January 3, 2006. https://guykawasaki.com/guys_golden_tou/
172  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

users while still being capable of completing complex tasks. Adobe is an innovative corporation working in
several fields, such as software, marketing, and artificial intelligence. Adobe often creates software
applications with basic functions that are easily accessible to new users but that also enable experienced users
to innovate on their own.[42] Creating a platform for innovation is a hallmark of deep, forward-thinking
innovation.

Indulgent

Innovations with lasting power engage users in ways that make them feel special for having purchased the
product or for having found the service. Indulgence refers to a depth of quality that does not come from being
the fastest solution to a problem. Indulgence may even sound like a negative trait. In humans, it certainly can
be, but for someone using an innovative product, feeling indulgent can relate to a richness of experience with
the user interface (UI). The UI of a product, particularly a software product, is what the user sees and
interacts with. A feeling of indulgence imbues your product with a sense of value and durability that reassures
users and encourages them to use your product confidently.

Complete

Kawasaki's vision of a complete product includes the services wrapped around it and underlying it such that
users understand the product well enough to be comfortable using it. Information about how it works and
how it is meant to work is readily available. Thus, product innovation must include marketing and other
communication efforts. For Kawasaki, this builds the "total user experience."[43] If you truly have solved a
problem in the marketplace, users will understand what that problem is and how your product and related
services deliver.

Elegant

Elegance also is part of a product's UI. It refers to intuitive design that immediately makes sense to consumers.
Elegance conveys more information with fewer words. Elegant design is not afraid of negative space or of the
occasional pause. Elegant innovations solve problems without creating new ones. For Kawasaki, elegance is
the difference between a pragmatic, good innovation and something great.

Emotive

Emotive innovations evoke the intended emotion and demand to be admired and shared. In other words, truly
great innovations create fandoms, not just consumer bases. You can't force people to love your product, but
you can give them experiences that create a sense of excitement and anticipation of what you might come up
with next.

Developing an Invention

The general process of inventing involves systematic and practical steps that might include linear and
nonlinear thinking. You might think that only people with innate artistic skills are creative and that only
geniuses become innovators and inventors, but much of creativity is driven by being immersed in a practice.
You can build and foster your own creativity. Your idea of an inventor might be someone like Johannes

42 Adobe Communications Team. "Adobe Named One of Fast Company's `Most Innovative Companies' for AI." Adobe Blog. February 20, 2018.
https://theblog.adobe.com/adobe-named-one-fast-companys-innovative-companies-ai/
43 Guy Kawasaki. "Guy's Golden Touch." Guy Kawasaki. January 3, 2006. https://guykawasaki.com/guys_golden_tou/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  173

Gutenberg, who developed the printing press. The spread of printing ultimately redrew the map of Europe and
resulted in the foundation of new centers of learning. Gutenberg's supposed spark actually was more of a
slow burn. He was creative and innovative--one of history's most famous inventors--but his printing press,
like all other inventions, was a synthesis of existing technologies. Gutenberg's most important innovation was
his use of moveable, interchangeable metal type instead of entire hand-carved wooden blocks of text
(Figure 4.14). Perfecting his printing process took decades and left him all but broke.[44] The notion of the
inventor's single stroke of genius is mostly myth. The people that history remembers usually worked very hard
to develop their creativity, to become familiar with the processes and tools that were ripe for innovation in
their time, and ultimately to make something so unique that society recognizes it as an invention.

Figure 4.14 Gutenberg's invention of movable type was an important innovation in printing. (credit (a):
modification of "Printer in 1568-ce" by "Parhamr"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain; credit (b):
modification of "Metal movable type" by Willi Heidelbach/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.5)

The old adage claims that "necessity is the mother of invention," but an innovator needs experience in a field,
creative effort, and knowledge to be a successful inventor. Entrepreneurship means taking your efforts and
knowledge, and finding a market where your invention can first survive, then thrive.
One model for developing an invention is the first five steps of a plan adapted from Sourcify.com, which
specializes in connecting product developers with manufacturers.[45] This process is succinct and includes
suggestions for building a team along the way (Figure 4.15).

44 John Man. The Gutenberg Revolution. New York: Random House, 2010.
45 Natalie Peters. "9 Key Steps to Bring Your Invention to Life." Sourcify. December 11, 2017. https://www.sourcify.com/bring-your-invention-
to-life/
174  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

Figure 4.15 These are the five steps for developing an invention, according to Sourcify. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 1: Educate Yourself

Before your inventive product can do battle with other inventions, you will need to educate yourself. To
prepare yourself to weather the competition, you need to learn as much as you can about the current
investing climate, current product development opportunities, and current leadership approaches. Even if you
are not deeply interested in leadership dogma, it helps to know what the current trends are in leadership and
product development. To succeed as an inventor in a vast marketplace, you need to understand the rules,
written and unwritten, of the industry and competitive landscape. The product development process can be
quite involved. The process can vary by industry and by availability of resources.
Part of educating yourself is also gaining an understanding of your own strengths and weaknesses, and how
those relate to your leadership style. A leadership style inventory can help you better understand your
approach to leading others. This is just one example of many that exist to give you a starting point. As the
inventor of your product or service, you will manage/lead others as you attempt to make your idea a reality.
Also, the environment can constantly change. For this reason, it is important to understand the basic tenets of
leadership and management in a dynamic work atmosphere. Many sources will give you insights into the
challenges of management.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   A leadership style inventory (https://openstax.org/l/52LeadStyleQuiz) can help you understand your
   leadership style and how to adapt your own style to other situations and people.

Another key step in educating yourself is to find out which kinds of contributors you are going to need to build
a successful entrepreneurial team. Building a team is essential to making your invention a reality. Even those
who invent alone--and they are quite rare--must have a development team, a manufacturing and/or service
team, a marketing team, and other members with specific skill sets such as coders, graphic designers, test
marketers, and more.

Step 2: Stay Organized

Most tip sheets for inventors suggest that you find a method for organizing your creativity so that you don't
spend time trying to remember previous ideas, plans, and decisions. You must organize information related to
your business idea, your business plan, and your potential teammates in the process.
Contact management software has been popular for decades. Nowadays, you can investigate many other
productivity and team-chat tools. Research ways to organize information about the people you plan to work

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  175

with and hope to work for. The team-chat program Slack (www.slack.com) enables you to create specific topics
for team members to discuss and collaborate on. Slack offers several features to help keep employees
connected. Insightly (www.insightly.com) is a customer relationship management tool to stay better
connected to your customers. Ryver and Glip incorporate task management. Flock and Microsoft Teams offer a
host of features, with Microsoft leveraging its corporate position to bring about deployment in more than
200,000 organizations. Select the tool set that works best for you and consider paying for the software that
offers the precise team communication functionality and utility you need.[46]

Step 3: Conduct Market Research

Market research is an obvious must, but many entrepreneurs fail to go as deeply as they should in researching
their competition. You must be aware of current and future competitors so that you are prepared to compete
in the marketplace when you are actually ready. Being the best on paper now won't be much use when you
enter the marketplace with an MVP in six to eight months in competition with competitors' new products and
updates.

What should you consider with regard to team development when you're looking at the competition? Within
the legal limits of any noncompete clauses, you should be shopping the competition for potential team
members. The best leaders are always seeking talented people. If you sense that someone would be a good fit
for your team, that they have not only the skill set but also the temperament that would help put your
invention in the market, do not be afraid to reach out to them. How you reach out is something you must
research for each industry. In some industries, you will have to be highly secretive. Part of market research is
understanding the market well enough to understand the soft skills you need to find contributors who are
already working in the industry or in an adjacent one

Step 4: Conduct Patent Research

If you expect to apply for a patent, take the time to read up on policies and procedures. Officials in the US
Patent Office, or in similar bureaus in other countries, decide whether an invention is worthy of receiving a
patent. A patentable invention must meet the criteria of being novel, useful, and nonobvious; it must be
proven to be workable.[47] Those three standards--novel, useful, and nonobvious--are subjective. So is the
concept of invention, but conceptualizing invention this way sets a high bar for entrepreneurs who truly wish
to make a social impact. Developing an invention that is patentable also creates a barrier against competition,
which can make the difference between business success and failure. There are two types of patents. Utility
patents last twenty years, and design patents usually last fourteen years. If a patent is granted, the inventor
has a window of time in which to secure further funding, work to produce the product, and try to gain mass-
market adoption.[48] After all is said and done, you can apply your creativity to social innovations, product
innovations, or service innovations. If you can combine enough innovations, add your unique creativity, and
create something that survives the diffusion chasm, you can truly invent something new.

The patent basics page of the US Patent and Trademark Office's website is roughly forty pages long.[49] The
utility patent process includes a thirteen-step flow chart[50] that outlines the process. The patent office

46 Aleksey Chepalov. "9 Slack Competitors in 2019: What Team Chat Tools Are Leading the Way?" Chanty. March 18, 2019.
https://www.chanty.com/blog/slack-competitors/
47 "Patent Subject Matter Eligibility." United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). n.d. https://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/pac/
mpep/s2106.html
48 "How Long Does Patent, Trademark, or Copyright Protection Last?" Intellectual Property Rights Information and Assistance. July 7, 2016.
https://www.stopfakes.gov/article?id=How-Long-Does-Patent-Trademark-or-Copyright-Protection-Last
49 "General Information Concerning Patents." United States Patent and Trademark Office. October 2015. https://www.uspto.gov/patents-
getting-started/general-information-concerning-patents
176  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

encourages you to use a registered patent attorney or agent. If you are skilled and diligent enough to secure a
patent, you should expect to pay fees and file paperwork to maintain it for years after it is granted. We've
already discussed the keys to securing a patent, but to reiterate, here is how an invention is defined in US
patent law: "In the language of the statute, any person who `invents or discovers any new and useful process,
machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful improvement thereof, may obtain a
patent,' subject to the conditions and requirements of the law."[51]

When building a team to make your invention a reality, finding a patent lawyer or agent is key. Even those who
have advocated for hiring patent attorneys in the past now suggest that hiring a patent agent might work.
What's the difference? Patent attorneys often bill by the hour, but they offer a full suite of legal advice. As the
author Stephen Key indicates, patent agents are narrowly focused on helping you get and defend your
patent.[52] The other limitation that Key mentions is that patent agents may write a patent application in such a
way that you are less prepared to protect your invention against future legal challenges. Key quotes Gene
Quinn, a leading attorney on intellectual property and patent law: "By the time you realize that you are sitting
on a million-dollar invention it will be too late to do anything about it....Patent agents as a general rule tend to
be very good at describing what it is that you as an inventor show up with." What they tend to be much less
good at is describing what your invention could be. They also frequently will use terms that are more concrete
and limiting than would a patent attorney. Attorneys are taught the art of being hyper-specific, which is
necessary at times, but also the art of being anything but specific."[53] Patents cannot be vague, but they can
be written with just the right amount of specificity to protect against similar products that may arise and
threaten your market share.

Step 5: Develop a Prototype

Developing a prototype can be the most fun or the most tedious part of inventing. Much of your attitude
toward developing a prototype depends on available resources, technology, and expertise. In this text, we
reference the concept of the lean startup from time to time. In the lean startup model, the prototype is most
often an MVP. As we saw earlier, an MVP is a version of your invention that may not be polished or complete in
terms of how you envisioned it, but it functions well enough and looks good enough that you can begin to
market it with reasonable hopes that it will be adopted. For other inventions, you may need to build a more
advanced prototype. This requires serious investment capital, but the payoff is that users will interact with a
version of the product that looks and functions more like what you had in mind during your ideation phase. As
an inventor, you are responsible for establishing quality control minimums for your product. You may have to
compromise on your vision, but you should not compromise on basic functionality or basic levels of quality in
materials.

You have many options at the prototype development stage. You can build the prototype yourself or with a
small team. You can partner with design/invention firms that specialize in helping inventors create, but you
must be very careful and involve your legal representation when working with such firms to be sure that you
maintain the patents and other rights to your invention. Many inventors have partnered with such firms only
to see their intellectual property stolen. Another option is to get funding for your invention on Kickstarter or
some other crowdfunding site, but again you must beware that establishing such a campaign puts your idea in

50 "Process for Obtaining a Utility Patent." United States Patent and Trademark Office. n.d. https://www.uspto.gov/patents-getting-started/
patent-basics/types-patent-applications/utility-patent/process-obtaining
51 "What Can Be Patented" in "General Information Concerning Patents." United States Patent and Trademark Office. October 2015.
https://www.uspto.gov/patents-getting-started/general-information-concerning-patents#heading-4
52 Stephen Key. "Should You Hire a Patent Agent Instead of a Patent Attorney?" Inc. October 26, 2016. https://www.inc.com/stephen-key/
should-you-hire-a-patent-agent-instead-of-a-patent-attorney.html
53 "Gene Quinn." IP Watchdog. n.d. https://www.ipwatchdog.com/people/gene-quinn-3/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  177

the public sphere. "Copycatters are monitoring crowdfunding platforms like Kickstarter and watching for
trendy products to go viral," according to Amedeo Ferraro, an intellectual property attorney.[54] Competing
companies, particularly in foreign markets, actively scout Kickstarter and similar platforms for new ideas that
they can manufacture and bring to market before your crowdfunding project has run its course. Perhaps most
chilling is this comment regarding legal protections that do not function, even when inventors take
precautions to protect their intellectual property when working with some Chinese firms: "But even with these
protections, there's no guarantee that you can stop someone from copycatting your product. [One U.S.
intellectual property lawyer] said that the problem lies not in China's courts but enforcing rulings. Winning a
case against one factory is relatively easy. But suing every factory and winning is expensive and time
consuming."[55] For this reason, some inventors prefer to start small and local, if possible. It can be better for
them to start with a trusted team striving for a small profit and a good market position than to see the market
flooded with copycat products.

54 Jennifer Schlesinger, Andrea Day, Bianca Fortis, Eunice Yoon, and Lilian Wu. "How One Entrepreneur's American Dream Turned into a
Copycat Nightmare." CNBC. April 30, 2019. https://www.cnbc.com/2019/04/30/how-one-entrepreneurs-american-dream-turned-into-a-copycat-
nightmare.html
55 Josh Horwitz. "Your Brilliant Kickstarter Idea Could Be on Sale in China before You've Even Finished Funding It." Quartz. October 17, 2016.
https://qz.com/771727/chinas-factories-in-shenzhen-can-copy-products-at-breakneck-speed-and-its-time-for-the-rest-of-the-world-to-get-over-
it/
178  Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

     Key Terms

brainstorming generation of ideas in an environment free of judgment or dissension with the goal of
     creating solutions

creativity development of original ideas
design thinking method to focus the design and development decisions of a product on the needs of the

     customer, typically involving an empathy-driven process to define complex problems and create solutions
     that address those problems
diffusion chasm most critical point of adoption, which often occurs at the end of the early adoption phase,
     before the early majority steps in and truly confirms (or not) the diffusion of an invention
disruptive innovation process that significantly impacts the market by making a product or service more
     affordable and/or accessible often by smaller companies in an industry
empathy human ability to feel what other humans are feeling, which in the context of creativity, innovation,
     and invention is essential to beginning a process of human-centric design
ideation purposeful process of opening up one's mind to new trains of thought that branch out in many
     directions from a stated purpose or problem
incremental innovation innovation that modifies an existing product or service
innovation new idea, process, or product, or a change to an existing product or process
invention truly novel product, service, or process that, though based on ideas and products that have come
     before, represents a leap, a creation truly novel and different
iterative development process in which inventors and innovators continuously engage with potential
     customers in order to develop their products and their consumer bases at the same time
lateral thinking free and open thinking in which established patterns of logical thought are purposefully
     ignored or even challenged
linear thinking logical, step-by-step process
minimum viable product (MVP) early version or prototype of a product that may not be polished or
     complete but that functions well enough that you can begin to market it or test it with potential users
open innovation searching for and finding solutions outside of the organizational structure
pain point problem that people have with a product or service that might be addressed by creating a
     modified version that solves the problem
pioneering innovation one based on a new technology, a new advancement in the field, and/or an
     advancement in a related field that leads to the development of a new product
scientific method most often associated with the natural sciences, outlines the process to discover an
     answer to a question or a problem
user interface what the user sees and interacts with

     Summary

4.1 Tools for Creativity and Innovation
There are many practical approaches to being creative and developing innovations. Many programs and
models encourage creative thinking. Some of the best encourage entrepreneurs to think like the stakeholders
they hope their products and services will help. Human-centered design begins with empathizing with the
people experiencing a problem or pain point. It continues through steps meant to clearly define problems and
examine solutions through careful testing. Returning to empathy is essential in the human-centric design
protocol. The Six Thinking Hats method of ideation can open up deep avenues of creative thought directed at

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention                                                       179

solving problems by limiting the roles individuals in a group play. This reinforces the idea that creative thinking
is a practice, that it can be guided, and that sometimes a combination of open thinking and rule following is
ideal for collaborative creativity. The statement starter method of creative thinking frames every problem as
though there must be a solution. This type of open thinking is an effective way to begin a creative journey that
can lead to innovation and invention of products or services for social benefit.

4.2 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention: How They Differ
Creativity is defined as the ability to develop something original, particularly an idea or an artistic
representation of an idea. Innovation occurs when an individual or a firm applies something new to an existing
product or service that adds value. Innovation can be planned or spontaneous, incremental or pioneering.
Some pioneering innovations rise to the level of being unique inventions--truly novel products, services, or
processes that, though based on ideas and products that have come before, represent a leap.

The diffusion curve is related to iterative innovations versus black box innovations. Innovators and inventors
conduct the iterative innovation process by engaging with potential consumers on a near-continuous basis in
order to develop the product and the consumer base at the same time, thus bridging the diffusion chasm.
Black box innovations either jump the chasm or not, depending on the social perceptions through which they
are perceived by potential users, the quality of the product itself, and marketing strategies.

4.3 Developing Ideas, Innovations, and Inventions
Whether an entrepreneur has innate creativity or not, practice can help improve creative efforts. One practice
model includes preparation, incubation, insight, evaluation, and elaboration. Entrepreneurs can use their
creativity to solve problems and innovate. However, innovators strive to anticipate and prevent problems,
rather than react to them. The innovation pyramid begins with problem solving at the base, moving up to
prevention, then continuous improvement, and finally directing the future of an industry. Innovative products
are DICEE: They are deep, indulgent, complete, elegant, and emotive.

Building and fostering your own creativity often involves linear and nonlinear thinking. Models are available
that help develop inventions, such as Sourcify.com's five steps: Educate yourself, stay organized, conduct
market research, conduct patent research, and develop a prototype. This model has guidelines for working
with teams as well. These models allow you to apply your knowledge of creativity, innovation, and invention in
an entrepreneurial context. Seek inspiration from inventors who have come before and learn from the modes
of thought and models of practice that guide inventors today.

     Review Questions

1. The question "How might we find a way to make use of DVDs and other physical media as users adopt
streaming services for films and television over time?" is an example of which form of ideation?

    A. statement starter
    B. open innovation
    C. design thinking
    D. brainstorming
180                                                                               Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

2. The creative process that begins with empathy is known as ________.
    A. Stanford's model of human-centric design
    B. build-measure-learn
    C. open innovation
    D. disruptive innovation

3. In the Six Hats exercise, new ideas are the purview of the ________.
    A. Black Hat
    B. Blue Hat
    C. Green Hat
    D. Red Hat

4. ________ is thinking strategically, often to create human-centered products.
    A. Creativity
    B. Innovation
    C. Invention
    D. Design thinking

5. An innovation that is not developed in tandem with consumers but that is introduced in a society or in a
targeted market as completed and "finished" is often referred to as a "________."

    A. design thinking
    B. iterative development
    C. black box
    D. corporate narrative

6. If linear thinking is the idea that progress follows or should follow a set of established, logical steps, ________
is free and open thinking where established patterns of logical thought are purposefully ignored or even
challenged.

    A. design thinking
    B. iterative development
    C. corporate narrative
    D. lateral thinking

7. The model for building ________ also includes steps for team building, suggesting that the most complex
developments require more than the lone mad scientist in a lab, despite what is often depicted in popular
culture.

    A. creativity in an individual
    B. innovations
    C. inventions

8. Problem solving is part of but not the entire model for building innovations. True or False?
    A. true
    B. false

9. DICEE is a model for ________ that focuses on going beyond problem solving to get at the underlying qualities
of what makes certain new products "sticky" in ways that make people true fans.

    A. creativity in practice
    B. innovative products
    C. inventions
    D. building creative teams

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention  181

     Discussion Questions

1. Open innovation can be criticized for being vague and encouraging corporations to attempt to commit
corporate espionage to look for solutions to problems shared by multiple firms in the same field. Is open
innovation all it is cracked up to be? Is it truly new? Does it encourage intellectual property theft?

2. At what point is a product truly inventive? Can you think of products that some people think are inventions
but that other people consider mere variations of previous products?

3. What is the value of creative efforts that are not meant for sale and that are never turned into products for
the marketplace?

4. Critics of contemporary society suggest that there is something akin to a "technology cult" around the
world. Some people treat innovation and inventiveness as cure-alls even as social conditions such as poverty,
environmental degradation, and hunger persist. Can innovation cure all of society's ills? If so, what is standing
in the way? Why hasn't the modern era solved basic human needs and human rights problems with
technology?

5. Can you think of a product you or someone you know adopted early only to watch it fall into the diffusion
chasm between early adopters and early majority adopters? What was that product, and why do you think it
failed to make it across that gap?

6. What makes a model for creativity necessary? Isn't creativity the opposite or the absence of structure?

7. Why does the model for innovation stress that it does not end with problem solving?

8. Why does the section on invention focus so much on building a team? Aren't most inventors and truly
creative people famous for working solo?

     Case Questions

1. Open innovation means more than searching online for others who are attempting to solve the same
problems you are and trying to take inspiration from other corporations and other entrepreneurs. It also
involves forming partnerships, supporting new ventures, investing in business accelerators, and acquiring
firms that innovate in ways that are valuable to your firm or to your entrepreneurial effort (assuming you can
raise the capital to acquire a firm while you develop your invention).[56] Think of an example of a firm (other
than Samsung, the example from Merit Morikawa's article, and Apple, the "easy" answer) that has engaged in
all of these practices. What seems to drive these different modes of open innovation? When are they most
appropriate? When are they not appropriate ethically?

56 Merit Morikawa. "16 Examples of Open Innovation: What Can We Learn From Them?" Viima. November 20, 2016. https://www.viima.com/
blog/16-examples-of-open-innovation-what-can-we-learn-from-them
182                                                                               Chapter 4 Creativity, Innovation, and Invention

2. Read this article to prepare for answering this question: https://www.brookings.edu/blog/brookings-now/
2018/05/23/artificial-intelligence-will-disrupt-the-future-of-work-are-we-ready/. (Brennan Hoban. "Artificial
Intelligence Will Disrupt the Future of Work. Are We Ready?" Brookings. May 23, 2018.)

Many signs point to growing automation across a variety of industries in the coming decades. In many cases,
disruptive technologies will force people to innovate. Based on the DICEE innovation model, explain how
humans will be needed on the design side of innovation to create human-centric products. In what ways can
you create a career that is "disruption-proof"?

     Suggested Resources

4.1 Tools for Creativity and Innovation
The World's 25 Best Design Schools: https://www.businessinsider.com/the-worlds-25-best-design-

  schools-2012-11
Open Innovation Community: http://openinnovation.net/
The Seven All-Time Greatest Ideation Techniques: http://www.innovationmanagement.se/2013/05/30/

  the-7-all-time-greatest-ideation-techniques/
Ideation Method: Mash-Up: https://www.ideou.com/pages/ideation-method-mash-up
LUMA Institute's LUMA System of Innovation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDyElJ0xe2o
Ideation Method: Top Five: http://www.designkit.org/methods/15

4.3 Developing Ideas, Innovations, and Inventions
Additional information about product development: https://www.smartsheet.com/all-about-new-product-

  development-process
A summary of various leadership styles and traits that are essential for a changing business environment:

  https://www.christinespeaks.com/management/demonstrate-dynamic-leadership

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     5

              Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Figure 5.1 Chris Johnson, CEO and founder of California-based company Rapid Brands, invented the Rapid
Ramen Cooker and has since grown his offerings to a line of successful products. (credit: photo provided by
Rapid Brands Inc.)

 Chapter Outline

        5.1 Entrepreneurial Opportunity
        5.2 Researching Potential Business Opportunities
        5.3 Competitive Analysis

      Introduction

   Like many college students, Chris Johnson ate a lot of ramen noodles, and like many college students, cooking
   meant microwaving something in his dorm room. At the time, ramen noodle companies did not print
   microwave instructions on the package, and there was a lack of microwave cookware in which to prepare the
   popular college food fare.
   Many entrepreneurial ideas aim to solve small everyday problems. In his quest to find a better way to prepare
   ramen noodles, Chris Johnson invented the Rapid Ramen Cooker.
   Johnson is now the CEO of Rapid Brands. He founded his company in 2013 with the Rapid Ramen Cooker.
   Johnson pitched his idea on the TV show Shark Tank. Although he negotiated with investor Mark Cuban for an
   ownership stake in the company, Johnson wound up not taking the deal. Instead, he made a deal with Walmart
   to position the Ramen cooker on the retailer's shelves. Rapid Brands sold more than 4 million Rapid Ramen
   Cookers in its first two years at Walmart and other retailers. Johnson has since introduced several new
   products, including cookers for eggs, hot dogs, and brownies.[1]
   Finding an entrepreneurial opportunity and persisting until your business becomes successful is not easy and

   1 Mark Anderson. "Local `Shark Tank' Winner Cooks up a Major Expansion." Sacramento Business Journal. April 4, 2016.
   https://www.bizjournals.com/sacramento/news/2016/04/04/local-shark-tank-winner-cooks-up-a-major-expansion.html
184  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

involves risk. But whether you start a new venture because you came up with an idea to solve an everyday
problem, or whether you are deliberately searching for an opportunity because you want to start your own
business, doing the research beforehand will help mitigate risk and determine the venture's likelihood of
success.

 5.1 Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define entrepreneurial opportunity
  · Discuss Joseph Shumpeter's theories of opportunity
  · Identify key drivers of opportunity

Aspiring entrepreneurs can come up with ideas all day long, but not every idea is necessarily a good idea. For
an idea to be worth pursuing, we must first determine whether the idea translates into an entrepreneurial
opportunity. Entrepreneurial opportunity is the point at which identifiable consumer demand meets the
feasibility of satisfying the requested product or service. In the field of entrepreneurship, specific criteria need
to be met to move from an idea into an opportunity. It begins with developing the right mindset--a mindset
where the aspiring entrepreneur sharpens his or her senses to consumer needs and wants, and conducts
research to determine whether the idea can become a successful new venture.

In some cases, opportunities are found through a deliberate search, especially when developing new
technologies. In other instances, opportunities emerge serendipitously, through chance. But in most cases, an
entrepreneurial opportunity comes about from recognizing a problem and making a deliberate attempt to
solve that problem. The problem may be difficult and complex, such as landing a person on Mars, or it may be
a much less complicated problem such as making a more comfortable pillow, as entrepreneur Mike Lindell did
by inventing My Pillow.

Theories of Opportunity

In the twentieth century, economist Joseph Schumpeter, as shown in Figure 5.2, stated that entrepreneurs
create value "by exploiting a new invention or, more generally, an untried technological possibility for
producing a new commodity or producing an old one in a new way, by opening up a new source of supply of
materials or a new outlet for products, by reorganizing an industry" or similar means.[2]

2 Joseph Schumpeter. Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, 3rd ed. (New York: Harper Torchbooks, Harper and Row Publishers, 1950),
132-134.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  185

Figure 5.2 Schumpeter believed that entrepreneurs create value in an economy. (credit: Joseph Alois
Schumpeter, ca. 1910: HUGB S276.90 p (2), olvwork369436. Harvard University Archives)

According to Schumpeter, entrepreneurial innovation is the disruptive force that creates and sustains
economic growth, though in the process, it can also destroy established companies, reshape industries, and
disrupt employment. He termed this force creative destruction. Schumpeter described business processes,
including the concept of downsizing, as designed to increase company efficiency. The dynamics of businesses
advances the economy and improves our lifestyle, but the changes (sometimes through technology) can make
other industries or products obsolete. For instance, Schumpeter provided the example of the railroad
changing the way companies could ship agricultural products quickly across the country by rail and using ice
"cold cars," while at the same time, destroying the old way of life for many ranchers who wrangled cattle from
one location to their intended commercial destination.

Today, we might think of the displacement of taxi drivers by ride-sharing services such as Uber and Lyft as a
modern-day example of this concept. To own and operate a New York City cab, for instance, one must buy
what is called a taxi medallion, which is basically the right to own and operate a cab. Drivers take out loans to
buy these medallions, which cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. But now, ride-sharing services have eaten
in to the taxi industry, all but destroying the value of the medallions, and the ability of taxi drivers to make the
same money they were before the popular services existed. This change has left many taxi drivers in financial
ruin.[3] Schumpeter argued that this cyclic destruction and creation was natural in a capitalist system, and that
the entrepreneur was a prime mover of economic growth. To him, the goal was to progress, and progression
starts with finding new ideas. He identified these methods for finding new business opportunities:

 1. Develop a new market for an existing product.
 2. Find a new supply of resources that would enable the entrepreneur to produce the product for less

      money.

3 Winnie Hu. "Taxi Medallions, Once a Safe Investment, Now Drag Owners Into Debt." The New York Times. September 10, 2017.
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/09/10/nyregion/new-york-taxi-medallions-uber.html
186  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

 3. Use existing technology to produce an old product in a new way.
 4. Use an existing technology to produce a new product.
 5. Finally, use new technology to produce a new product.

We can understand theories of opportunity as related to supply or demand, or as approaches to innovations in
the use of technology. The first situation is a demand opportunity, whereas the remaining situations are
supply situations. The final three incorporate technological innovations. Supply and demand are economic
terms relating to the production of goods.

Supply is the amount of a product or service produced. Demand is the consumer or user desire for the
outputs, the products, or services produced. We can use the ideas from Schumpeter to identify new
opportunities. Our focus is on identifying where the current or future supply and the current or future demand
are not being met or are not aligned, or where technological innovation can solve a problem.

More recent research has expanded on the concept of technological entrepreneurial opportunities, identifying
several areas: creating new technology, utilizing technology that has not yet been exploited, identifying and
adapting technology to satisfy the needs of a new market, or applying technology to create a new venture.[4]

Regardless of which of Schumpeter's paths entrepreneurs pursue, before investing time and money, the
business landscape requires a thorough investigation to see whether there is an entrepreneurial opportunity.
Remember, entrepreneurial opportunity is the point at which identifiable consumer demand meets the feasibility
of satisfying the requested product or service. "Feasibility" in this definition includes identifying a sizable target
market interested in the product or service that has sufficient profitability for the venture's financial success.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Chester Carlson

   Chester Carlson, a physicist, inventor, and patent attorney, spent ten years searching for a company to
   develop and manufacture a new photographic machine for office use to make copies faster and for less
   money. Carlson went on to found the XEROX Corporation, the company that made the first photocopy
   machines. Can you imagine a school or office today without a photocopy machine? The companies that
   Carlson approached with his invention missed the opportunity to invest. For Carlson, it was the
   beginning of a technology product development company that has been granted more than 50,000
   patents worldwide.

   Today, Xerox continues to innovate. Visit the innovation section of its website (https://www.xerox.com/
   en-us/innovation) and consider how one of the inventions it's developing now could spur creative
   destruction in an industry, according to Schumpeter's theory.

Identifying Opportunity

A good place to begin your entrepreneurial quest is to read as much as you can, especially with new
technology developments, even outside the field you work in. Remember that as technologies start to emerge,

4 Jamalia Behrooz, Reza MohammadKazemi, Jahangir Yadollahi Farsi, and Ali Mobini Dehkordi. "Theories of Opportunity Creation and
Effective Entrepreneurial Actions in Opportunity Creation Context." Decision Science Letters 7, no. 4 (2018): 443-454.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  187

we often do not yet understand their commercial potential. For example, microwave technology was first
applied in radars to track military submarines. But, thanks to a curious man named Percy Spencer and the
accidental melting of a peanut bar in his pocket one day while tinkering with the technology, the microwave
was born. It would take a few decades for it to be produced at a price the mass market could afford.[5]

Think of drones, too. When they were invented, the multiple uses for this technology were not yet identified.
Now, drone technology is being used by real estate firms, package delivery services, agriculture, underwater
search and scientific research, security, surveillance, and more. Being tuned in to new experiences and
information can lead to identifying opportunities. Entrepreneur Fred Smith found a system to solve the
problem of overnight package delivery in founding Federal Express.[6] As a college student, he wrote a paper
for an economics class where he discussed his business idea. He earned only a C on his paper, by the way. He
received his bachelor's degree in 1966 and went on to found Federal Express a few years later, which, in 2019,
generated almost $70 billion in revenue.[7] Prior to starting Federal Express, Smith was in the US Marine Corps
serving in Vietnam where he observed the military's logistics systems.[8] This is where he honed his interest in
shipping products while in the military. Many entrepreneurs start their business after working for someone
else and seeing a better way to operate that business, and then start their own competing business.

Note that entrepreneurs need to be careful about starting competing businesses. See Telling Your
Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea and Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues for
information on noncompete clauses and agreements. Indeed, some entrepreneurs, like Smith, conduct
research as an idea percolates, paying attention to new experiences and information to further advance their
idea into an entrepreneurial opportunity. However, they must ensure that the existing product, service, or
business process is not covered by any active and protected intellectual property (patent, trademark,
copyright, or trade secret), as discussed in Creativity, Innovation, and Invention and Fundamentals of Resource
Planning.

Identifying consumer needs may be as simple as listening to customer comments such as "I wish my virtual
orders could be delivered more quickly." or "I can never seem to find a comfortable pillow that helps me sleep
better." You can also observe customer behavior to gather new ideas. If you are already in business, customer
feedback can be a simple form of market research.

When purchasing an existing business or franchise, the process is a bit different. The first step will usually be
searching for a business that suits your experience, personal preferences, and interests. You will still want to
conduct research to understand the industry, the local market, and the business itself. Then, you will begin to
examine all available company financial data. If purchasing a franchise, you may want to contact other
franchise owners and discuss their experience in working with the franchisor.

5 Matt Blitz. "The Amazing True Story of How the Microwave Was Invented by Accident." Popular Mechanics. February 24, 2016.
https://www.popularmechanics.com/technology/gadgets/a19567/how-the-microwave-was-invented-by-accident/
6 "Success Story - Fred Smith | Federal Express." Daily10Minutes. n.d. http://www.dailytenminutes.com/2017/09/success-story-fred-smith-
federal-express.html
7 "FedEx Corp. Reports Fourth Quarter and Full-Year Earnings." Federal Express. June 25, 2019. http://investors.fedex.com/news-and-events/
investor-news/news-release-details/2019/FedEx-Corp-Reports-Fourth-Quarter-and-Full-Year-Earnings/default.aspx
8 Vance H. Trimble. Inventing FedEx: The Cruel Ordeal (2012). Vance Trimble. Overnight Success: Federal Express and Frederick Smith, Its Renegade
Creator (1993).
188  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     How Spanx Founder Developed Resilience and Persistence[9]

     Another entrepreneur, Sara Blakely (Figure 5.3), admits that for the seven years she spent selling fax
     machines in the 1990s, many times, she became so frightened of approaching sales prospects that she
     would burst into tears and then have to drive around the block to collect herself before she could
     complete the next sales call.

   Figure 5.3 (a) Spanx, a new product that was created to solve an everyday problem, was invented by
   (b) Entrepreneur Sara Blakely (far right). (credit (a): "Spanx" by Mike Mozart/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit (b):
   "Ed Bastian and Sara Blakely at the Fast Company Innovation Festival" by Nan Palmero/Flickr, CC B 2.0)

   One day in 1998, she was putting on pants and looked in the mirror and did not like how she looked. So,
   Blakely came up with the idea to wear a pair of control-top pantyhose underneath--but she cut the feet
   out. Blakely liked the look and comfort of the footless hose and decided to patent her own body-shaping
   footless version. Just a few years later, Blakely founded her company, Spanx, Incorporated, which since
   has gone on to launch more than 200 styles of body-shaping garments. This is another case of an
   entrepreneurial company born out of a simple way to solve an everyday problem.
   Blakely is also a master of resilience, which is a quality of many successful entrepreneurs. When she was
   sixteen years old, right around the time her parents separated, she witnessed a good friend get hit and
   killed by a car. Her father gave her a set of motivational tapes to listen to: How to Be a No-Limit Person by
   Wayne Dyer. She found the tapes so helpful that she memorized all of them and still gives copies of the
   tapes as gifts.
   As a child, her father encouraged his children to respect the valuable lessons we can learn through
   failure. Obviously, it helped Blakely at a young age develop persistence and determination. That
   persistence and determination helped her develop a business idea into a billion-dollar enterprise.

      · Was Blakely's idea a demand or a supply idea?
      · What industry information would Blakely need as she was researching this idea?

9 Teri Evans. "Sara Blakely on Resilience." Entrepreneur. March 21, 2011. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/219367

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                                                      189

When researching supply and demand, you should also consider political factors. For example, changes in tax
laws can inform decisions. One example is a tax credit that encourages alternative energy use, such as electric
or hybrid vehicles. For 2019, the IRS tax credit is between $2,500 and $7,500 per new electric vehicle, with a
concurrent phase-out of the plug-in electric vehicle tax credit. Changes in the tax code can therefore influence
buyer behavior or the demand for vehicles. Another example is the Residential Energy Efficient Property Credit
of up to $4,000 for solar electronic appliances such as solar water heaters and solar panels and for small wind
turbines, through the end of 2021.[10] Tax incentives do not usually last more than a few years (the tax subsidy
for corn farmers to produce ethanol, an ingredient in automotive fuels, is a notable exception due to heavy
lobbying by the farming industry), so it is important that entrepreneurs do not rely on these incentives as a
permanent "pillar" of their value proposition and business model.

Let's say you have an interest in machinery and art. Taking these two areas of interest, and knowing about this
tax credit, you recognize that you have the talents to create artistic backyard wind turbines to create energy
for a homeowner. Of course, you will still need to determine whether this is merely an idea, or if the conditions
are in place to move forward in translating this idea into an entrepreneurial opportunity.

Drivers of Opportunity

Some recent drivers for change in the entrepreneurial space include new funding options, technological
advancements, globalization, and industry-specific economics.

  · Increased access to capital through social media sources like crowdsourcing (see the chapter on Problem
      Solving and Need Recognition Techniques for a more detailed discussion of crowdsourcing) is having a
      significant impact on entrepreneurship in that it enables underserved people and communities--such as
      women, veterans, African Americans, and Native Americans, who otherwise might not be able to start and
      own a business--to become entrepreneurs.

  · Technological advancements continue to provide new opportunities, ranging from drones to artificial
      intelligence, advancements in medical care, and access to learning about new technology. For example,
      drone technology is being used to map and photograph real estate, deliver products to customers, and
      provide aerial security and many other services. Cell phones have spawned many new business
      opportunities for a wide range of cell phone accessories and related products, ranging from cell phone
      cases to apps that help make our cell phones faster for business and personal use.

  · Increased globalization drives entrepreneurship by allowing importing and exporting to flourish.
      Globalization also helps spread ideas for new products and services to a world market instead of a local or
      regional market. Combined with the Internet and computer technology, even small businesses can
      compete and sell their products around the globe.

  · Economic factors could include a strong economy that fuels other businesses. For example, growth in the
      housing market fuels growth for many housing-related products and services, ranging from interior
      decorating to landscaping as well as furniture, appliances, and moving services.

David Pridham, CEO of the patent advisory board and transaction firm Dominion Harbor Group in Dallas, cites
six reasons that current conditions are excellent for startups:

 1. Venture capital investment, which you will learn more about in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting,
      has surged to the highest level ever, totaling $148 billion in 2018.

 2. The concern over patent protection is improving with better trade protection of intellectual property
      rights.

10 "Tax Credits for Energy Efficient Home Improvements." EFile.com. January 24, 2019. https://www.efile.com/tax-credit/energy-credit/
190  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

 3. Artificial intelligence could be a tremendous opportunity based on a McKinsey report projection,
      estimating artificial intelligence to become a $13 trillion industry by 2025.

 4. The explosive growth in freelance workers has been a boon to startups and small businesses.
 5. Another hot sector is technology-driven advancements such as self-driving vehicles.
 6. Intellectual property now accounts for 38.2 percent of our total Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in the

      United States. That totals $6 trillion per year, more than any other nation's GDP except for China.[11]

In addition, Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) Financial Group surveyed new startup businesses in 2017 and found that
95 percent indicated they believe that business conditions will be the same or better. In addition, 83 percent
plan to increase their workforce, and 24 percent found fundraising not to be a challenge.[12] These numbers
represent the highest levels of optimism among entrepreneurs over the most recent five-year period.

Some other economic indicators favor entrepreneurship. According to the 2019 Goldman Sachs Economic
Outlook, consumer confidence is up, business confidence is up, interest rates remain reasonable and steady,
more people are working, and wages are higher.[13] When the economy is strong, there are generally more
opportunities available and more potential customers with money to purchase your products and services; but
of course, there are no guarantees.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   There are debates about so-called kill zones--markets that the tech giants like Facebook and Amazon
   control through aggressive anticompetitive tactics. Some argue that these zones have frightened off
   investors and stifled competition. But others maintain that investment in young tech startups is as strong
   as ever and that the creative effects of big tech companies outweigh their destructive forces.

   Read this article on how tech giants make it difficult for startups (https://openstax.org/l/52TechGiant1)
   from The Economist and then this blog post refuting the idea that tech giants kill startups
   (https://openstax.org/l/52TechGiant2) from The American Enterprise Institute and see what you think
   about the issue.

 5.2 Researching Potential Business Opportunities

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe opportunity screening
  · Identify common sources of research data
  · Explain how to research and verify business opportunities
  · Identify industry and consumer sources of opportunities

In order to discover how reasonable your business idea is, you need to research many aspects of the concept.

11 David Pridham. "Entrepreneurs: Here's Good News for 2018." Forbes. January 10, 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/davidpridham/2018/
01/10/entrepreneurs-heres-good-news-for-2018/#18f02aef6659
12 Silicon Valley Bank. 2019 Startup Outlook Report. 2019. https://www.svb.com/startup-outlook-report-2019
13 Goldman Sachs. 2019 Outlook: The Home Stretch. US Economics Analyst. November 18, 2018. https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/
pages/outlook-2019/us-outlook/report.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  191

Opportunity screening is the process by which entrepreneurs evaluate innovative product ideas, strategies,
and marketing trends. Focusing on the viability of financial resources, the skills of the entrepreneurial team,
and the competition, this screening helps determine the potential for success in pursuing the idea and can
help refine planning.

Common Sources of Research Data

As you embark on researching whether your idea is viable, a good place to start is with the sources
recommended by the US Small Business Administration. These include US Census data
(https://www.census.gov/academy), which provides insight into the population in your market area, such as
the metropolitan statistical area data, as well as statistics on the economy and trade. For most entrepreneurs,
research will also include asking potential customers, specifically your target customers, questions about
products they like and don't like, how a product or service could be improved, how the customer buying
experience could be improved, and even where customers might go to purchase products and services instead
of your business.
Small business marketers can use several no-cost or low-cost methods, including surveys, questionnaires,
focus groups, and in-depth interviews. Of course, you do not need to be an expert in these areas. Business
assistance is available to you from the Small Business Administration, the Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE), and your local Small Business Development Center. You may also have a local college or university
business department that provides assistance to local area businesses.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The Small Business Administration website (https://openstax.org/l/52SBA2) and SCORE website
   (https://openstax.org/l/52SCORE2) are rich resources of information for entrepreneurs.

You will likely begin with secondary research--that is, data that are already available through some published
source. There may be articles, research reports, or reliable Internet sources where you can research
information about your industry, products, and customers. If you have the funds, you can also purchase
research reports from firms that specialize in gathering research on certain topics or products. Secondary
research has the advantage of being quickly available. However, secondary research often is not specific
enough to provide all the details you need to know about your idea. For example, secondary research (this is
research that has been developed from primary sources that is almost as useful as primary, direct research)
might report how often consumers purchase shampoo, where they purchase shampoo, and what brands of
shampoo they purchase. But if you want to understand the details of how people shampoo--for example,
whether they shampoo then repeat, use a separate conditioner, or use a combination shampoo/conditioner
product--then you would want to conduct primary research. Primary research is needed when secondary
research does not address the questions you want to explore while investigating your business idea.

Primary research gathers data that do not yet exist. The information is specific to the business, product, or
consumer. It takes time and money to obtain primary data. Some of the methods used to gather primary
research data include developing a survey questionnaire, using secret shoppers, or using focus groups. Survey
questionnaires can be simple, such as a customer comment card included on a receipt, or extensive, including
dozens of detailed questions. Secret shoppers can be used by hiring a shopping service or using friends, family
192                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

members, and even your customers. One local small business owner gave a friend gift certificates that could
be used at his ice cream business in exchange for the friend reporting back on product quality, service, and
other key issues.

Researching and Verifying the Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Whether you start your own business, buy an existing business, or purchase a franchise, researching the
industry, your target market, and examining the economic and funding options are all part of performing due
diligence. Due diligence is the process of taking reasonable steps to verify that your decisions are based on
well-researched and accurate information. It means thoroughly researching potential pursuits, asking detailed
questions, and verifying information.

Different industries have different meanings for due diligence. For example, in the legal industry, due
diligence involves understanding the terms of a transaction and contract. In business finance, due diligence
refers to raising capital or the work involved in merger and acquisition transactions. In the entrepreneurship
field, research is necessary to verify whether the idea is really an opportunity, considering the entire process of
starting the venture and funding the venture.

One of the more common questions entrepreneurs must ask is whether now is a good time to start a business.
This question of timing is addressed in the investigation to determine whether the idea is merely interesting or
fits the criteria of being an entrepreneurial opportunity.

An idea can move to a recognized opportunity when the following criteria are met. Figure 5.4 shows these
three factors:

  · Significant market demand
  · Significant market structure and size
  · Significant margins and resources to support the venture's success
Significant market demand means that the idea has value by providing a solution to a problem that the target
market is willing to purchase. This value can result from a new product or service that fills an unmet need, a
lower price, improved benefits, or greater financial or emotional value. This value can also result from
capitalizing on "nonconsumption." For example, in the 1980s, the Disney Corporation realized that it was
losing an opportunity to entice visitors to come to their theme parks from 9 p.m. to 9 a.m. when they were
closed. So the company started having "school nights" when schools and students could use the parks at a
discount.

Significant market structure and size involve growth potential and drivers of demand for the product or
service. Barriers to entry are manageable, meaning that entering the industry or creating a new industry is not
exceptionally difficult. If the industry already exists, there must be room within the industry for your venture to
gain market share by providing a value that creates a competitive advantage.

Significant margins and resources involve the potential for achieving profit margins at a high-enough level
that the work of starting the venture (including the entrepreneur's time and energy) is worth the risks
involved. If the operating costs are too high and the profit margin is too low, it is important to analyze whether
the idea is truly feasible. Significant margins also include the capital requirements--how much money is
needed to start the venture--as well as the technical requirements, the complexity of the distribution system,
and similar resources.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  193

Figure 5.4 When these criteria are met, an idea is recognized as an opportunity. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Determining whether an idea has significant market demand, significant market structure and size, and
significant margins and resources to support the venture's success represents the most basic concerns when
screening a business idea as an entrepreneurial opportunity.

Keep in mind that these three criteria are based partially on creating a for-profit venture. If your
entrepreneurial venture is focused on solving a societal problem, you want to know that the identified
problem is realistic and that there is a need for solving it. In a for-profit venture, significant market structure
and margins relate to the expectation that the venture will have significant sales with significant profit margins
to sustain and grow. There are also examples of profitable entrepreneurial ventures, like YouTube, that did not
have any sales, but there was still an expectation that harvesting or selling YouTube would result in a
significant profit for the entrepreneurial team. You can read more about Google's purchase of YouTube at
https://www.theringer.com/2016/10/10/16042354/google-youtube-acquisition-10-years-tech-
deals-69fdbe1c8a06.

After confirming that a business idea is an entrepreneurial opportunity, the entrepreneur should ask more
detailed questions in the next phase of screening the business. Here are some examples:

  · Would other people value your product or service?
  · Does your product or service solve a significant problem?
  · Is the market for the product definable/specific?
  · Does the market have unique needs or expectations that align with your entrepreneurial opportunity?
  · Is the timing right to start the venture?
  · Are there infrastructure or supporting resources that need to be commercialized or created prior to your

      launch of the venture?
  · What resources are needed to start the venture?
194                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

  · What is the competitive advantage your venture offers within the industry and is this competitive
      advantage sustainable?

  · What is the timeline between starting the venture and the first sale?
  · How long before the venture becomes profitable and do you have the resources to support this timeline?
A good starting point in your opportunity screening research is to begin learning about the demographics of
the market you are targeting (your target market). Demographics are statistical factors of a population, such
as race, age, and gender.
The government collects census data demographics,[14] which can provide a snapshot of the population in your
city or town. Census data include the total population, a breakdown of the population by age, gender, race,
and income, and some other useful data.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The US Census website (https://openstax.org/l/52USCensus) and your local chamber of commerce
   (https://openstax.org/l/52ChamberComm) can help you learn more about the demographics of your
   target market or region.

For example, if you were considering opening a new ice cream store with unique flavors preferred by children,
census data could tell you the number of children living in the area, the ratio of boys to girls, their ages, and
the general income levels of the families in town. The census data would help you determine the size of the
market and potential target market, local market growth, income levels, and key demographics that might fit
the potential customer profile. Of course, there is other information you might want to collect, such as the
percentage of the population that had lactose intolerance. If you found that a significant portion of your
market was lactose intolerant, this could be your identified opportunity: You could create a lactose-free ice
cream store or expand with a variety of lactose-free flavors. The census data also help identify where to locate
your entrepreneurial venture. For example, if your lactose-free ice cream was expensive because of the
necessary ingredients, you would not want to open your store in a low-income area.

There is a vast amount of data and information available through the Internet that can support your success in
making informed decisions as you explore the feasibility of opening a successful venture. Or you can purchase
more detailed consumer data through providers such as Claritas Research, which gathers information on
demographics, consumer lifestyles, attitudes, and behaviors (https://claritas360.claritas.com/
mybestsegments/?ID=70). For many small business startups that cannot afford sophisticated research data,
the entrepreneur will probably have to rely on census data along with information that the local economic
development council is able to provide.

14 United States Census Bureau. https://www.census.gov/
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  195

   WORK IT OUT

   T-Shirt Startup

   Create your own t-shirt line to target your classmates.

      · What would be the theme?
      · How much would you charge?
      · Where would you sell the shirts?
      · What are the expected sales of the business?
      · What are the resources needed to get started?

After analyzing demographic data, the entrepreneur can then develop and conduct some basic research,
which could range from observing customers to shopping at potential competitors. Entrepreneurs can also
uncover business opportunities by asking questions of, and listening to, their customers, if they are working
within the industry or looking for new entrepreneurial opportunities with a similar target market. Sometimes
an easy and inexpensive customer survey can uncover problems and opportunities. Entrepreneurs can also
gather information using their social media accounts and customer sales records.

For example, imagine a men's clothing store in Denver that maintained a detailed customer database that
they used primarily to order the colors and sizes their customers were most likely to purchase. A marketing
consultant begins researching customer data and finds a number of former customers who had not shopped
at the store for a year or more. The consultant uncovers some lapses in service that had cost the store
thousands of dollars in sales. Store management, working with the information from the consultant, develops
a direct marketing campaign that helps bring back former customers and adds new customers, resulting in a
substantial sales increase.

The lesson here is that research is important at all stages of the business--before you start your business and
consistently thereafter. Markets change as new people move in or out of an area, styles and preferences
change over time, and new technology can radically impact what customers want to buy. We all know of
businesses like Blockbuster or Xerox that ignored evolving technology, to the detriment of their success.
Constantly tracking changes in the external environment and competitive arena is an ongoing activity that
supports the continued success of the venture.

A popular tool for market analysis is a product from Claritas Research called Potential Rating Index for Zip
Markets (PRIZM), which characterizes census data according to certain lifestyle traits, even down to the
neighborhood level. As an example, let's see how PRIZM can help us better understand the consumer market
of a small town in Massachusetts. Oxford, Massachusetts (zip code 01540), has a population of 11,653, with
slightly more half being female; a median income of $70,444; and a median age of 42.3 years. PRIZM data give
us a better understanding of consumers than census data do in Oxford by examining the five dominant
lifestyle segments from within PRIZM's sixty-six segments. The PRIZM segments are based on socioeconomic
rank determined by characteristics such as income, education, occupation, and home value. A thorough
analysis of available data could suggest the most likely products and sources consumers in this zip code
market would likely purchase.

Entrepreneurs might also obtain data from economic development agencies, the local chamber of commerce,
the state small business development center, or industry associations. Of course, lots of data can be found
196  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

with a good search on your computer. Your university reference librarian can tell you what resources they
have available and which resources would best fit your research question(s) and area of focus for your idea.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Elon Musk's SpaceX

   There have been many instances in which products have been promised but fail in their implementation.
   Space travel--think Elon Musk's venture SpaceX (Figure 5.5)--is an example of a bold concept that is still
   in the feasibility phase. Is it even possible to send humans to Mars? This is an extreme but interesting
   example for considering product feasibility.
   Another application of the SpaceX technology is to develop satellite-based Internet access that can
   provide service to billions of people who do not already have Internet service.[15] However, the project will
   require new satellite networks, and it may take twenty years to fully develop.

      · What short-term and long-term considerations are necessary in the project?
      · As the concept will take twenty years of satellite development, how can technological changes be

          incorporated into the development of the idea?
      · Given the description of an entrepreneurial opportunity, does this idea fit that definition?

   Figure 5.5 SpaceX operations are centered in these headquarters. (credit: "Iridium-4 Mission
   (25557986177)" by Official SpaceX Photos/Wikimedia Commons, CC0 1.0)

What should you do if your idea does not fit these criteria--significant market demand, market structure and
size, and margins and resources--and your passion to develop the idea into an opportunity and new venture
is still strong? This is also part of the entrepreneurial process. You, as the lead entrepreneur, are charged with
the task of identifying the obstacles to turning your idea into an opportunity and what actions are necessary to
overcome these. This could mean adjusting the idea, adding new features, or even removing some features.
Adding new features should focus on increasing the value or benefit offered by the product or service, or

15 Aaron Pressman. "Elon Musk's SpaceX May Fuel $1 Trillion Space Business Boom." Fortune. October 12, 2017. http://fortune.com/2017/10/
12/elon-musk-spacex-morgan-stanley/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  197

creating a tighter alignment with the needs of the target market. Removing features could decrease the
production costs or even the complexity in using the product.

As part of your research to verify whether your idea is truly an entrepreneurial opportunity, researching your
state's laws and regulations is essential. Conduct an Internet search for your state's business regulations
applicable to your business. You will need to comply with these laws, as well as purchase any licenses and
permits necessary for your business. You should also check with your local or county government for
additional local regulations, including zoning and signage laws. Remember that laws vary by state, so what is
legal in one state may not be legal in another, or there might be stricter regulations. For emerging industries,
the regulations and laws can fluctuate as industries evolve. This is especially true for emerging industries such
as the sale and distribution of medical marijuana.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Getting a License or Permit to Start a Business

   When starting a business, be sure that you have all the required licenses and permits, keeping in mind
   that you may need licenses from federal, state, county, and local government agencies. You can start
   with the SBA website at https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-business/apply-licenses-
   permits#section-header-0. Another helpful resource is Fundera, an online financial resource that
   provides information about obtaining business licenses in all fifty states and links to essential
   government organizations for each state: https://www.fundera.com/blog/business-license. And try
   nav.com as well: https://www.nav.com/blog/266-business-licensing-by-state-5008/.

   States regulate a larger number of business activities than the federal government. Business activities
   that are regulated locally include auctions, construction, dry cleaning, farming, plumbing, restaurants,
   retail, and vending.

      · Select a business in a regulated industry and research what would be needed to start the venture in
          a specific locale.

Many estimates indicate that half of all new businesses will no longer exist within the first five years, but good
research can help you avoid your business becoming a statistic.[16] On the surface, this fact can be daunting.
However, there are many reasons why a business no longer exists that can reflect a positive outcome, such as
the sale of a business or a merger with another business. Another example is when an entrepreneur
intentionally starts a venture knowing that there is a short-term timeline for success, with the expectation that
new technology will replace the gap that the venture originally filled. Most entrepreneurs are not big risk-
takers but understand that there are no guarantees in starting a new business venture. Instead,
entrepreneurs tend to take calculated business risks based on the best research they can gather. At some
point, however, the entrepreneur recognizes that despite all the good research they have gathered, they still
need to take a leap of faith when starting their new venture.

16 US Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy. Frequently Asked Questions about Small Business. August 2018. https://www.sba.gov/
sites/default/files/advocacy/Frequently-Asked-Questions-Small-Business-2018.pdf
198                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

     WHAT CAN YOU DO?

     Why Small Businesses Fail

     Why do half or more of new small businesses no longer exist after the first five years? In many cases, it is
     failure of the business. The Small Business Institute at Thomas College in Maine has cited factors in Table
     5.1 as the most common reasons for small business failures. Many business development agencies have
     compiled similar lists.

                      Ten Reasons for Small Business Failure

          Reason                                                        Description
     Low sales
                      Entrepreneurs may have overestimated sales, assuming they could take sales
                      away from established competitors.

     Lack of          Running a business is hard, and a new business can be especially challenging, as it
     experience       is difficult to prepare adequately for the unexpected.

     Insufficient     When calculating how much money you will need to start your new business
     capital          venture, be sure to account for the time it will take before your business breaks
                      even and be sure also to allow for some contingency funds for when the
                      unexpected happens.

     Poor location    For some types of businesses, location is critical. Of course, location may be less
                      important for a home-based business and not at all important for an Internet
                      business.

     Poor inventory   Too much inventory results in the business becoming cash-strapped and unable to
     management       buy advertising or other important goods and services.

     Overinvestment   Especially when starting a business, it is usually less expensive to lease or
     in fixed assets  purchase used equipment, thereby saving cash for meeting operational expenses.

     Poor credit      Start your venture small and limit the amount of money you need to borrow. Work
     arrangement      with your banker from the beginning by sharing your business plan and vision for
     management       the business with the banker and, most important, show that you are proactive in
                      planning for when you will need to borrow money.

     Table 5.1 Understanding some of the factors that lead to business failure can help you be aware of those
     as you research your idea and opportunity.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                         199

                 Ten Reasons for Small Business Failure

Reason                                             Description

Personal use of  The owner should pay him/herself a minimal salary and not dip into business
business funds   funds. If the business has done well, the owner will earn additional funds at the
                 end of the year.

Unexpected       Surprisingly, some businesses fail because the business owner cannot manage
growth           growth. Growing a new venture, especially if the growth is at a higher rate than
                 expected, can create surprising challenges. For example, if creating a product, you
                 need to consider the capacity of the factory where you are producing the product.
                 If you are at 100 percent capacity and your orders increase, you will need to think
                 about what actions can support this increase in demand. If you cannot meet the
                 demand, you will have unhappy customers and negative publicity that will reflect
                 negatively on your leadership and managerial skills. Your lack of planning for this
                 surge in sales may open opportunities for someone else to start a competing
                 business.

Competition      Many small business owners underestimate their competition. Remember, if there
                 is money to be made, there will be competition! Larger competitors can beat you
                 every day of the week on price, so find another way to challenge competitors.

Table 5.1 Understanding some of the factors that lead to business failure can help you be aware of those
as you research your idea and opportunity.

  · Given the preceding reasons for small business failure, what can be done to head off such failure?
  · Why is it necessary to assemble a team of professional advisors to address financial, personnel,

      legal, accounting, and other business issues?
  · Why is it vital to identify suppliers and personnel to be able to provide a product or service?
  · What factors are important when considering whether a product should be manufactured internally

      or outsourced to a third party?

Let us analyze, as an example, opportunity recognition displayed by a company called Sweet Beginnings. Eddie
Griffin, Kevin Greenwood, and Tiffany Chen were all residents of Chicago who were seeking jobs and a fresh
start on life after serving time in prison. They wanted a chance to rebuild their lives and the ability to support
themselves financially. Unfortunately, the odds were against them in their North Lawndale community: There
was a 40 percent unemployment rate, 57 percent of residents had criminal histories, the average annual
income was only $25,000, and the area was known for drugs, sex workers, and gangs. Statistically, they were
destined to return to the criminal justice system.

But fate intervened in the form of Brenda Palms Barber, who knew all of these statistics. Palms Barber was the
Executive Director of the North Lawndale Employment Network (LEN). When employers refused to hire Griffin,
Greenwood, and Chen, whom she had coached, she researched what it would take to open various businesses,
200  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

including a temp agency, a landscaping company, and a delivery service, with the intent to offer employment
to LEN clients. A recommendation from a board member's connection led her to consider, of all things, raising
bees. It was not until she learned that the ins and outs of the apiary profession are passed on by word of
mouth that she felt it was ideal for her clients who often faced learning challenges due to limited academic
experience.

In 2005, Palms Barber founded Sweet Beginnings, a social enterprise that employs former inmates and
teaches them job skills by running an apiary business directly in the heart of North Lawndale. The Sweet
Beginnings brand, Bee Love (shown in Figure 5.6), sells honey and honey-infused skincare products in airports,
hotels, and supermarkets, including Whole Foods. Palms Barber recognized that the skills her potential
employees learned in the streets were transferrable to running and managing the business.[17],[18],[19]

Figure 5.6 Bee Love products are part of a social entrepreneurship venture. Founder Palms Barber
researched the opportunity carefully and has found success. (credit: "Bee Love" by Alisha McCarthy/Flickr, CC
BY 4.0)

Palms Barber also realized that a product gap existed between customer needs and products offered. She
identified the niche market of customers who wanted all-natural skin care products and liked the idea of
purchasing them from a social enterprise. Bee Love positioned itself for success as an appealing, high-end
natural product to environmentally conscious consumers willing to pay a premium for it.
Palms Barber recognized an opportunity when she identified the societal problem of employment for people
who had experienced incarceration. In seeking solutions to this problem, she encountered roadblocks from
employers' resistance to hiring ex-prison inmates. She then researched other possible solutions including
business startups. The idea of raising bees at first seemed an unusual solution to the problem of employment
for her unique clients. In her due diligence, she identified a gap between customer preferences for all-natural
skin care products and currently available offerings. Combining these ideas resulted in the opening of Bee
Love. The fits between the clientele of ex-inmates, apiary, and skin care products supported the opening of
this unique venture. Exploring the gaps was part of the process of finding the right solution and realizing that
the idea of starting a business to support ex-inmates was an actual opportunity worth developing into a new
venture.

17 "Sweet Beginnings." North Lawndale Employment Network. n.d. https://www.nlen.org/sweetbeginnings
18 BeeLove. www.beelovebuzz.com
19 Leigh Buchanan. "Finding Jobs for Ex-Offenders." Inc. May 2011. https://www.inc.com/magazine/20110501/social-entrepreneurs-finding-
jobs-for-ex-offenders.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  201

Industry Sources of Opportunity

Your research process should include learning everything you can about the industry you plan to enter. This
will help you to identify opportunities. An excellent source for industry information is the business reference
section of your college library. Industry averages are available in reference books and can also be found at
Dun & Bradstreet/Hoovers (http://www.hoovers.com/industry-analysis.html). The industry analysis contains
important information including a brief description of the industry and its characteristics, the competitive
landscape, along with products, operations, and technology.

Industry sources reveal knowledge about a specific industry from the perspective of identifying unmet needs
or areas for improvement within that industry. For example, Airbnb reshaped the hotel industry by connecting
travelers with property owners, so that the travelers could rent the property when the owner was not using it.
As Airbnb has grown, the company has made improvements to their offerings in meeting the needs of the
traveler's demand based on property location and in categorizing the supply (the homeowner's property) for
increased efficiency, meeting the needs of both the property owner and the traveler. Researching specific
industries from supply and demand perspectives, and noticing unused supplies, as we saw in the Airbnb
example, also applies to other industries, such as a sandwich shop. What happens to the unsold bread at the
end of the day when there is an excess supply? For Stacy Madison and her pita sandwich food cart, unsold
bread presented an opportunity to create pita chips by turning an oversupply into sliced and seasoned pita
chips.[20]

Almost every industry is worth investigating from the perspective of identifying unused resources or extra
resources that could be restructured for what are known as a shared economy or a gig economy. A shared
economy considers that there are times when an asset in not in use. This down time when the asset is not in
use provides an opening for someone else to use that asset, like Airbnb. Other companies, like Uber, Lyft,
DoorDash, and Postmates, support the gig economy in aligning a person's choices for when they want to work
with the flow of the work demand. A gig economy is an open or fluid market system with temporary positions
made up of independent short-term workers. In these examples, we can see the alignment of supply and
demand. The entrepreneurial opportunity happens in providing a platform to assist in connecting the supply
and demand.

The tech sector, for example, is continually adapting to change. Items such as 3D printers and mobile devices
are making the technology landscape expand. As new products come to market, the need for applications and
increased efficiency abound. Several other industries are experiencing growth, including health care and
nutrition. According to Global Market Insights (2019), the clinical nutrition market will exceed $87,530.7 million
dollars by 2025.[21] This same source reported that this industry was valued at over $10,562.7 million in 2018, a
significant increase over the previous seven years. Drivers in this industry include sedentary lifestyles and
related health issues, such as obesity. The result of these societal changes is an increase in clinical nutrition
products and home healthcare services. According to business management author, professor, and corporate
consultant, Peter Drucker, entrepreneurs excel at finding and developing potential business opportunities
created by social, technological, and cultural changes.

20 "Stacy's Pita Chips: Stacy Madison." How I Built This with Guy Raz. National Public Radio (NPR). May 27, 2019. https://www.npr.org/2019/05/
24/726755480/stacys-pita-chips-stacy-madison
21 Global Market Insights. "The Clinical Nutrition Market to Surpass $87,530.7 Million by 2025: Global Market Insights, Inc." Cision PR
Newswire. March 5, 2019. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/the-clinical-nutrition-market-to-surpass-87-530-7-million-by-2025-global-
market-insights-inc-300806622.html
202  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Consumer Sources of Opportunity

Consumer sources of opportunities relate to changes in our society, such as new habits or behaviors brought
about by exposure to new information. For example, most people feel the pressure related to having less free
or unrestricted time. Figure 5.7 tracks the average number of hours worked by country per worker per year.

Figure 5.7 This graph compares average annual hours worked by country. It does not distinguish between
full-time and part-time employment. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The International Labour Organization and Bureau of Labor Statistics report that most people in the United
States work more than forty hours per week, work significantly more hours per year than workers in many
other countries, and are vastly more productive than they were half a century ago.[22]
Another consideration is tracking where our time is spent during commuting. The average commute time in
major cities in the United States is twenty-six minutes, ranging from thirty-eight minutes in New York City to
the shortest commute time of twenty minutes in Buffalo, New York.[23] When we add in commute times, work
hours, and other required activities like sleeping and eating, we find that people struggle to find time for
relaxation and personal activities. This large trend leads to recognizing that our working population in the
United States and other countries would value novel approaches to completing tasks and making life simpler.
For instance, several businesses have looked at making life easier and saving the consumer time, such as

22 G.E. Miller. "The US Is the Most Overworked Developed Nation in the World." 20SomethingFinance. January 2, 2018.
https://20somethingfinance.com/american-hours-worked-productivity-vacation/
23 Jeff Desjardins. "Visualizing the Average Commute Time in US States and Cities." Visual Capitalist. April 1, 2018.
https://www.visualcapitalist.com/average-commute-u-s-states-cities/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  203

Amazon's One-Click-Checkout, grocery delivery, and product recommendations. Other examples include
mobile businesses like pet grooming that come to your home, or diaper delivery services that pick up used
diapers, wash and dry them, and return clean diapers to your home. Understanding consumer needs and
problems opens the possibility of creating a business that addresses those needs or problems.

Another consumer trend is the demand for affordable housing. One solution involves offering more affordable
"tiny homes" that make home ownership more accessible (Figure 5.8).[24] As one entrepreneurial opportunity
materializes into a new product, spin-off ideas may also arise. The tiny home concept attracted the attention of
groups that assist homeless veterans. The Veterans Community Project in Kansas City, has developed a
community of forty-nine tiny homes for homeless veterans and the project is so successful that more than 500
cities around the country are building tiny home housing projects for veterans there.[25]

Figure 5.8 These tiny homes cost as little as $10,000 to build and come complete with one or two bedrooms,
a small kitchen, and bath. (credit: photo provided by Veterans Community Project)

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Vestergaard

   Vestergaard has a mission to prevent diseases, especially for vulnerable populations around the world,
   and to contribute to a healthier and more sustainable planet through good actions.
   LifeStraw is a product that Vestergaard launched in 2005, making water safe to drink in areas where
   clean water is not readily available and redefining beliefs around safe drinking water. LifeStraw uses a
   combination of a hollow fiber membrane, a filtration process, and in some products, a second filtration
   process to remove chemicals like chlorine, lead, and pesticides.

24 Linda Federico-O'Murchu. "Tiny Houses: A Big Idea to End Homelessness." NBC News. February 26, 2014. https://www.nbcnews.com/
business/real-estate/tiny-houses-big-idea-end-homelessness-n39316
25 Lauren Stewart. "Community Is Building Tiny Homes for Homeless Veterans in 500 Different Cities." Do You Remember? 2018.
https://doyouremember.com/87151/community-builds-tiny-homes-for-homeless-veterans
204                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

     · Apply the concepts of supply and demand in describing LifeStraw from the perspective of an
        entrepreneurial opportunity.

     · What are three drivers that support the creation of LifeStraw?

 5.3 Competitive Analysis

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand the elements of a competitive analysis
  · Describe tools you can use to refine and focus your planning (three circles, SWOT, PEST)
  · Recognize social media's role in saving time and money on research
  · Understand how a business model helps determine the feasibility of an opportunity

Conducting a competitive analysis helps you focus your idea and identify your unique selling proposition and
competitive advantage.

Competitive Analysis

A competitive analysis should provide the entrepreneur with information about how competitors market their
business and ways to penetrate the market by entry through product or service gaps in areas that your
competitors do not serve or do not serve well. More importantly, competitive analysis helps the entrepreneur
develop a competitive edge that will help create a sustainable revenue stream. For example, a big company
like Walmart primarily competes on price. Small companies typically cannot compete on price, since the
internal efficiencies and volume sales available to large corporations like Walmart are not available to small
companies, but they may be able to compete successfully against Walmart on some other important variable
such as better service, better-quality products, or unique buying experiences.

When preparing the competitive analysis, be sure to identify your competitors by product line or service
segment. For an entrepreneur, this activity can be difficult when the industry does not yet exist. In the case of
Bee Love, Palms Barber didn't have direct competitors, but she did have related competitors of traditional skin
care products. Her unique idea of all-natural, honey-based skin care products created a new market. The
competitive analysis might need to focus on substitute products rather than direct competitors. There are two
main tools used in analysis of competitors: a competitive analysis grid and the "three circles" approach.

Competitive Analysis Grid

The competitive analysis grid should identify your competitors and include an assessment of the key
characteristics of the competitive landscape in your industry, including competitive strengths and weaknesses
and key success factors.

Table 5.2 provides an example of what a competitive analysis might look like for a bicycle shop in a tourist
locale.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                             205

                 Competitive Analysis Grid for Sid's Cycle Shop in Branson, Missouri

        Key      Sid's Cycle                       City Cycle            SpokeMasters     Target
Characteristics

Strengths        Product knowledge,                Repair service        High quality,    Price, hours (open
                 Repair service                                          Top brands       seven days per
                                                                                          week and online)

Weaknesses       Limited selection                 Poor customer         Pricing, no      Low-end quality, no
                                                   service               entry-level      repair facilities
                                                                         products

Product Quality  Low-middle                        Middle-high           High-end         Entry-level
Level

Price Point      Middle                            Middle-high           High price       Lowest price

Location of the  Suburban strip-mall               Outskirts of town     Downtown side    Branson Mall
business         on busy highway                   on route 280          street

Promotion        Weekly ad in local                Advertising in local  Sponsors major   Advertises online
                 newspaper, some                   paper during          bike race in     and in Sunday
                 radio and Internet/               season, Internet/     area, Internet,  newspaper
                 social media                      social media          social media     (seasonally),
                                                                                          Internet)

Table 5.2 This competitive analysis grid captures some of the main aspects of competitors within a given
market.

As you complete an analysis for your venture's competitors, identify what contributes to the competitor's
success. In other words, why do people purchase from the company? Some possible reasons include no
nearby competitors, lower prices than competitors, a wider variety of products, offering services not offered
elsewhere, or branding and marketing that appeals to the target market. Your analysis should inform you of a
combination of key success factors within the industry (what it takes to be successful in the industry) and of
what your competitors are not offering that is valued by your target market.

Another frequently used tool is a SWOT analysis (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats), which
focuses on analyzing your venture's potential and builds on the knowledge gained from the competitive
analysis grid and the three circles. You will need to identify the strengths your venture will need to support the
competitive advantage identified through the competitive analysis tools. The weaknesses can be identified
based on your current and foreseeable expectations. For a new venture, the opportunities and threats sections
are based on current factors in the external environment that come from your research. In this context,
opportunities are facts, changes, or situations within the external environment that could be favorably
leveraged for the venture's success.
206                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

     WORK IT OUT
     Using SWOT Analysis to Evaluate Entrepreneurial Opportunity

   Figure 5.9 A SWOT analysis can be used to identify the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
   threats of a potential entrepreneurial opportunity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
   under CC BY 4.0 license)

   One way to evaluate a business idea is to prepare a SWOT analysis (Figure 5.9). Note that strengths and
   weaknesses are internal to the entrepreneur, while opportunities and threats are external factors.
   Strengths are capabilities and advantages of the entrepreneur, including education, experience, and
   personal or professional contacts. Weaknesses are disadvantages of the entrepreneur, which could
   include lack of knowledge or experience. Opportunities are positive events that the entrepreneur can
   develop to his or her benefit. This could include development of new technologies, changes in consumer
   tastes and preferences, market growth, and new laws and regulations. Threats can be anything that
   could potentially harm the business or prevent the business from becoming successful such as
   competition, negative changes in economic conditions, and new laws or regulations.

      · If you were starting a new business venture, what strengths would you be able to leverage to help
          your business be successful?

      · Provide some examples of personal or professional weaknesses an entrepreneur might face when

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                               207

          starting a new business.
      · Discuss three occurring events such as new laws and regulations, changes in consumer tastes and

          preferences, or developing new technologies that could provide business opportunity for a new
          business venture.

Another tool that can be used to analyze opportunities and threats section is called PEST analysis (political,
economic, societal, technology). In this analysis, we identify issues in each of these categories. Figure 5.10
shows an example of the topics that could be placed in a PEST analysis. The chapter on Fundamentals of
Resource Planning discusses this tool as it relates to resource procurement.

Figure 5.10 A PEST analysis can help identify opportunities and threats that can be used in a SWOT analysis.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Each of these categories should be completed with relevant facts related to your entrepreneurial opportunity.
After completing this analysis, you then determine if these facts, or factors, would be placed in the opportunity
section or the threat section of the SWOT.

Three Circles Tool

Another tool that can be used in competitive analysis is the three circles tool (Figure 5.11). The goal is to
identify competitors' strengths and competitive advantages with any overlaps among competitors. Then, you
would identify values or features not offered by competitors. This gap in value or offered services helps to
identify your unique selling proposition and thereby your competitive advantage.
208  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Figure 5.11 The three circles competitive analysis helps to identify where there is overlap and where there
may be a gap in the market that a new venture could fill. The overlaps identify points of parity, the areas where
competitors offer the same value with the important identification of the areas of unmet customer needs and
how unique your competitive advantage is within the industry. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The unique selling proposition is important to the marketing plan and is often used as a slogan. It should also
align with the value communicated by the product or company brand. These concepts are different from your
venture's competitive advantage; the competitive advantage describes your venture's unique benefit, which
supports growth of the venture, whereas the unique selling proposition describes the product or service itself,
rather than the venture. Although these concepts are different, there should be alignment between the
concepts.
For example, Amazon has a competitive advantage in its virtual presence, knowledge of the market,
knowledge and application of technology, and knowledge of the industry. Through these competitive
advantages, Amazon offers unique combinations of benefits to their customers, such as one-click checkout
and algorithm-based recommendations using data mining to track an individual customer's preferences.
Amazon's unique selling proposition becomes making the purchase as easy and as accurate as possible,
whereas their competitive advantage lies in their ability to foresee future advances and act on those

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                                                    209

predictions, even to the point of shaping the industry.

The competitive advantage results from the analysis of the strengths and unique aspects of a venture, an
analysis of the industry, including competitor's advantages, customer needs, and what the venture provides
within this competitive landscape. The unique selling proposition should support the competitive advantage,
just as the competitive advantage needs to support the unique selling proposition.

Social Media's Role in Research

For almost all new business ventures, two key issues related to research are time and money. Large-scale
research projects can take months or longer, and cost a significant amount of money. Social media can offer
some opportunities to overcome these concerns. Ray Nelson, writing for Social Media Today, reports several
ways that social media can provide speedy, low-cost market research: tracking trends in real-time, helping the
entrepreneur "learn the language" of their potential customers, discovering unnoticed trends by engaging
consumers, and performing market research using a very cost-efficient means.[26] If the entrepreneur can
perform social media research on his or her own, the cost will primarily be in terms of time. But the time it will
take to conduct research through social media platforms such as Facebook or Twitter is usually well spent. This
research should include learning the unique selling proposition of competitors, understanding their
competitive advantage, and identifying what the customer values, which can be rather difficult. For example,
before Amazon recognized that people are busy, were we aware that we wanted faster check-out processes
for making purchases? Or were we aware that we wanted the package delivered to our home to be easier to
unwrap? And yet, if we asked Amazon shoppers what they value in shopping at Amazon, we will receive
answers that support an easier and faster process.

Another technique would be to read through customer reviews on Amazon (or another company related to
your entrepreneurial venture) to find out what customers like and don't like about existing products and
brands. You can also develop your own surveys on an app like SurveyMonkey and send them to customers and
prospective customers. This usually works when sent to persons who have a strong interest in the product or
issue rather than randomly sending out surveys.

Business Models and Feasibility

Part of the analysis in determining if your idea is an actual entrepreneurial opportunity is identifying a feasible
business model. A business model is a plan for how the venture will be funded; how the venture creates value
for its stakeholders, including customers; how the venture's offerings are made and distributed to the end
users; and how income will be generated through this process. Basically, a business model describes how a
venture will create a profit by describing each of these actions. The business model at this stage is composed
of four components: the offering, customers, infrastructure, and financial viability (Figure 5.12). A fuller version
of the business model is covered in Business Model and Plan.

26 Ray Nelson. "How to Use Social Media for Market Research." Social Media Today. March 19, 2013. https://www.socialmediatoday.com/
content/how-use-social-media-market-research
210  Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Figure 5.12 A business model has four components: the offering, customers, infrastructure, and financial
viability. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The offering refers to the product or service you will be selling, the value proposition, and how you will reach
and communicate with your target customers. The customer value proposition includes a detailed description
of the products and services you will offer to customers, and what benefits (value) the customer will derive
from using your product or service. The customer benefit could be the ability to do something more easily,
more quickly, or at a lower cost than customers could before. The benefit could also solve a problem no one
else has solved.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Writing a Customer Value Proposition

   It is helpful to write out your customer value proposition. Then you have a draft to review and tweak as
   your ideas develop. Here is a general structure you can follow:[27]

      · Start with a headline-style statement that describes how your offering benefits the customer.
      · Provide a few sentences or a brief paragraph that explains the offering in more detail. Be sure to

          make clear what the offering is, who the customer is, and why you are offering it.
      · Consider including a bulleted list or checklist highlighting 3-5 features of the product or benefits the

          customer will receive.
      · If possible, add a graphic that engages interest or reinforces the idea.

Customers are the people you will be serving, including potential customers from one or more market
segments, or subsections of the market categorized by similar interests or needs. Products seldom appeal to
everyone, so the entrepreneur needs to determine, through high-level segmentation and targeting analysis,
which segments of the market would make the most sense for the business, and the market environment and
dynamics. Some products might appeal to market segments based on age or income, whereas other products
might appeal to customers based on their lifestyle. A sign of a potential market opportunity is when a certain
market is experiencing rapid growth. This could be a city with a fast-growing population, or it could be a style
or consumer trend that is really taking off. The chapter on Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales goes into more
detail about these topics.
Infrastructure refers to all the resources the entrepreneur will need to launch and sustain the business

27 Modified from Lindsay Kolowich. "How to Write a Great Value Proposition [Infographic]." HubSpot/Marketing. June 5, 2018.
https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/write-value-proposition

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  211

venture. These include people, products, facilities, technology, suppliers, partners, and finances, all of which
the entrepreneur must have to fulfill the customer value proposition.

Financial viability relates to the long-term financial sustainability of an organization to fulfill its mission. This
goes back to our definition of an entrepreneurial opportunity. Knowing that the venture solves a sizable and
significant problem that the target market is willing to purchase is a key piece in determining financial viability.
This category also addresses how the venture will create profits.

For example, would a subscription-based business model fit the target market and venture's success?
Currently, we see a significant growth in startups offering subscription services. What are the benefits to this
sales method? For the venture, this model increases upfront cash to support the growth of the venture,
especially when customers pay a year in advance for products that will be delivered over the subsequent
twelve months. Receiving the payment prior to completing the sales provides the venture with operating cash
to support current and future growth. The benefit to the customer in this situation is fewer transactions. The
customer knows that the payment covers the next twelve months' worth of benefits (the received product or
service) with no further purchases until the subscription runs out.

Another choice involves deciding whether to have a physical location, a virtual location, or both. Financial
viability means exploring the benefits and drawbacks of various methods in creating your business model.

   WORK IT OUT

   Researching Target Markets with Census Data

   Practice conducting research by going to www.census.gov and two other sources to identify a specific
   target market for a product that interests you. Include the target market's:

      · Disposable income. You might ask whether the target market has sufficient disposable income to
          purchase this product.

      · Demographics
      · Psychographics (the combination of buying personality behaviors and demographics)
      · How you as the entrepreneur could reach this target market.

When you have a business idea that you have been researching and find that there is a large enough market
that has a need that your idea meets, that this target market has the willingness and ability to satisfy the need
through purchasing the provided solution, that you have access to the necessary resources to build an
infrastructure for your business, that you have the right mix of products and services with a sound value
proposition, and that you can secure funding, you have a real opportunity. This chapter has introduced you to
all of these concepts. Further chapters delve into them in more depth.
212                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

     Key Terms

business model plan for how venture will be funded; how the venture creates value for its stakeholders,
     including customers; how the venture's offerings are made and distributed to the end users; and the how
     income will be generated through this process

competitive advantage describes your venture's unique benefits that poise it for growth
creative destruction theory developed by Joseph Schumpeter stating that entrepreneurial innovation is the

     disruptive force that creates and sustains economic growth, though in the process, it destroys established
     companies and disrupts employment
customers people the business will be serving, including potential customers from one or more market
     segments
demand need or desire for the outputs, the product or services
demographics statistical factors of a population or group, such as information about age, gender, income,
     race, or ethnicity
entrepreneurial opportunity point at which identifiable consumer demand meets the feasibility of
     satisfying the requested product or service and meets the following conditions: significant market
     demand, significant market structure and size, significant margins, and resources to support the
     venture's success
financial viability long-term financial sustainability of an organization to fulfill its mission
gig economy market system in which independent contractors fill a variety of positions
infrastructure all resources the entrepreneur will need in order to launch and sustain a business venture
offering actual product or service, its value proposition, and how you will reach and communicate with your
     target customers
opportunity screening process used to evaluate innovative product ideas, strategies, and marketing trends,
     focusing on financial resources, skills of the entrepreneurial team, and competition
primary research research that involves gathering new data
secondary research research that uses existing data
shared economy economy in which some assets are not in use, which may present an entrepreneurial
     opportunity
supply amount of a product or service produced
SWOT analysis strategic analytical tool used to help a potential venture or existing company identify its
     strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats related to business competition
unique selling proposition marketer's rationale as to why a product or service is different/better than the
     competitor's products

     Summary

5.1 Entrepreneurial Opportunity
Entrepreneurial opportunity exists when consumer demand meets the feasibility of bringing the product or
service to market. Joseph Schumpeter, an early scholar of entrepreneurship, identified creative
destruction--when innovation is disruptive and creates potential entrepreneurial opportunities. Schumpeter's
focus on economics led him to categorize potential opportunities based on supply, demand, or changes in ho w
technology is used.

Burgeoning entrepreneurs should be engaged with industries of interest to remain informed and aware of

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity  213

opportunities to research. Additionally, they should be attentive to drivers of opportunity, such as emerging
funding options, technological advancements, and economic factors.

5.2 Researching Potential Business Opportunities
Researching the viability of your entrepreneurial idea will help you determine whether the venture is currently
worth pursuing. Use primary and secondary research to determine whether there is adequate demand,
market structure and size, and the needed margins and resources to launch and sustain the enterprise.
Entrepreneurs researching options should also be aware of industry and consumer sources of opportunities.

5.3 Competitive Analysis
A competitive analysis helps determine the viability of your idea by considering how feasible it is within a
specific competitive landscape. Tools such as a competitive analysis grid, a SWOT analysis, a PEST analysis, and
the three circles approach can help you further examine issues and refine your plans.

     Review Questions

1. What is entrepreneurial opportunity?
2. What are five methods through which an entrepreneur can create new economic opportunities, according to
Joseph Schumpeter?
3. What are some factors that might indicate it is a good time to start a business?
4. When should an entrepreneur explore opportunities?
5. What should a potential entrepreneur research before starting a business?
6. What kind of information is available in census data and how might that data be useful?
7. Compare and contrast supply-based opportunities and demand-based opportunities.
8. How can using a PEST analysis contribute to discovering new patterns of trends for recognizing
entrepreneurial opportunities?
9. What is a SWOT analysis and how is it useful?
10. What is a unique selling proposition?
11. What is a business model?

     Discussion Questions

1. Explain the difference between an idea and an entrepreneurial opportunity. Why is it important to recognize
if your idea is truly an entrepreneurial opportunity or only an idea?
2. Is now a good time to start a business? Why or why not?
3. If you were thinking about starting a clothing store for teens and young women in your hometown, what
census information do you think would be useful to you?
214                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

4. What new patterns or behaviors have you noticed within your society or the country's society?

5. What unused resources are present in your own life that could be translated into a shared economy idea for
a new venture?

6. What spin-off ideas can you think of that support a gig economy? For example, what services or products
might gig employees value or gig employers value?

7. What are some of the reasons for business failures? If you were starting a business, what are some actions
you could take to increase your potential for success?

8. Many entrepreneurs like Chris Johnson, who invented the ramen noodle cooker and Palms Barber had
ordinary problems they were trying to solve. What are some examples of ordinary problems you could solve if
you could invent a product?

9. How do social enterprises like Bee Love help the community? What problem was Palms Barber trying to
solve? What problems did the company end up solving?

     Case Questions

1. Mandy Tillman was a high school student who lived in a rural area of Oklahoma. Mandy was only fourteen
years old but wanted to make some extra money for her family's trip to the Grand Canyon the following
summer. While shopping with her parents, she noticed there was only one place in town to buy flats with
flowers and vegetables for spring planting, and there was not much of a selection. Mandy made a note of the
various types of plants and flowers the store sold and how much they sold for.

When Mandy got home from shopping with her parents, she went online to see how much the seeds and
equipment would cost. Her parents liked the idea of Mandy earning some money of her own to spend on
vacation and made a large area in the basement available for her to start her plants.

    A. What else should Mandy know about this business before getting started?
    B. What else do you think Mandy needs to start this business?
    C. Do you see any potential problems with this business idea?
    D. What are some ways Mandy can sell her plants?
    E. Is this a business idea or an entrepreneurial opportunity?

2. Research the eyeglass company Warby Parker.
    A. What is Warby Parker's business model?
    B. What is the value proposition offered by Warby Parker?
    C. Describe Warby Parker's target market? What resources did you use to identify their target market?
    D. If Warby Parker did not exist and you decided that you wanted to open a direct to consumer eyeglass
          company, what would be the top five factors you would research to determine if your idea was truly an
          entrepreneurial opportunity?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity                                                        215

3. Travis and Katelyn loved backpacking and had hiked the Appalachian Trail twice. Although they had been
backpacking for several years, each time they went out on the trail, they learned something new. Almost every
backpacker they met was quick to offer a good tip on the best clothing or equipment for the trail. Travis and
Katelyn decided to start a backpacker's blog and sell advertising space to manufacturers and retailers of
backpacking gear.

    A. If you were launching a company to help back packers trek through the wilderness, what products
          would you provide and what would be their unique selling propositions?

    B. What benefit would you build into your website that would attract backpackers to your website?
          Consider how you would distinguish your website from competitor websites.

    C. Using PEST around your knowledge of backpacking and interest in starting a business related to
          backpacking, identify one fact for each of the PEST categories that could be useful in identifying new
          information or patterns to support this business.

    D. How would you change your business model based on your answers to the previous question?

     Suggested Resources

5.2 Researching Potential Business Opportunities
American Fact Finder (market research): http://factfinder2.census.gov/main.html
FedStats (statistics from more than 100 federal agencies): https://www.usa.gov/statistics
FindLaw Small Business Center (business forms): https://smallbusiness.findlaw.com/
National Federation of Independent Business: https://www.nfib.com/business-resources
The Small Business National Center: https://sites.google.com/a/uca.edu/sbanc/home
The U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA): www.sba.gov
Top Franchises of 2019: https://www.entrepreneur.com/franchise500/2019
U.S. patent and Trademark Office: https://www.uspto.gov/
General Business Statistics: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/, http://www.census.gov/library/

  publications/2011/compendia/statab/131ed.html
Consumer Statistics: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G19/, https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--

  Statistics
Demographics: https://factfinder.census.gov/faces/nav/jsf/pages/index.xhtml, http://www.bls.gov/bls/

  demographics.htm
Economic Indicators: https://www.bls.gov/cpi/, bea.gov
Employment Statistics: https://stats.bls.gov/bls/employment.htm
Income Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/cps/earnings.htm, https://www.bls.gov/data/#employment
Money and Interest Rates: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/h15/, https://www.federalreserve.gov/

  data.htm
Production and Sales Statistics: https://www.bea.gov/data/consumer-spending/main,
Trade Statistics: https://www.bea.gov/data/economic-accounts/international#bop,

  https://usatrade.census.gov/
216                                                                               Chapter 5 Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity

Statistics of specific Industries: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/, https://www.census.gov/programs-
  surveys/susb.html

https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/market-research-competitive-analysis#section-
  header-5

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     6

              Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Figure 6.1 Sometimes, navigating from the recognition of an opportunity to overcoming problems in the
development of that opportunity can feel like winding through a maze. (credit: modification of "human hand
company paper solutions" by "Eluj"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

        6.1 Problem Solving to Find Entrepreneurial Solutions
        6.2 Creative Problem-Solving Process
        6.3 Design Thinking
        6.4 Lean Processes

      Introduction

   Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
   support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
   https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.
   Marah Lidey and Naomi Hirabayashi met when they worked together at DoSomething.org, a youth-oriented
   global nonprofit organization. They considered each other aspirational peers--accessible friends they looked
   up to and leaned on. While working together, they got the idea to turn the support they gave each other into a
   product idea: an inspirational platform that would send users a motivational text message each day. In 2015,
   Hirabayashi and Lidey began to focus on turning their idea into a reality. They conducted a test with seventy
   individuals before publicly releasing Shine in beta in October 2015. They formally left DoSomething.Org in April
   2016 and their startup venture, Shine, was born.
   The problem Shine tackles is that "self-help is broken" and its value proposition addresses in part what is
   known as "the confidence gap," often cited as a barrier that holds women back when it comes to advancing in
   their careers, raising money, investing, and planning retirement. Shine has four pillars it is built to address:
   mental health, confidence, daily happiness, and productivity. As of 2018, the Shine community had two million
218  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

users from 189 countries. What began as a motivational text message service has since evolved to include an
app and additional services such as Shine Talks and audio challenges.

Hirabayashi and Lidey recognized a need--or an entrepreneurial opportunity. You learned about identifying
opportunities in the chapter on Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity. This chapter will explore what
happens next--the problem solving and need recognition techniques that entrepreneurs employ to carry the
idea forward, and to solve issues that arise as the enterprise advances. Problem solving is essential to the
genesis of entrepreneurship. At the same time, problem-solving techniques can be used in management and
in an individual's everyday personal life.

 6.1 Problem Solving to Find Entrepreneurial Solutions

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define problem solving in the context of entrepreneurship
  · Describe and compare the adaptive model and the innovative model of problem solving
  · Identify the skills entrepreneurs need for effective problem solving
  · Identify types of problem solvers

As you've learned, entrepreneurs often visualize an opportunity gap, a gap between what exists and what
could exist, as Hirabayashi and Lidey did with Shine. Entrepreneurial problem solving is the process of using
innovation and creative solutions to close that gap by resolving societal, business, or technological problems.
Sometimes, personal problems can lead to entrepreneurial opportunities if validated in the market. The
entrepreneur visualizes the prospect of filling the gap with an innovative solution that might entail the revision
of a product or the creation of an entirely new product. In any case, the entrepreneur approaches the
problem-solving process in various ways. This chapter is more about problem solving as it pertains to the
entrepreneur's thought process and approach rather than on problem solving in the sense of opportunity
recognition and filling those gaps with new products.

For example, as we read in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity, Sara Blakely (as shown in Figure 6.2) saw a
need for body contouring and smoothing undergarments one day in the late 1990s when she was getting
dressed for a party and couldn't find what she needed to give her a silhouette she'd be pleased with in a pair
of slacks. She saw a problem: a market need. But her problem-solving efforts are what drove her to turn her
solution (Spanx undergarments) into a viable product. Those efforts came from her self-admitted can-do
attitude: "It's really important to be resourceful and scrappy--a glass half-full mindset."[1] Her efforts at
creating a new undergarment met resistance with hosiery executives, most of whom were male and out of
touch with their female consumers. The hosiery owner who decided to help Blakely initially passed on the idea
until running it by his daughters and realizing she was on to something. That something became Spanx, and
today, Blakely is a successful entrepreneur.[2]

1 Helen Lock. "`I Put My Butt on the Line': How Spanx Took Over the World." The Guardian. July 11, 2016. https://www.theguardian.com/small-
business-network/2016/jul/11/put-butt-on-the-line-how-spanx-world
2 Gary Keller. "Business Success Series, Part 1: Sara Blakely-Spanx." The One Thing. n.d. https://www.the1thing.com/blog/the-one-thing/
business-success-series-part-1-sara-blakely-spanx/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  219

Figure 6.2 Sara Blakely (right) participates in a discussion at the 2018 Fast Company Innovation Festival.
(credit: "Ed Bastian and Sara Blakely at the Fast Company Innovation Festival" by "Nan Palmero"/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

Before getting into the heart of this chapter, we need to make a distinction: Decision making is different from
problem solving. A decision is needed to continue or smooth a process affecting the operation of a firm. It can
be intuitive or might require research and a long period of consideration. Problem solving, however, is more
direct. It entails the solution of some problem where a gap exists between a current state and a desired state.
Entrepreneurs are problem solvers who offer solutions using creativity or innovative ventures that exploit
opportunities. This chapter focuses on different approaches to problem solving and need recognition that help
potential entrepreneurs come up with ideas and refine those ideas.

Two Problem Solving Models: Adaptive and Innovative

There are two prominent established problem-solving models: adaptive and innovative. A renowned British
psychologist, Michael Kirton, developed the Kirton Adaption-Innovation (KAI) Inventory to measure an
individual's style of problem solving.[3] Problem-solving preferences are dependent on the personality
characteristics of originality, conformity, and efficiency, according to Kirton. The KAI inventory identifies an
individual's problem-solving approach by measuring agreement with statements that align with
characteristics, such as the ability to produce many novel ideas, to follow rules and get along in groups, and to
systematically orient daily behavior. The results categorize an individual as an innovator or an adaptor.
Innovators are highly original, do not like to conform, and value efficiency less than adaptors.
The first and more conservative approach an entrepreneur may use to solve problems is the adaptive model.
The adaptive model seeks solutions for problems in ways that are tested and known to be effective. An
adaptive model accepts the problem definition and is concerned with resolving problems rather than finding
them. This approach seeks greater efficiency while aiming at continuity and stability. The second and more
creative approach is the innovative model of entrepreneurial problem solving, which uses techniques that are
unknown to the market and that bring advantage to an organization. An innovative problem-solving style
challenges the problem definition, discovers problems and avenues for their solutions, and questions existing

3 "Characteristics of Adaptors and Innovators." Kirton KAI Inventory Tool. n.d. http://pubs.acs.org/subscribe/archive/ci/31/i11/html/
11hipple_box3.ci.html
220  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

assumptions--in a nutshell, it does things differently. It uses outside-the-box thinking and searches for novel
solutions. Novelty is a shared trait of creative entrepreneurship, and it's why entrepreneurs gravitate toward
this method of problem solving. According to Dr. Shaun M. Powell, a senior lecturer at the University of
Wollongong, Australia: "Creative entrepreneurs are notable for a distinctive management style that is based
on intuition, informality and rapid decision making, whereas the more conventional thinking styles are not in
accord with the unique attributes of creative entrepreneurs."[4] This way of problem solving doesn't alter an
existing product. It is the creation of something entirely new.

For example, healthcare facilities have long been known as a source of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
aureus (MRSA), a deadly infection that can have long-term effects on patients. Vital Vio, led by Colleen Costello,
has developed white light technology that effectively disinfects healthcare facilities by targeting a molecule
specific to bacteria. The light, safe to humans, can burn constantly to kill regenerative bacteria. An adaptive
problem-solving model would seek to minimize harm of MRSA within a hospital--to respond to it--whereas
the Vital Vio is an entirely new technique that seeks to eliminate it. Adaptive solutions to MRSA include
established processes and protocols for prevention, such as having doctors, nurses, and other healthcare
providers clean their hands with soap and water, or an alcohol-based hand rub before and after patient care,
testing patients to see if they have MRSA on their skin, cleaning hospital rooms and medical equipment, and
washing and drying clothes and bed linens in the warmest recommended temperatures.[5]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit Inc. Magazine for support and advice for up-and-coming startups (https://openstax.org/l/
   52AdviceStartup) to learn more. Examples of how "Dorm Room" entrepreneurs spot and pursue
   opportunities are shared along with tips and advice for making your startup a success.

Problem-Solving Skills

While identifying problems is a necessary part of the origin of the entrepreneurial process, managing
problems is an entirely different aspect once a venture is off the ground and running. An entrepreneur does
not have the luxury of avoiding problems and is often responsible for all problem solving in a startup or other
form of business. There are certain skills that entrepreneurs possess that make them particularly good
problem solvers. Let's examine each skill (shown in Figure 6.3) .

4 Shaun Powell. "The Management and Consumption of Organisational Creativity." Journal of Consumer Marketing 25, no. 3 (2008): 158-166.
5 N.C Healthcare-Associated Infections Prevention Program. Healthcare-Associated Infections in North Carolina: 2014 Annual Report, Healthcare
Consumer Version. April 2015. https://epi.dph.ncdhhs.gov/cd/hai/figures/hai_apr2015_consumers_annual.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  221

Figure 6.3 These are a few of the skills that entrepreneurs possess that aid in solving problems. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Critical Thinking

Critical thinking is the complex analysis of a problem or issue with the goal of solving the problem or making
a decision. The entrepreneur analyzes and peels away the layers of a problem to find the core of an issue
facing a business. The entrepreneur focuses on the heart of the problem and responds reasonably and openly
to suggestions for solving it. Critical thinking is not only important for developing entrepreneurial ideas: it is a
sought-after asset in education and employment. Entrepreneur Rebecca Kantar dropped out of Harvard in
2015 to found the tech startup Imbellus, which aims to replace standardized college admissions tests like the
SAT with interactive scenarios that test critical-thinking skills. Many standardized tests may include multiple
choice questions asking for the answer to a straightforward knowledge question or math problem. Kantar
seeks to create tests that are more concerned with the analytic ability and reasoning that goes into the
process of solving the problem. Imbellus says it aims to test "how people think," not just what they know. The
platform, which has not yet launched, will use simulations for its user assessments.[6]

6 Romesh Ratnesar. "What If Instead of Taking the SAT You Got to Play a Video Game?" Bloomberg BusinessWeek. March 19, 2019.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2019-03-19/a-harvard-dropout-s-plan-to-fix-college-admissions-with-video-games
222  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Read more about problem solving and EnterpriseWorks/Vita's story (https://openstax.org/l/
     52ProbSolve) at Harvard Business Review.

Communication

Communication skills, the ability to communicate messages effectively to an intended recipient, are the skills
entrepreneurs use to pool resources for the purposes of investigating solutions leading to innovative problem
solving and competitive advantage. Good communication allows for the free association of ideas between
entrepreneurs and businesses. It can illustrate a problem area or a shared vision, and seeks stakeholder buy-
in from various constituencies. Networking and communication within an industry allow the entrepreneur to
recognize the position of an enterprise in the market and work toward verbalizing solutions that move an
organization beyond its current state. By "verbalizing," we mean communication from and with the company/
entity. Internal communications include company emails, newsletters, presentations, and reports that can set
strategic goals and objectives, and report on what has been accomplished and what goals and objectives
remain, so that employees within an organization are knowledgeable and can work on solving problems that
remain within the organization. External communications could include press releases, blogs and websites,
social media, public speeches, and presentations that explain the company's solutions to problems. They could
also be investor pitches complete with business plans and financial projections.

Ideation exercises, such as brainstorming sessions (discussed in Creativity, Innovation, and Invention, are
good communication tools that entrepreneurs can use to generate solutions to problems. Another such tool is
a hackathon--an event, usually hosted by a tech company or organization, which brings together
programmers and workers with other degrees of specialization within the company, community, or
organization to collaborate on a project over a short period of time. These can last from twenty-four hours to a
few days over a weekend. A hackathon can be an internal company-wide initiative or an external event that
brings community participants together. A business model canvas, which is covered in Business Model and
Plan and other activities outlined in other chapters can be used internally or externally to identify problems
and work toward creating a viable solution.

Networking is an important manifestation of useful communication. What better method is there of
presenting one's concept, gaining funding and buy-in, and marketing for the startup than through building a
network of individuals willing to support your venture? A network may consist of potential employees,
customers, board members, outside advisors, investors, or champions (people who just love your product)
with no direct vested interest. Social networks consist of weak ties and strong ties. Sociologist Mark
Granovetter studied such networks back in the 1970s, and his findings still apply today, even if we include
social media networks in the definition too. Weak ties facilitate flow of information and community
organization, he said, whereas strong ties represent strong connections among close friends, family members,
and supportive coworkers.[7] Strong ties require more work to maintain than weak ties (as illustrated by the
strong lines and weak dotted lines in Figure 6.4) and in a business context, they don't lead to many new
opportunities. Weak ties, in contrast, do open doors in that they act as bridges to other weak ties within
functional areas or departments that you might not have had access to directly or through strong ties.[8]

7 Mark Granovetter. "The Strength of Weak Ties." American Journal of Sociology 5 (1973): 1360-1380.
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  223

Figure 6.4 Networking results in connecting individuals who otherwise might not have met and who may be
able to help each other solve problems. (credit: "social media connections networking" by "GDJ"/Pixabay, CC0)

In fact, many young entrepreneurs, including tech entrepreneur Oliver Isaacs, realize college is a great place
to begin building teams. Isaacs is the founder of viral opinion network Amirite.com, which is widely credited as
the place where Internet memes started and online slang got a foothold.[9] Amirite.com consists of a large
network of pages and partnerships on Facebook and Instagram that reach 15 million users each month. Isaacs
recommends using your alumni network to build a team and customer base for your own venture because
you never know if you're talking to a future employee or partner.
Sharing of ideas and resources is highly valued in the entrepreneurial process. Communication is a vital skill in
problem solving because the ability to identify and articulate the problem (define the problem space) is
necessary to adequately address a problem. A problem can be too vague or broad or narrow. Thus,
communicating the problem is important, as is conveying the solution.

Decisiveness

Decisiveness is as it sounds: the ability to make a quick, effective decision, not letting too much time go by in
the process. Entrepreneurs must be productive, even in the face of risk. They often rely on intuition as well as
on hard facts in making a choice. They ask what problem needs to be solved, think about solutions, and then
consider the means necessary to implement an idea. And the decisions must be informed with research.
For example, as explained in Adam Grant's book The Originals, the co-founders of Warby Parker, a venture-
backed startup focused on the eyewear industry, started their company while they were graduate students. At

8 Jacob Morgan. "Why Every Employee Should Be Building Weak Ties at Work." Forbes. March 11, 2014. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
jacobmorgan/2014/03/11/every-employee-weak-ties-work/#277851063168
9 John White. "Top UK Influencer Oliver Isaacs Reveals What It Takes to Go Viral." Inc. August 6, 2017. https://www.inc.com/john-white/top-
uk-influencer-oliver-isaacs-reveals-what-it-ta.html
224  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

the time they knew little about the industry, but after conducting some detailed research, they learned that the
industry was dominated by one major player--Luxottica. They used this information and other data to refine
their strategy and business model (focusing mainly on value, quality, and convenience via an online channel).
By the time they decided to launch the business, they had thought through the key details, and they attained
rapid early success. Today Warby Parker has over 100 retail stores in the US, is profitable, and is valued at
almost $2 billion.
Decisiveness is the catapult to progress. Amazon founder Jeff Bezos preaches the importance of decisiveness
throughout his organization. Bezos believes that decisiveness can even lead to innovation. Bezos advocates for
making decisions after obtaining 70 percent of the information you need to do so: "Being wrong may be less
costly than you think, whereas being slow is going to be expensive for sure," Bezos wrote in a 2017 annual
letter to stockholders.[10]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this LinkedIn blog post on decisiveness (https://openstax.org/l/52decisiveness) to learn more.

Ability to Analyze Data

Data analysis is the process of analyzing data and modeling it into a structure that leads to innovative
conclusions. Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity covered much of the sources of data that entrepreneurs
might seek. But it is one thing to amass information and statistics. It is another to make sense of that data, to
use it to fill a market need or forecast a trend to come. Successful founders know how to pose questions about
and make meaning out of information. And if they can't do that themselves, they know how to bring in experts
who can.
In addition to public sources of broad data, a business can collect data on customers when they interact with
the company on social media or when they visit the company website, especially if they complete a credit card
transaction. They can collect their own specific data on their own customers, including location, name, activity,
and how they got to the website. Analyzing these data will give the entrepreneur a better idea about the
interested audience's demographic.
In entrepreneurship, analyzing data can help with opportunity recognition, creation, and assessment by
analyzing data in a variety of ways. Entrepreneurs can explore and leverage different data sources to identify
and compare "attractive" opportunities, since such analyses can describe what has happened, why it
happened, and how likely it is to happen again in the future. In business in general, analytics is used to help
managers/entrepreneurs gain improved insight about their business operations/emerging ventures and make
better, fact-based decisions.
Analytics can be descriptive, predictive, or prescriptive. Descriptive analytics involves understanding what has
happened and what is happening; predictive analytics uses data from past performance to estimate future
performance; and prescriptive analytics uses the results of descriptive and predictive analytics to make
decisions. Data analysis can be applied to manage customer relations, inform financial and marketing
activities, make pricing decisions, manage the supply chain, and plan for human resource needs, among other

10 Erik Larson. "How Jeff Bezos Uses Faster Better Decisions to Keep Amazon Innovating." Forbes. September 24, 2018.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/eriklarson/2018/09/24/how-jeff-bezos-uses-faster-better-decisions-to-keep-amazon-innovating/#492c351b7a65

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                                  225

functions of a venture. In addition to statistical analysis, quantitative methods, and computer models to aid
decision-making, companies are also increasingly using artificial intelligence algorithms to analyze data and
make quick decisions.

Understanding of Business and Industry

Entrepreneurs need sound understanding of markets and industries. Often times, they are already working in
a large organization when they see growth opportunities or inefficiencies in a market. The employee gains a
deep understanding of the industry at hand. If the employee considers a possible solution for a problem, this
solution might become the basis for a new business.

For example, consider a marketing agency that used traditional marketing for thirty years. This agency had an
established clientele. An executive in the organization began studying social media analytics and social media.
The executive approached the owner of the business to change processes and begin serving clients through
social media, but the owner refused. Clients within the agency began to clamor for exposure on social media.
The marketing executive investigated the possibility of building an agency in her locale servicing clients who
wish to utilize social media. The marketing executive left the organization and started her own agency
(providing, of course, that this is in compliance with any noncompete clauses in her contract). Her competitive
advantage was familiarity with both traditional and social media venues. Later, the original agency started
floundering because it did not offer social media advertising. Our intrepid executive purchased the agency to
gain the clientele and serve those wishing to move away from traditional marketing.

A similar experience occurred for entrepreneur Katie Witkin. After working in traditional marketing roles, the
University of Wisconsin-Madison graduate, pictured in Figure 6.5, left agency life behind four years out of
college to cofound her own company, AGW Group. In 2009, Witkin had been interning at a music marketing
agency that didn't have a social media department. She knew, both from her time at college and from
observing industry trends, that social media was changing the way companies connected with customers. For
her own venture, she expanded the focus to all supporting brands to manage all things digital. Today, the
cultural and marketing communications agency has fifteen employees and big-name clients ranging from HBO
to Red Bull.[11]

11 Stephanie Schomer. "How Getting Laid Off Empowered This Entrepreneur to Start Her Own Award-Winning Marketing Agency."
Entrepreneur. January 15, 2019. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/326212
226  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Figure 6.5 Pictured is AGW Group cofounder Katie Witkin. (credit: photo provided by AGW Group)

Resourcefulness

Resourcefulness is the ability to discover clever solutions to obstacles. Sherrie Campbell, a psychologist,
author, and frequent contributor to Entrepreneur magazine on business topics, put it this way:

       "There is not a more useful or important trait to possess than resourcefulness in the pursuit of
       success. Resourcefulness is a mindset, and is especially relevant when the goals you have set are
       difficult to achieve or you cannot envision a clear path to get to where you desire to go. With a
       resourcefulness mindset you are driven to find a way. An attitude of resourcefulness inspires out-of-
       the-box thinking, the generation of new ideas, and the ability to visualize all the possible ways to
       achieve what you desire. Resourcefulness turns you into a scrappy, inventive and enterprising
       entrepreneur. It places you a cut above the rest."[12]

Entrepreneurs start thinking about a business venture or startup by talking to people and procuring experts to
help create, fund, and begin a business. Entrepreneurs are risk takers, passionate about new endeavors. If
they don't have a college degree or a great deal of business experience, they understand there are many
resources available to support them in the endeavor, such as the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE)
and the Small Business Administration (SBA). There are many sources available to fund the business with little
or no debt and options, as you will see in the chapter on Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting. The
entrepreneur follows a vision and researches opportunities to move toward a dream.

For example, in the late 1990s, Bill McBean and his business partner Billy Sterett had an opportunity to buy an
underperforming auto dealership that would make their company the dominant one in the market. Neither
wanting to take cash from other ventures nor wanting to borrow more money and tie themselves to more
debt, the entrepreneurs were resourceful by finding another path forward to obtaining the money necessary
for the acquisition they both coveted. They changed banks and renegotiated their banking payback
requirements, lowering their interest payments, reducing fees, and lowering their monthly payments,
ultimately freeing up a significant amount of cash that allowed them to buy the new company.[13]

12 Sherrie Campbell. "6 Characteristics of Resourceful People That Bring Them Success." Entrepreneur. March 10, 2016.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/272171

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  227

Types of Problem Solvers

Entrepreneurs have an insatiable appetite for problem solving. This drive motivates them to find a resolution
when a gap in a product or service occurs. They recognize opportunities and take advantage of them. There
are several types of entrepreneurial problem solvers, including self-regulators, theorists, and petitioners.

Self-Regulating Problem Solvers

Self-regulating problem solvers are autonomous and work on their own without external influence. They
have the ability to see a problem, visualize a possible solution to the problem, and seek to devise a solution, as
Figure 6.6 illustrates. The solution may be a risk, but a self-regulating problem solver will recognize, evaluate,
and mitigate the risk. For example, an entrepreneur has programmed a computerized process for a client, but
in testing it, finds the program continually falls into a loop, meaning it gets stuck in a cycle and doesn't
progress. Rather than wait for the client to find the problem, the entrepreneur searches the code for the error
causing the loop, immediately edits it, and delivers the corrected program to the customer. There is immediate
analysis, immediate correction, and immediate implementation. The self-regulating problem solvers' biggest
competitive advantage is the speed with which they recognize and provide solutions to problems.

Figure 6.6 A self-regulating problem solver identifies a problem, thinks of solution, and then implements the
solution. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Theorist Problem Solvers

Theorist problem solvers see a problem and begin to consider a path toward solving the problem using a
theory. Theorist problem solvers are process oriented and systematic. While managers may start with a
problem and focus on an outcome with little consideration of a means to an end, entrepreneurs may see a
problem and begin to build a path with what is known, a theory, toward an outcome. That is, the entrepreneur
proceeds through the steps to solve the problem and then builds on the successes, rejects the failures, and
works toward the outcome by experimenting and building on known results. At this point, the problem solver
may not know the outcome, but a solution will arise as experiments toward a solution occur. Figure 6.7 shows
this process.
For example, if we consider Marie Curie as an entrepreneur, Curie worked toward the isolation of an element.
As different approaches to isolating the element failed, Curie recorded the failures and attempted other
possible solutions. Curie's failed theories eventually revealed the outcome for the isolation of radium. Like

13 "Resourcefulness Is More Important Than Resources." The Ecommerce Mindset: How Successful Store Owners Think. n.d.
https://www.oberlo.com/ebooks/mindset/resourceful-entrepreneur
228  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Curie, theorists use considered analysis, considered corrective action, and a considered implementation
process. When time is of the essence, entrepreneurs should understand continual experimentation slows the
problem-solving process.

Figure 6.7 A theorist problem solver identifies a problem; implements a theory, sometimes repeatedly; and
eventually arrives at a solution. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Petitioner Problem Solvers

Petitioner problem solvers (Figure 6.8) see a problem and ask others for solution ideas. This entrepreneur
likes to consult a person who has "been there and done that." The petitioner might also prefer to solve the
problem in a team environment. Petitioning the entrepreneurial team for input ensures that the entrepreneur
is on a consensus-driven path. This type of problem solving takes the longest to complete because the
entrepreneur must engage in a democratic process that allows all members on the team to have input. The
process involves exploration of alternatives for the ultimate solution. In organizational decision-making, for
example, comprehensiveness is a measure of the extent a firm attempts to be inclusive or exhaustive in its
decision-making. Comprehensiveness can be gauged by the number of scheduled meetings, the process by
which information is sought, the process by which input is obtained from external sources, the number of
employees involved, the use of specialized consultants and the functional expertise of the people involved, the
years of historical data review, and the assignment of primary responsibility, among other factors.
Comprehensive decision-making would be an example of a petitioner problem-solving style, as it seeks input
from a vast number of team members.
A charette--a meeting to resolve conflicts and identify solutions--is another example that employs a petitioner
problem-solving approach. Often times, a developer of a new project might hold a community charette to aid
in the design of a project, hoping to gain approval from elected officials. In the building example, this could
consist of the developer and his team of architects, project designers, and people with expertise in the project
working alongside community members, business executives, elected officials, or representatives like staff
members or citizen-appointed boards like a planning board. Such an activity is representative of a petitioner
problem-solving approach, as opposed to a developer representative designing the project with no input from
anyone else.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  229

Figure 6.8 A petitioner problem solver identifies a problem, discusses it with others, and arrives at solution
agreeable to others. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

In summary, there is no right or wrong style of problem solving; each problem solver must rely on the instincts
that best drive innovation. Further, they must remember that not all problem-solving methods work in every
situation. They must be willing to adapt their own preference to the situation to maximize efficiency and
ensure they find an effective solution. Attempting to force a problem-solving style may prevent an
organization from finding the best solution. While general entrepreneurial problem-solving skills such as
critical thinking, decisiveness, communication, and the ability to analyze data will likely be used on a regular
basis in your life and entrepreneurial journey, other problem-solving skills and the approach you take will
depend on the problem as it arises.
There are a number of resources online that can help analyze your problem-solving abilities. Mindtools.com is
one such resource. These are useful to learn your general problem-solving tendencies before being called
upon to apply them in a real-world setting. One of the problem-solving techniques available from
mindtools.com offers that problems can be addressed from six different perspectives. Called CATWOE, the
approach is an acronym for Customers, Actors (people within the organization), Transformative, Worldwide,
Owner, and Environment (organizational).

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Learn more about the CATWOE technique (https://openstax.org/l/52CATWOE) for problem solving.

 6.2 Creative Problem-Solving Process

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.
230                                                                               Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the five steps in the creative problem-solving process
  · Identify and describe common creative problem-solving tools

Creativity can be an important trait of an entrepreneur, as the chapter on Creativity, Innovation, and Invention
discussed. In that discussion, we learned about creativity's role in innovation. Here, we will look in more depth
at creativity's role in problem solving. Let's first formally define creativity as the development of original ideas
to solve an issue. The intent of being an entrepreneur is to break away from practical norms and use
imagination to embrace quick and effective solutions to an existing problem, usually outside the corporate
environment.

The Steps of the Creative Problem-Solving Process

Training oneself to think like an entrepreneur means learning the steps to evaluating a challenge: clarify,
ideate, develop, implement, and evaluate (Figure 6.9).

Figure 6.9 The process of creativity is not random; it is a specific and logical process that includes
evaluation. The entrepreneur repeats the creative process until reaching a successful solution. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Step 1: Clarify

To clarify is the critical step of recognizing the existence of a gap between the current state and a desired
state. This can also be thought of as having need awareness, which occurs when the entrepreneur notes a
gap between societal or customer needs and actual circumstances. Clarifying the problem by speaking with
clients and developing a detailed description of the problem brings the specifics of a problem to light. Failure
to identify the specifics of a problem leaves the entrepreneur with the impossible task of solving a ghost
problem, a problem that is fully unknown or unseen. To establish and maintain credibility, an entrepreneur
must clarify the problem by focusing on solving the problem itself, rather than solving a symptom of the
problem.

For example, a farm could have polluted water, but it would not be enough to solve the problem only on that
farm. Clarifying would involve identifying the source of the pollution to adequately tackle the problem. After
gaining an understanding of a problem, the entrepreneur should begin to formulate plans for eliminating the
gap. A fishbone diagram, as shown in Figure 6.10, is a tool that can be used to identify the causes of such a
problem.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  231

Figure 6.10 A quality problem has main causes--here designated as a, b, c, and d. Within these main causes,
there are several causes that might need to be addressed to solve the quality problem. The goal of a fishbone
diagram is to find the root causes of the quality problem. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)
In the case of our water pollution example, a fishbone diagram exploring the issue might reveal the items
shown in Figure 6.11.

Figure 6.11 Farm water pollution could have four main causes, such as livestock, pesticide and fertilizer, soil
erosion, and other chemicals. For each of those, there are other related causes. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
232                                                                               Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Step 2: Ideate

To ideate is the step of the creative problem-solving process that involves generating and detailing ideas by
the entrepreneur. After collecting all information relevant to the problem, the entrepreneur lists as many
causes of the problem as possible. This is the step in which the largest variety of ideas are put forth. Each idea
must be evaluated for feasibility and cost as a solution to the problem. If a farm does not have clean water, for
example, the entrepreneur must list causes of toxic water and eliminate as many of those causes as possible.
The entrepreneur must then move forward investigating solutions to bring the water back to a safe state. If,
say, nearby livestock are polluting the water, the livestock should be isolated from the water source.

Step 3: Develop

To develop is the step in which the entrepreneur takes the list of ideas generated and tests each solution for
feasibility. The entrepreneur must consider the cost of each idea and the obstacles to implementation. In the
preceding example, adding a chemical to the water may not be a feasible solution to the farmer. Not every
farmer wants additional chloride or fluoride added to the water due to the effect on both humans and
livestock. These tradeoffs should be addressed in the feasibility assessment. The farmer might prefer a
filtration system, but the cost of that solution might not be practicable. The entrepreneur should identify and
assess alternative solutions to find one that is most cost-effective and feasible to the customer.

Step 4: Implement

To implement is the step in which the solution to the problem is tested and evaluated. The entrepreneur
walks through the planned implementation with the client and tests each part of the solution, if a service, or
thoroughly tests a developed good. The entrepreneur implements the solution and goes through a structured
system of follow-up to ensure the solution remains effective and viable. In the water example, the solution
would be reducing runoff from toxic insecticides by adding prairie strips, buffers of grass, and vegetation
along banks of streams.

Step 5: Evaluate

To evaluate is the step in which the final solution is assessed. This is a very important step that entrepreneurs
often overlook. Any fallacy in the implementation of the product or service is reassessed, and new solutions
are implemented. A continual testing process may be needed to find the final solution. The prairie strips,
buffers of grass, and vegetation along banks of streams chosen in the farming water example should then be
analyzed and tested to ensure the chosen solution changed the content of the water.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Implementing Creative Problem Solving

   Removing waste is a problem, and it can also present an entrepreneurial opportunity. Try to examine
   ways in which waste products that you usually pay to have hauled away can now generate revenue.
   Whether it's recycling aluminum cans or cardboard, or garbage that could be used to feed animals, your
   task is to come up with solutions to this entrepreneurial-oriented problem.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                 233

· Try following the first step of the creative problem-solving process and clearly identify the problem.
· Next, gather data and formulate the challenge.
· Then, explore ideas and come up with solutions.
· Develop a plan of action.
· Finally, note how you would evaluate the effectiveness of your solution.

Using Creativity to Solve Problems

Entrepreneurs are faced with solving many problems as they develop their ideas for filling gaps, whether
those opportunities involve establishing a new company or starting a new enterprise within an existing
company. Some of these problems include staffing, hiring and managing employees, handling legal
compliance, funding, marketing, and paying taxes. Beyond the mundane activities listed, the entrepreneur, or
the team that the entrepreneur puts in place, is indispensable in maintaining the ongoing creativity behind the
product line or service offered. Innovation and creativity in the business are necessary to expand the product
line or develop a groundbreaking service.

It is not necessary for the entrepreneur to feel isolated when it comes to finding creative solutions to a
problem. There are societies, tools, and new methods available to spur the creativity of the entrepreneur that
will further support the success and expansion of a new enterprise.[14] Learning and using entrepreneurial
methods to solve problems alleviates the stress many startup owners feel. The entrepreneur's creativity will
increase using collaborative methodologies. Some entrepreneurial collaborative methodologies include
crowdsourcing, brainstorming, storyboarding, conducting quick online surveys to test ideas and concepts, and
team creativity activities.

Crowdsourcing

Professor Daren Brabham at the University of Southern California has written books on crowdsourcing and
touts its potential in for-profit and not-for-profit business sectors. He defines it simply as "an online,
distributed problem-solving and production model."[15] Crowdsourcing involves teams of amateurs and
nonexperts working together to form a solution to a problem.[16] The idea, as cbsnews.com's Jennifer Alsever
has put it, is to "tap into the collective intelligence of the public at large to complete business-related tasks
that a company would normally either perform itself or outsource to a third-party provider. Yet free labor is
only a narrow part of crowdsourcing's appeal. More importantly, it enables managers to expand the size of
their talent pool while also gaining deeper insight into what customers really want. The challenge is to take a
cautionary approach to the `wisdom of the crowd,' which can lead to a `herd' mentality."[17]

14 "Creating a World of Opportunities." The Collegiate Entrepreneurs' Organization. n.d. https://www.c-e-o.org/
15 Daren C. Brabham. "Crowdsourcing as a Model for Problem Solving: An Introduction and Cases." Convergence: The International Journal of
Research into New Media Technologies 14, no. 1 (2008): 75-90.
16 Michael Houlihan and Bonnie Harvey. "How Crowdsourcing Is Shaping the Future of Everything." Entrepreneur. January 13, 2018.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/307438
17 Jennifer Alsever. "What Is Crowdsourcing?" CBS News. May 1, 2008. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/what-is-crowdsourcing
234  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this article that discusses what crowdsourcing is, how to use it, and its benefits
   (https://openstax.org/l/52CrowdSource) for more information.

This new business prototype, similar to outsourcing, features an enterprise posting a problem online and
asking for volunteers to consider the problem and propose solutions. Volunteers earn a reward, such as prize
money, promotional materials like a T-shirt, royalties on creative outlets like photos or designs, and in some
cases, compensation for their labor. Before proposing the solution, volunteers learn that the solutions become
the intellectual property of the startup posting the problem. The solution is then mass produced for profit by
the startup that posted the problem.[18] The process evolves into the crowdsourcing process after the
enterprise mass produces and profits from the labor of the volunteers and the team. Entrepreneurs should
consider that untapped masses have solutions for many issues for which agendas do not yet exist.
Crowdsourcing can exploit those agendas and add to the tools used to stimulate personal creativity. This type
of innovation is planned and strategically implemented for profit.
For example, Bombardier held a crowdsourced innovation contest to solicit input on the future of train
interiors, including seat design and coach class interior. A corporate jury judged the submissions, with the top
ten receiving computers or cash prizes. Companies are often constrained, however, by internal rules limiting
open source or external idea sourcing, as they could be accused of "stealing" an idea. While crowdsourcing
outside of software can be problematic, some products such as MakerBot's 3D printers, 3DR's drones, and
Jibo's Social Robot have used developer kits and "makers" to help build a community and stimulate innovation
from the outside.

   WORK IT OUT

   A Crowdsourced Potato Chip

   In an effort to increase sales among millennials, PepsiCo turned to crowdsourcing to get new flavor ideas
   for their Lay's potato chips (called Walker's in the UK). Their 2012 campaign, "Do Us a Flavor," was so
   successful that they received over 14 million submissions. The winner was Cheesy Garlic Bread, which
   increased their potato chip sales by 8 percent during the first three months after the launch.

      · What are some other products that would work well for a crowdsourced campaign contest?
      · What items wouldn't work well?

Amazon's Mechanical Turk is an online crowdsourcing platform that allows individuals to post tasks for
workers to complete. In many instances, these tasks are compensated, but the payment can be less than one
dollar per item completed. Mechanical Turk is one of the largest and most well-known crowdsourcing

18 Daren C. Brabham. "Crowdsourcing as a Model for Problem Solving: An Introduction and Cases." Convergence: The International Journal of
Research into New Media Technologies 14, no. 1 (2008): 75-90.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  235

platforms, but there are a number of other more niche ones as well that would apply to smaller markets. In
the case of innovation contests and outsourced tasks from corporations, those tasks may be hosted internally
by the corporation.

Brainstorming

Brainstorming is the generation of ideas in an environment free of judgment or dissension with the goal of
creating solutions. See Creativity, Innovation, and Invention to refresh yourself on this technique.
Brainstorming is meant to stimulate participants into thinking about problem solving in a new way. Using a
multifunctional group, meaning participants come from different departments and with different skill sets,
gives entrepreneurs and support teams a genuine chance to suggest and actualize ideas. The group works
together to refine and prototype potential solutions to a problem.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Brainstorming is a highly researched and often practiced technique for the development of innovative
   solutions. One of the more successful proponents of brainstorming is the United Nations Children's Fund
   (UNICEF). UNICEF faces unique problems of solving resource problems for mothers and children in
   underdeveloped nations. See how UNICEF practices brainstorming to solve problems
   (https://openstax.org/l/52UNICEFbrain) including child survival, gender inclusion, refugee crises,
   education, and others.

The setting for a brainstorming session should remain as informal and relaxed as possible. The group needs to
avoid standard solutions. All ideas are welcome and listed and considered with no censorship and with no
regard to administrative restrictions. All team members have an equal voice. The focus of brainstorming is on
quantity of ideas rather than on the ideal solution provided in every suggestion. A classic entrepreneurial
brainstorming activity, as popularized by business software developer Strategyzer, is known as the "silly cow"
exercise. Teams come up with ideas for new business models pertaining to a cow, with the results often
outrageous, ranging from sponsored cows to stroking cows for therapeutic release. Participants are asked to
identify some aspect of a cow and develop three business models around that concept in a short time period,
typically two minutes or fewer. The activity is designed to get creative juices flowing.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video from ABC's Nightline that shows how IDEO designed a new shopping cart
   (https://openstax.org/l/52IDEOshopcart) for an example of a design process that involves
   brainstorming.
236  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Storyboarding

Storyboarding is the process of presenting an idea in a step-by-step graphic format, as Figure 6.12 shows.
This tool is useful when the entrepreneur is attempting to visualize a solution to a problem. The steps to the
solution of a problem are sketched and hung in graphic format. Once the original graphic is placed, images of
steps working toward a solution are added, subtracted, and rearranged on a continual basis, until the ultimate
solution emerges in the ultimate graphic format. For many years, entrepreneurs have used this process to
create a pre-visual for various media sequences.

Figure 6.12 Storyboarding helps entrepreneurs and team members to visually represent steps in product
creation and problem solving. (credit: "Clue storyboarding" by Adam Wiggins/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Team Creativity

Team creativity is the process whereby an entrepreneur works with a team to create an unexpected solution
for an issue or challenge. Teams progress through the same creative problem-solving process described
already: clarify, ideate, develop, implement, and evaluate. The main advantage of team creativity is the
collaboration and support members receive from one another. Great teams trust in other team members,
have diverse members with diverse points of view, are cohesive, and have chemistry.
Team members should work in a stress-free and relaxing environment. Reinforcement and expansion of ideas
in the team environment motivates the team to continually expand horizons toward problem solution. A small
idea in a team may spark the imagination of a team member to an original idea. Mark Zuckerberg, cofounder
of Facebook, once said, "The most important thing for you as an entrepreneur trying to build something is,
you need to build a really good team. And that's what I spend all my time on."[19]

19 "Three Tips for Entrepreneurs Creating the Perfect Team." Virgin. n.d. https://www.virgin.com/entrepreneur/three-tips-entrepreneurs-
creating-perfect-team

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                       237

ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

Taaluma Totes[20]

Young entrepreneurs Jack DuFour and Alley Heffern began to notice the beautiful fabrics that came from
the different countries they visited. The entrepreneurs thought about what could be done with the
fabrics to create employment opportunities both in the country from which the fabric originated and in
their home base of Virginia. They decided to test producing totes from the fabrics they found and formed
Taaluma Totes (Figure 6.13). DuFour and Heffern also wanted to promote the production of these fabrics
and help underserved populations in countries where the fabric originated maintain a living or follow a
dream.

   Figure 6.13 This photograph was taken by a traveler, Kelsey Friedman, who studied abroad in Rwanda
   through Virginia Tech's International Business in Lugano: Combining Theory and Practice program.
   (credit: photo provided by Taaluma Totes)

   The team continued to test the process and gathered original fabrics, which they sent to Virginia to
   create totes. They trained individuals with disabilities in Virginia to manufacture the totes, thus serving
   populations in the United States. The entrepreneurs then decided to take 20 percent of their profits and
   make microloans to farmers and small business owners in the countries where the fabric originated to
   create jobs there. Microloans are small loans, below $50,000, which certain lenders offer to enterprising
   startups. These startups, for various reasons (they are in poor nations, at poverty level), can't afford a
   traditional loan from a major bank. The lenders offer business support to the borrower, which in turn
   helps the borrower repay the microloan. The microloans from Taaluma are repaid when the borrower is
   able. Repayments are used to buy more fabric, completing Taaluma's desire to serve dual populations. If
   the process proved unsuccessful, the co-owners would revise the process to meet the plan's
   requirements.
   DuFour and Heffern now have fabrics from dozens of countries from Thailand to Ecuador. The totes are
   specialized with features to meet individual needs. The product line is innovated regularly and Taaluma
   Totes serves a dual purpose of employing persons with disabilities in Virginia and creating employment
   for underserved populations in other countries.

20 "Backpacks That Carry a Country." Taaluma Totes. n.d. https://www.carryacountry.com/pages/about
238  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

 6.3 Design Thinking

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the design thinking process
  · Discuss some design thinking tools

David Kelley, founder of Stanford University's Design School and cofounder of design company IDEO, is
credited as the originator of design thinking, at least within business and entrepreneurial contexts. You were
briefly introduced to design thinking in Creativity, Innovation, and Invention, but we will delve into it in more
depth here. IDEO grew from a merger of the creator of Apple's first mouse and the first laptop computer
designer, David Kelley Design and ID Two, respectively. Almost a decade after the 1982 Apple creations, the
1991-merged company primarily focused on the traditional design of products, ranging from toothbrushes to
chairs. Yet another decade later, the company found itself designing consumer experiences more so than
consumer products. Kelley began using the word "thinking" to describe the design process involved in
creating customer experiences rather than creating physical products. The term design thinking was born.
The current IDEO CEO Tim Brown defines design thinking as "a human-centered and collaborative approach to
problem-solving, using a designed mindset to solve complex problems."[21] Design thinking is a method to
focus the design and development decisions of a product on the needs of the customer, typically involving an
empathy-driven process to define complex problems and create solutions that address those problems.
A common core of design thinking is its application beyond the design studio, as the methods and tools have
been articulated for use by those outside of the field, particularly business managers. Design practice is now
being applied beyond product and graphic areas to the design of digital interactions, services, business
strategy, and social policy.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this 2009 TEDGlobal talk where Tim Brown describes design thinking (https://openstax.org/l/
   52TEDTimBrown) from a historical perspective to modern times.

Design Thinking Process

Business schools have typically taught a rational, analytic approach to thinking. It focuses on well-defined
goals and constraints, and thought precedes action in a sequential process of planning and analysis. The
design thinking process approaches problem solving differently. Thinking and doing are often intertwined in
an iterative exploration of the design "space," and the process uncovers goals and constraints, rather than

21 Mark Logan. "Design Thinking for Entrepreneurs." Medium. September 29, 2018. https://medium.com/idealect/design-thinking-for-
entrepreneurs-392c8cbdcc24

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  239

identifying them up front.

One design thinking approach that is taught at places like Stanford's Design School and organizations like the
LUMA Institute (a global company that teaches people how to be innovative) is human-centered design
(HCD). HCD, as the name suggests, focuses on people during design and development. This speaks to the Tim
Brown definition of design thinking. Inspiration for ideas comes from exploration of actual people, their needs
and problems.

Figure 6.14 The design thinking process focuses on the spaces of inspiration, ideation, and implementation.
(credit (left): modification of "thought idea innovation imagination" by "TeroVesalainen"/Pixabay, CC0; credit
(center): modification of "document paper business chart" by "rawpixel"/Pixabay, CC0; credit (right):
modification of "office business colleagues meeting" by "Free-Photos"/Pixabay, CC0)

Three spaces--inspiration, ideation, and implementation--compose the design thinking process (Figure 6.14).
The process uses "spaces" and not "phases" because multiple spaces can happen simultaneously.

Nevertheless, inspiration usually occurs first. This entails identifying a problem or opportunity that motivates
someone to search for solutions. Ideation is the process of generating ideas and solutions through various
techniques such as brainstorming and sketching sessions. There are hundreds of ideation techniques
available. A few examples of ideation exercises include Top Five, How Might We, Mash-up, and Co-Creation
Session. In Top Five, everyone on the team writes down their top five ideas, shares them, and clusters similar
ideas. In How Might We, the team looks at insight statements and reframes them as "How Might We"
questions by adding that phrase at the beginning. The goal is to find opportunities for design that also allows
for a variety of solutions. Mash-up involves combining existing brands or concepts to create something new.
The team identifies those brands or concepts that represent a quality they desire in their solution, and they
"mash up" those ideas to create a new idea. A co-creation session incorporates the desired market into the
creation process by recruiting a group of people from the market to work on the design with the team. The
goal is to capture the feedback the group provides by treating them as designers, not as interview subjects.
Implemented solutions evolve from interactions with users and from the ongoing creation and refinement of
possible solutions. Design thinking incorporates experience-based insights, judgments, and intuition from the
end users' perspectives, while in a rational analytic approach, the solution process often becomes formalized
into a set of rules.
240  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Nesta is a UK-based innovation foundation that offers many design thinking tools and resources similar to
IDEO. Named for the acronym NESTA, the National Endowment for Science, Technology and the Arts, the
organization was established in 1998 with an endowment from the UK National Lottery and became an
independent charity in 2012. Nesta's strategy focuses on health, government innovation, education, arts, and
creative economy and innovation policy. Nesta offers a set of five criteria to ascertain that an occupation is
creative:[22]

 1. Novel process
 2. Mechanization resistant
 3. Nonrepetitive or nonuniform function
 4. Makes a creative contribution to the value chain
 5. Involves interpretation not merely a transformation in the service or artifact

As the name implies, design thinking originates from design. As design is one of the identified creative
industries, there's a clear connection between creative industries and design thinking. In fact, Nesta offers
inspiration and ideation exercises that are freely available for users wishing to implement design thinking
practices.

Human-Centered Design Thinking Spaces

The Stanford Design School uses human-centered design thinking (HCD) as its design thinking approach. HCD
emphasizes the following spaces of the design thinking process:

  · Empathizing: As illustrated by the human-centered approach, it is important to have empathy for the
      problem you are attempting to solve. Empathy, as the chapter on Creativity, Innovation, and Invention
      defined, means observing and immersing yourself in the surrounding environment to engage with and
      understand people's experiences and motivations.

  · Defining: This aspect involves describing the core problem(s) that you and your team have identified.
      Asking "how might we?" questions helps narrow the focus, as the ultimate aim here is to identify a
      problem statement that illustrates the problem you want to tackle. "Frame Your Design" is one such
      challenge in what IDEO calls its "toolkit" that works well here. Frame Your Design asks you to write down
      your problem and then refine it by following specific steps so that you end up with a design question that
      serves as a starting point but leaves room for creativity.[23]

  · Ideating: This is where you begin to come up with ideas that address the problem "space" you have
      defined. There are hundreds of exercises aimed at the ideation process, ranging from brainstorming to
      "Five whys?" in the IDEO toolkit. The "Five whys" is a questioning method in which the researcher, in
      looking for information to solve a problem, asks a respondent a broad question, then asks "why" to get
      deeper into the respondent's thinking. IDEO puts it this way: "You'll use this method while you're
      conducting an interview and start with really broad questions like "Do you save much money?" or "How
      was your harvest this year?" Then, by asking why five times you'll get some essential answers to
      complicated problems. This can be a great method to use if you're trying to get at the human and
      emotional roots of a problem."[24]

  · Prototyping: In this space, the entrepreneur creates and tests inexpensive, scaled-down versions of a

22 Christine Harris, Margaret Collins, and Dennis Cheek. America's Creative Economy: A Study of Recent Conceptions, Definitions, and Approaches
to Measurement across the USA. National Creativity Network and Creative Alliance. August 2013. https://www.centerforcreativeeconomy.com/wp-
content/uploads/2015/10/AmericasCreativeEconomyFULLReport.pdf
23 IDEO.org. The Field Guide to Human Centered Design. 2015. https://bestgraz.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/Field-Guide-to-Human-
Centered-Design_IDEOorg.pdf
24 "The Five Whys." Design Kit. n.d. http://www.designkit.org/methods/66

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                     241

   product with features or benefits that serve as solutions for previously identified problems. This could be
   tested internally among employees, a process known as dogfooding, or externally with potential
   customers. This is an experimental phase.
· Testing: Designers apply rigorous tests of the complete product using the best solutions identified in the
   prototyping space.

WHAT CAN YOU DO?

Every Day a Little Closer

 Some examples of everyday items that can be improved through design thinking are sinks on top of
 toilet cisterns that save water by refilling the cistern with the water you wash your hands with, video
 doorbells, and smart lightbulbs. Try to think of an improvement to one of your everyday items.

Design Thinking Tools

There are numerous design thinking tools aimed to aid or stimulate your design thinking activities. They stem
from organizations dedicated to design thinking like IDEO and Google Ventures. While methodologies
incorporate processes and techniques, tools are resources that enable such approaches. These may be
activities, or templates that facilitate the approach.

  · Innovation Flowchart: A sample innovation flowchart may map out the details of the process. The
      structured overview serves as an organizational tool in the development process.

  · Question Ladder: A tool that helps you ask the "right" questions by refining your questions (Figure 6.15).
      Asking the "wrong" questions can yield meaningless or less-than-adequate results.

Figure 6.15 A question ladder can help refine questions. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

  · Design Thinking Tool Kit: There are various tool kits for select audiences. For example, the "design
      thinking for educators" toolkit has design thinking resources related to education. A typical tool kit
      includes a wide assortment of resources with methods and instructions to help you put design thinking
242  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

   into action.
· IDEO Design Kit: IDEO offers an approximately 200-page free PDF, "The Field Guide to Human Centered

   Design," with activities on mindsets, ideation, inspiration, implementation and a few case studies:
   http://www.designkit.org/resources/1.
· Google Ventures Design Sprint: A five-day design-thinking exercise that helps resolve questions through
   design, prototyping, and testing: https://www.gv.com/sprint/.
· Design Thinking Mix Tapes: Stanford's Design School offers three "mixtapes" that serve as guides
   through a half day of design thinking work in the areas of understanding, experimentation, and ideation:
   https://dschool.stanford.edu/resources/chart-a-new-course-put-design-thinking-to-work.
· WE THINQ: Software designed to enable collaboration in innovation management:
   https://www.ideaconnection.com/software/we-thinq-258.html.

ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

BitGiving and Design Thinking

 At age twenty-two, Ishita Anand created India's first live social crowdfunding platform that enabled
 artists, engineers, and creators to collaborate and raise funds for special causes by verifying causes and
 how the funds would be used, while charging a small percentage of the funds raised as a fee. Within five
 years of its inception, her social enterprise, called BitGiving, has led efforts to address problems through
 social change. The firm has contributed to various social campaigns related to children, women,
 education, health, and disaster among others. The firm partnered with charities and other organizations
 to raise funds for India's National Ice Hockey team to compete in Kuwait at the World Cup and for the
 victims of the 2015 Nepal earthquake through the crowdfunding platform and other social media
 platforms such as Twitter.[25]

 As India's first social crowdfunding platform, BitGiving literally aimed to solve problems through social
 change. Describe some design thinking activities that would have been useful to Anand at BitGiving's
 inception.

 As of September 2018, the company closed its website abruptly and reportedly shut down. While the
 exact reason for its failure is unknown, some reasons the venture could have failed were insufficient
 capital, regulation, management problems or strategic misalignment, or even poor timing. Failure is
 common in entrepreneurship, and conferences dedicated to failure are even conducted around the
 globe (FailCon is sort of the TED Talk of failure).

   · How could the design thinking process have helped BitGiving from the outset?

 6.4 Lean Processes

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

25 "BitGiving." Crunchbase. n.d. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/bitgiving#section-overview

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                                             243

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Discuss the lean process methodology
  · Understand the phases of the lean problem-solving process.

You have learned about different problem-solving approaches that entrepreneurs take to lead their startups
and work with others. Most of these approaches have had to do with the entrepreneur's cognitive or creative
mindsets. Now we will learn about an approach that is more rooted in process, called lean process. Lean
problem solving has been used as an entrepreneurial methodology in new and emerging ventures, and it's
interesting that it comes from a large corporate, manufacturing background that focuses on efficiencies. The
Six Sigma methodology, pioneered at Motorola in the 1970s and 1980s, and adopted by many companies, is a
disciplined, data-driven approach that provides companies tools to improve the capability of their business
processes. According to the American Society for Quality, "Six Sigma views all work as processes that can be
defined, measured, analyzed, improved and controlled. A set of qualitative and quantitative tools is used to
drive process improvement. This increase in performance and decrease in process variation helps lead to
defect reduction and improvement in profits, employee morale, and quality of products or services."[26] GE
copied it and created the "Process Excellence" programs that millions of managers and others have taken to
get certified at various "belts." Although Six Sigma and Process Excellence do not fit strictly in terms of
entrepreneurship, as they are used mainly by large, mature companies, many of the methods fit in the lean
model.

Toyota pioneered the lean process in the 1980s. The term "lean manufacturing" is the most common, but it is
much more than manufacturing. The lean process is a systematic method for the maximizing of continuous
improvement and the minimization of surplus or unused material in the production of a process. The
entrepreneur begins the startup with a sense the original product will be the product carrying the
organization to success in the long term. In most cases, the good or service will require modification to
maintain a process, technology, or up-to-date product offering. Lean problem solving means the
entrepreneur's entire team scans both the company's internal and external environments for continuous
improvement and methods for bringing additional revenue to the startup by cost improvement processes that
promote sustainable value. The external environment encompasses customers, industry trends, and
competition. The internal environment comprises the factors inside the enterprise, such as employees, and
internal practices and processes. In lean manufacturing, for example, improving efficiencies in the internal
environment should lead to advantages in the external environment (whether that be cost savings to
customers, competitive advantage from more output/superior product, etc.).

For example, every mile saved per day per UPS truck driver results in approximately $50 million in savings per
year, according to Juan Perez, the company's chief information and engineering officer. Using customer data
and artificial intelligence, the company created a system dubbed ORION, which is an acronym for On-Road
Integrated Optimization and Navigation.[27] To date, the system has resulted in $400 million in savings to UPS.
By applying the lean process, everything that UPS saves on the input (by reducing mileage) leads to savings on
the output, which leads faster deliveries, lower costs for consumers, and more profit for UPS.

26 American Society for Quality. "What Is Six Sigma?" n.d. https://asq.org/quality-resources/six-sigma
27 Juan Perez. "UPS' Approach to Innovation and Technology." Presentation sponsored by J. Mack Robinson College of Business, Georgia
State University, Atlanta, GA. March 28, 2019.
244     Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

Lean Problem-Solving Process

The lean problem-solving process is a cycle of observation, assessment, and continual evaluation. As shown in
Table 6.1, this cycle typically involves eight specific steps.

 Step                            Steps in the Toyota Lean Problem-Solving Process
Step 1                                                                  Action
Step 2
        Clarify the problem.
Step 3
Step 4  Analyze the problem (genchi genbutsu is the Toyota practice of thoroughly understanding a
Step 5  condition by confirming information or data through personal observation at the source of the
        condition; the Japanese phrase essentially means "go and see").[28]
Step 6
Step 7  Set targets.
Step 8
        Identify root causes. Asking, "Why?" repeatedly can narrow down the factors to a root cause.

        Develop countermeasures by asking, "What is the specific change we want to make?" and
        involving others in the problem-solving process.

        Implement the countermeasures and see them through.

        Monitor results.

        Standardize processes that succeed. Lean problem solving is about learning more about the
        problem itself and its deep causes in context.

Table 6.1 The lean problem-solving, step-wise process allows the business to observe, assess, and continually
evaluate.

     ARE YOU READY?

     Too Much Too Late?

     Many entrepreneurs create a startup with an idea that they develop without any feedback from potential
     customers, relying on their own knowledge or assumptions about the market. Consider the story of
     Rapid SOS: https://hbr.org/2018/05/do-entrepreneurs-need-a-strategy. What would most likely happen
     when they decided to go forward with their product? Will it be a fit to the customer's needs or solve their
     problems? How is lean process different from this?

28 "Genchi Genbutsu." Lean HE Glossary. n.d. http://www.leanhe.org/lean-he/glossary#TOC-Genchi-Genbutsu
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  245

Lean Problem-Solving Phases

Observation is the phase in which the entrepreneur studies the challenge and notes all facets of the challenge
requiring solution. In this phase, the entrepreneur asks questions and conducts research about the change
needed for a successful product, outcome, or service. The entrepreneurs must determine why the change is
needed. What is the purpose of the endeavor? Feedback is extremely important in this phase.

For example, a community asked a group of entrepreneurs to help address the youth obesity problem in a
middle school. The entrepreneurs began to study the intake of food by the children and determined that both
the content of the school lunch menu and the lifestyle of the majority of the children were affecting the obesity
rate in the community. They then defined the purpose of the project as finding a low-cost, low-risk method of
changing the lunch menu and agreed that the primary outcome would be a 30 percent reduction in the
obesity rate of the children. The entrepreneurs began to assess the cost of changing the lunch menu and
observing what else the kids ate. The entrepreneurs discovered that the lunch menu change required to
reduce the obesity rate was beyond the financial capability of the school district. Research also showed that
many of the children, products of single-parent homes, were eating high-calorie, high-fat, take-out foods for
dinner. Further observation revealed that the children did not engage in physical activity after hours because
the local surroundings were not safe. The community needed a process to transform the wellness of the
children, and the entrepreneurs recommended using a lean process approach to help the children as quickly
as possible.

After the observation of the problem comes assessment, the phase in which the entrepreneur experiments
and analyzes the potential process and its capabilities. The entrepreneur leverages creative tools and
resources to arrive at a solution and assesses each step of a possible solution. Each step must add value to the
solution, or that step in the solution is unnecessary. In addition, the step must be capable of solving the issue
and add flexibility to the solution. How is the process or product being improved? In this phase, a prototype of
the product is developed and delivered. The entrepreneur must ask the customer if all needs and wants are
satisfied with the prototype. If the prototype is being developed for mass production, surveying customers
about potential sales is essential. In the school lunch example, the school system would have been the
customer of the new food menu (prototype) in the assessment phase.

Evaluation is the phase in which behaviors are analyzed to assess success. The entrepreneur continually
studies each phase of the solution to observe the effectiveness of outcomes desired by the client. The
entrepreneur ensures that transformation is built into the habits of the school to obtain, maintain, and
develop the desired outcomes.

In a real-world example of a company applying lean processes, the New Balance Company, which designs and
manufactures both athletic and casual shoes, used a batching approach in the early 2000s that organized
production by departments, so that all of the cutting took place in one department, all of the stitching took
place in another, and so forth. While it seems that batching tasks would improve efficiency, at New Balance, it
meant that production of one pair of shoes took nine days. Executives observed piles of inventory sitting
between floors and departments, and noticed employees waiting while there were delays in the production
line. They also noticed that the pay structure contributed to the piles of works in process because employees
were paid by the piece, which encouraged them to produce as much as possible.

The company applied lean principles to rearrange the production floor by value streams, or the making of a
product by sharing similar processing steps. On one side was "cut and stitch" products using US materials of
leather and mesh, while another side used premade products from overseas for soles, inserts, and kits. This
change cut the time to make a pair of shoes down to four hours, meaning that domestic plants could ship
some orders in twenty-four hours, while competitors may need as much as 121 days to ship when they
246  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

outsourced manufacturing to Asia.

An often-used lean problem-solving tool is whiteboarding (Figure 6.16). Whiteboarding is a type of graphing
that permits the entrepreneur to plot each step in a process to build comprehension and detailing of the
process. The entrepreneur draws each step on the whiteboard using a linking-type diagram, and draws arrows
to show how processes affect other processes. Seeing the flow of the process allows the entrepreneur to note
where functions in the process are duplicated or inconsistent.

Figure 6.16 Whiteboarding is a technique that can help entrepreneurs visualize and analyze processes.
(credit: "whiteboard man presentation write" by "StartupStockPhotos"/Pixabay, CC0)

For example, in a community garden, storing tools, such as hoes and hand trowels for weeding, in different
sheds wastes time when preparing to begin the process of weeding. These tools should be stored collectively
to eliminate multiple trips and wasted time. Seeing the process on a whiteboard or other medium brings
awareness to how processes can be improved. After the process is changed, it is graphed again for further
scrutiny.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   The Origin of Lean

   Would it surprise you to know the origin of lean, in modern times, is considered to be Henry Ford's
   production line? Although we don't necessarily think of the creation of automobiles as an
   entrepreneurial venture in today's world, Henry Ford was truly an entrepreneur for his time when the
   manufacture of automobiles was just beginning. Not only did he recognize the opportunity inherent in
   the sale of automobiles, he recognized the need to create an efficient process for automobile production
   that could decrease costs and, consequently, the selling price of the vehicle. As the first entrepreneur to
   join the use of interchangeable parts with moving conveyance to develop fabrication processes, Ford was
   able to turn over inventory in a very short time; however, Ford's process could not deliver variety. In fact,
   Ford was quoted as saying of the Model T's color, "You can have any color as long as it's black."[29] It had
   the fastest drying time; hence, it was the only color he used for a number of years.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                                                              247

The Ford system was built around one static product. In the 1930s, when the market demanded product
variety, the company was not set up to address this challenge. Kiichiro Toyoda (Figure 6.17), the second
president of Toyota Motor Corporation, visited the Ford plant in Michigan to learn more about their
application of the assembly line concept. After observing, he proposed a new production system that
would strive to "right size" equipment to better match tasks and the volume of work, as well as
introducing quality assurance steps in each sequence of the work process. Toyoda's approach shifted the
focus from machinery to process, optimizing efficiency while maintaining quality.

Figure 6.17 Kiichiro Toyoda introduced new ways to improve processes. (credit: "Kiichiro Toyoda" by
"Scanyaro"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

29 Diana T. Kurylko. "Model T Had Many Shades; Black Dried Fastest." Automotive News. June 16, 2003. http://www.autonews.com/article/
20030616/SUB/306160713/model-t-had-many-shades%3B-black-dried-fastest
248                                                                               Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

     Key Terms

adaptive model method of entrepreneurial problem solving that seeks solutions in ways that are tested and
     known to be effective

assessment lean problem-solving process phase in which the entrepreneur experiments and analyzes the
     potential process and its capabilities

brainstorming generation of ideas in an environment free of judgment or dissension with the goal of
     creating solutions

clarify first step of the creative process, which involves recognizing the existence of a gap between the
     current state and a desired state

communication skills skills entrepreneurs use to pool resources for the purposes of investigating solutions
     leading to innovative problem solving and competitive advantage

creativity development of original ideas
critical thinking complex analysis of a problem or issue with the goal of solving the problem or making a

     decision
crowdsourcing teams of amateurs and non-experts working together to form a solution to a problem
data analysis process of analyzing data and modeling the data into a structure that leads to innovative

     conclusions
decisiveness ability to make a quick, effective decision, not letting too much time go by in the process
design thinking method to focus the design and development decisions of a product on the needs of the

     customer, typically involving an empathy-driven process to define complex problems and create solutions
     that address those problems
develop stage in which the entrepreneur takes the list of ideas generated and tests each solution for
     feasibility
entrepreneurial problem solving process of using innovation and creative solutions to close the
     opportunity gap by resolving complex societal, business, or technological problems
evaluate stage in which the final solution is assessed
evaluation lean problem-solving process phase in which behaviors are analyzed to assess success
external environment outside the enterprise and encompasses customers, industry trends, and
     competition
hackathon event, usually hosted by a tech company or organization, which brings together programmers
     and workers with other degrees of specialization within the company, community, or organization to
     collaborate on a project over a short period of time
human-centered design focuses on people during design and development
ideate stage of the creative problem-solving process leading to the detailing and formation of idea
     generation by the entrepreneur
implement means to enact the plan and test for success
innovative model method of entrepreneurial problem solving that uses techniques unknown to the market
     and that bring competitive advantage to an organization
internal environment comprises the factors inside the enterprise, such as employees, and internal practices
     and processes
lean process systematic process for the maximizing of continuous improvement and the minimization of
     surplus or unused material in the production of a process
need awareness occurs when the entrepreneur notes a gap between societal or customer needs and actual
     circumstances

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques  249

observation lean problem-solving process phase in which the entrepreneur studies the challenge and notes
     all facets of the challenge requiring solution

petitioner problem solvers problem solvers who see a problem and ask others for solution ideas
resourcefulness ability to discover clever solutions to obstacles
self-regulating problem solvers problem solvers who are autonomous and work on their own, without

     external influence; they have the ability to see a problem, immediately visualize a possible solution to the
     problem, and seek to devise a solution
storyboarding process of presenting an idea in a step-by-step graphic format
team creativity process of a team creating an unexpected solution for an issue or challenge
theorist problem solvers problem solvers who see a problem and begin to consider a path toward solving
     the problem using a theory
whiteboarding type of graphing that permits the entrepreneur to plot each step in a process to build
     comprehension and detailing of the process

     Summary

6.1 Problem Solving to Find Entrepreneurial Solutions
Problem solving involves more than making decisions. Problem solving is a necessary component of
entrepreneurial genesis, used to manage your business and helpful in addressing everyday personal
situations. Entrepreneurs must know their personal strengths and capitalize on applicable problem-solving
methods to create innovative products. Moving a startup ahead of the competition requires the entrepreneur
to use all problem-solving sources and skills in the entrepreneur's tool box. Problem-solving models can be
adaptive or innovative, the latter being more common among entrepreneurs. Problem-solving skills include
critical thinking, communication, decisiveness, resourcefulness, business and industry awareness, and an
ability to analyze data. There are various types of problem solvers, including self-regulating, theorist, and
petitioner problem solvers.

6.2 Creative Problem-Solving Process
The creative problem-solving process is a logical process. The steps to the creative problem-solving process
are clarify, ideate, develop, implement, and evaluate. Each step is an aid to creating a solution. The steps are
repeated cyclically until the entrepreneur develops an innovative solution. When entrepreneurs experience
creativity block, tools to alleviate the block are available. These tools include crowdsourcing, brainstorming,
and storyboarding. Each of these tools assist the entrepreneur in innovative thinking.

6.3 Design Thinking
Design thinking in business and entrepreneurship was made prevalent by David Kelley, founder of Stanford
University's Design School and cofounder of design company IDEO. Design thinking, which espouses an HCD
approach, can be applied beyond product and graphic design to include the design of social policy, business
strategy, services, and digital interactions. The five stages as espoused in Stanford's design thinking model are
empathizing, defining, ideating, prototyping, and testing. There are numerous design thinking tools that help
develop and carry out these processes from various organizations and companies, ranging from IDEO to
Google.

6.4 Lean Processes
Lean process is a systematic process for maximizing continuous improvement through minimizing surplus or
unused material in the production of a current process. With origins in manufacturing, the lean process can be
250  Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

applied to internal organizational processes as well as external product development. Lean process uses
observation, assessment and evaluation, and whiteboarding techniques to solve problems.

     Review Questions

1. What is the relationship between entrepreneurial thinking and problem solving?
2. What are the key aspects of the two types of problem-solving methods the entrepreneur uses to problem
solve?
3. What are the key skills entrepreneurs need to arrive at innovative solutions?
4. What are the differences in the three major types of entrepreneurs?
5. List and describe the steps an entrepreneur uses in the specific and logical process of creativity?
6. What are the key aspects of the brainstorming process?
7. What is the main advantage of using teams to create a solution?
8. Discuss the advantages of storyboarding.
9. What are the differences between the design thinking process and the problem-solving process and why are
they important?
10. What are the steps in human-centered design thinking? Briefly describe each.
11. What is human-centered design?
12. Observation is the phase in which entrepreneurs explore problems that requires solution. Which is not a
step in this phase?

    A. talk to clients and conduct research for potential solution
    B. determine if change is needed
    C. experiment and analyze potential solution
    D. None of these options is correct.
13. What are some advantages of the lean process?

     Discussion Questions

1. Which method do you think applies more to entrepreneurship, the innovative or adaptive problem-solving
method? Do you see yourself as using one method more than the other in your entrepreneurial endeavors? If
so, which one and why?
2. Do you think it is important for the entrepreneur to understand and develop all the problem-solving skills to
manage a successful startup? Why or why not?
3. Which of the three types of entrepreneurs relies more on the innate skill of the entrepreneur?
4. How does the fishbone process aid entrepreneurs in finding the root cause to problems worth solving?
5. Discuss the different methodologies an entrepreneur might use when experiencing creativity block.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques                                               251

6. Discuss the crowdsourcing process, including how contributors to the solution are rewarded and how
different platforms fit with different types of businesses.
7. Why is empathy needed in defining problems?
8. Why is it important to continuously ask for feedback and improve the current design?
9. What are some ways you can determine the true root cause of a problem and not just its symptoms?
10. What are the best ways to implement lean thinking in your company?

     Case Questions

1. The team at AMD, the manufacturer of a chip processor, has a good grasp on how software giants build
products around its processors. The teams at AMD design processors to feature attractive capabilities to the
software giants by seeking input from researchers and designers on the AMD team who possess knowledge of
current and upcoming trends. New processors will incorporate these trends in design. After identifying what
type of problem-solving style this would be an example of, incorporate the key skills entrepreneurs must have
according to the chapter and apply them in terms of the AMD team.

2. Tamika, a young entrepreneur, has been purpose-driven toward social change in her rural community. She
has created solutions for pesticide runoff, erosion problems, and toxic well water. She has decided to focus
more on energy conservation and local air quality. Her first client is interested in wind as a power source.
Tamika is unfamiliar with wind power and needs to learn about innovative solutions for residential application.
How might Tamika use creative problem solving methods to develop solutions for her client's request?

3. Based on input from his second-grade students, New York teacher Michael Schurr was able to redesign his
classroom to better serve the students' needs. In the book Design Thinking for Educators, he redesigned the
cubby space to make the room semi-private and lowered the boards so that students could see the content.
He made all of these changes after asking the students for input. What are some ways you could improve your
classroom if your instructor asked your opinion, using design thinking tools?

     Suggested Resources

6.1 Problem Solving to Find Entrepreneurial Solutions
Tony Robbins' tips on decisiveness: https://www.tonyrobbins.com/stories/unleash-the-power/be-decisive/

6.2 Creative Problem-Solving Process
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/storyboards-visualize-ideas/
https://www.studiobinder.com/blog/downloads/storyboard-template/
https://www.mturk.com/
https://www.mindtools.com

6.3 Design Thinking
Google Ventures Design sprint: https://www.gv.com/sprint/
252                                                                               Chapter 6 Problem Solving and Need Recognition Techniques

IDEO Design Kit: http://www.designkit.org
Stanford Design Thinking Mix Tapes: https://dschool.stanford.edu/resources/chart-a-new-course-put-design-

  thinking-to-work
Stanford Design Thinking Process Diagram: https://dschool.stanford.edu/executive-education/dbootcamp

6.4 Lean Processes
Lean Enterprise Institute: https://www.lean.org/WhatsLean/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     7

              Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

Figure 7.1 A pair of entrepreneurs pitches their venture at the "Risk City" Global Entrepreneur Week in
Memphis, Tennessee. (credit: modification of "Risk City. Global Entrepreneur Week." by Brad Montgomery/
Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        7.1 Clarifying Your Vision, Mission, and Goals
        7.2 Sharing Your Entrepreneurial Story
        7.3 Developing Pitches for Various Audiences and Goals
        7.4 Protecting Your Idea and Polishing the Pitch through Feedback
        7.5 Reality Check: Contests and Competitions

      Introduction

   Sara Minkara, a Muslim American of Lebanese decent, lost her eyesight at age seven because of a genetic
   disorder. She grew up experiencing ethnic discrimination and mistreatment because of her disability. As a
   college student in the United States, Minkara realized that she had access to privileges that other children in
   her native Lebanon did not. Her desire to make things better for youth like her developed into a passion for
   empowering blind children to get engaged in their communities. The problem: Many societies marginalize
   visually impaired people and may even see them as a burden. This bias can be attributed in part to physical
   and cultural constraints and habits that create de facto limitations on their ability to function freely and
   effectively in those societies. The solution: educational programs and public awareness campaigns that
   empower visually impaired persons from a young age and provide them with assertiveness training.
   At 27, Minkara founded Empowerment Through Integration (ETI), a social enterprise that empowers youth
   with visual impairments in the Middle East-North African region and in the United States. The organization has
   grown from a summer camp to a small movement that assists more than 3,000 individuals across Lebanon and
   the United States. The mission and vision of ETI are to develop an inclusive society that transforms the global
254                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

social stigma against disabilities and empower blind youth.[1] One of Minkara's signature events is "Dining in
the Dark," which is designed to expose participants to the life of a blind person and educate them about the
potential in all people, particularly those who are disabled, including the visually impaired.

 7.1 Clarifying Your Vision, Mission, and Goals

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support
from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Clarify the vision statement, mission statement, and goals for your enterprise
  · Define and develop a problem-solution narrative that is compelling
  · Define and develop a value proposition that is credible and appealing to customers and investors

Entrepreneurs can sometimes be compared to superheroes: They solve problems. They wield great power and
responsibility. They're willing to take on risks the way superheroes are willing to take on villains. They are
undaunted in the face of failure. They seek solutions and continuous improvement of their products with their
customers in mind so that their solutions go beyond addressing their individual needs. When an entrepreneur
succeeds, others say "If only I'd thought of that!"

But thinking isn't enough. And even doing isn't enough. Successful entrepreneurs also understand the need to
communicate the origin and value of their venture. They not only solve problems, they tell stories of crises
averted, foes bested, and painful defeats from which they learned how to start anew. After all, what's a hero
without an origin story and a list of tales, battles lost, and markets won?

In superhero narratives, these origin stories are sacred lore. For an entrepreneur, a problem-solution narrative
is like the origin story for their offering. The problem-solution narrative concisely introduces a specific
problem that affects many people and presents the good or service as an innovative, unique, and insightful
solution. Here are some classic problem-solution narratives in advertising and in corporate origin stories to
think about as you consider how to craft a quick, compelling problem-solution narrative.

  · A young man starting high school lacks muscle mass. He drinks milk and gets stronger, earning the
      respect of his classmates.

  · Young people, pictured in silhouette, walk around a city looking bored with life. Then, they turn on their
      new MP3 players and start dancing in the streets. Their world is set ablaze in color and sound.

  · A man literally turns into Joe Pesci when he gets hungry. He eats a candy bar and turns back into his
      normal self.

These may not be the greatest stories ever told. You're not going to get a National Book Award for a Snickers
commercial, but these are memorable narratives about people who have a problem that the product in
question can solve.

To stay focused through repeated series of successes and failures, you need more than a problem-solution
narrative: You need a vision and, in turn, a mission statement and goals. You learned about these in The
Entrepreneurial Perspective, but you should revisit them as you develop your story and refine how to pitch that

1 "About Eti." Empowerment through Integration. n.d. https://www.etivision.org/about-eti

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                                                 255

story to potential investors, customers, and employees. A pitch is a formal presentation in which you ask for
something. It is delivered (usually) to potential investors in a startup. More on pitches later in the chapter.

Sara Minkara's vision statement may be defined as wishing to live in a world where visually impaired people
are not discriminated against. Her venture's mission is to establish a well-functioning nonprofit organization
showing people in the United States, the Middle East, and North Africa the humanity and value in those with
severely impaired eyesight. Minkara's vision, imagining the organization's long-term future, is to make it a
global leader in providing services to visually impaired people. Specific goals include hosting events,
developing educational programs, organizing awareness campaigns, and, of course, fundraising. Following
this example of mission, vision, and goals, let's break down each concept and consider how they work broadly
and apply to your potential venture.

Vision

A vision statement, as you saw in The Entrepreneurial Perspective, outlines the venture's broader purpose,
what the entrepreneur sees the venture growing into in the future. Before you can create a focused mission
statement and goals answering who you are, what you do, and what you plan to do in the future, you must
develop a vision statement that allows you look into the future to answer this question: "What might we
become someday if our organization were the best possible version of itself?"

Drafting a vision statement is an exercise in ideation--a purposeful process of opening up one's mind to new
trains of thought that branch out in many directions from a stated purpose or problem--in this case, with the
goal of generating new possibilities for goods, services, or processes to make your venture sucessful. A vision
statement is more open-ended than a mission statement. For example, Table 7.1 shows Amazon's vision and
mission statements. Notice how they differ.

Amazon's Vision and Mission Statements[2]

Amazon's Vision Statement                                           Amazon's Mission Statement

To be Earth's most customer-centric company, where                  We strive to offer our customers the lowest
customers can find and discover anything they might                 possible prices, the best available selection, and
want to buy online                                                  the utmost convenience

Table 7.1 Notice the differences in Amazon's vision and mission statements. The vision statement is broader
than the mission statement and looks to the future.

To create a strong vision statement, look at the broader field in which your organization operates. Be general.
State a dream that is not currently attainable but that defines what your collective outcomes would be in a
best-case scenario. Crafting a vision statement enables your organization, as a team, to identify key areas for
potential growth and key social influences you can have, but it is important to stay focused on changes in your
industry or sector as a general rule of thumb and to revisit your vision when those may warrant a change. For
example, Netflix started out with the goal of providing optimum value and convenience for customers renting
DVDs but as entertainment consumption platforms evolved it needed to adjust, and it has since shifted into
streaming content for television. The company's 2019 vision statement is "Becoming the best global
entertainment distribution service."[3]

2 "Amazon Mission and Vision Statement Analysis." Mission Statement Academy. June 19, 2019. https://mission-statement.com/amazon/
256          Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

When crafting a vision statement, write questions beginning with, "How might we...?" or statements starting
with, "In a perfect world, our organization would..." Craft a vision statement that hinges on the organization's
service goals and turns it into a lasting social good. (You should not promise to create world peace or give
everybody a puppy, but you should look at how businesses operate in your field and dream of doing better
strategically and socially.) These steps provide a good starting point:

 1. State how your organization would function in a dream scenario.
 2. Connect your organization's dreams to broader hopes for progress.
 3. Define how you're going to make the world a better place in the future through your products and

      services.

Dreams do not have to be wild to be broadly appealing or influential. The purpose of the vision statement is
not to set unattainable goals but to open minds in the organization. If the vision statement has no grounding
in reality, it can easily be written off; if it focuses on market share and product development (that is, tangible,
mission-oriented things), the point is lost. Imagine your best team doing its best work with future capabilities
and affordances made possible by other entrepreneurs and creators like you, and then state clearly what your
influence as world changers could be. Again, the goal is not to develop unmanageable expectations or
demand constant innovation from employees and contributors who have jobs that sustain day-to-day
operations. The purpose is to develop a conversation about what is possible for the enterprise. For smaller
startup enterprises (a deli or coffee shop, for example), the vision can be simpler but still focused on a unique
experience they want to create for their customers. In other words, it should still be aspirational, with a link to
the mission statement. Table 7.2 lists the vision statements of some companies across a variety of industries.

   Entity                                     Example Vision Statements
                                                                 Vision Statement
Alzheimer's
Association  A world without Alzheimer's disease

Teach for    One day, all children in this nation will have the opportunity to attain an excellent education
America
             Realizing the full potential of the Internet--universal access to research and education, full
Creative     participation in culture--to drive a new era of development, growth, and productivity
Commons      To offer designer eyewear at a revolutionary price, while leading the way for socially
             conscious businesses
Warby        To create a better everyday life for the many people
Parker

IKEA

Table 7.2 Strong vision statements are forward-thinking.

A vision statement does not have to be long to be strong. One well-known vision statement contains only
fifteen words: "At IKEA our vision is to create a better everyday life for the many people."[4] This vision
statement focuses on what IKEA hopes to accomplish, and what its employees can aspire to be--people who

3 "Netflix Mission and Vision Statement Analysis." Mission Statement Academy. July 12, 2019. https://mission-statement.com/netflix/
4 "Vision and Business Idea." IKEA. n.d. https://www.ikea.com/gb/en/this-is-ikea/about-us/vision-and-business-idea-pub9cd02291

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  257

make everyday life better for others. Note the phrase "the many people." This is purposeful: IKEA makes
mass-marketed products and chooses to align its vision with its targeted consumers: many people. This vision
statement is not framed as a political statement; rather, it is an ideal established for the global brand, and it
indicates a broad positive outcome. IKEA's statement is almost pure vision. A vision statement should connect
an organization's day-to-day work to a universal ideal rather than trying to draw a roadmap for
implementation.

That being said, alongside its vision, the company follows up with what IKEA calls its "business idea." It states:
"Our business idea is `to offer a wide range of well-designed, functional home furnishing products at prices so
low that as many people as possible will be able to afford them.'" This is something of a value proposition and
a mission statement wrapped up in one. A value proposition explains what it is, exactly, that an organization
or firm does that people will pay for (or contribute, to in the case of a nonprofit), and it is a central point in any
pitch. We learned about value propositions in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity as being integral to
identifying opportunities, and you will learn how they figure into your business model in Business Model and
Plan. But the discussion in this chapter is about how and why the value proposition needs to be articulated.

An example of a complicated vision statement is Coca-Cola's.[5] While they are a very successful company, in
the vision and mission statements published on their website, the distinctions between each can be difficult to
discern. Figure 7.2 shows a large collection of statements and comments titled "Mission, Vision, & Values" on
Coca-Cola's website that includes sections on workplace culture, market focus, and "working smart." These
concepts, taken together, cover most of what is discussed in this section. Coca-Cola is not committing sins of
omission with its "Mission, Vision, & Values" page. If anything, it tries to say too much. Also at issue is how
these ideas are stated. For a company with massive global reach and some of the best, most memorable
marketing moments, the relatively lifeless nature of its vision stands out.

Figure 7.2 This is Coca-Cola's mission, vision, and values. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

This is a classic case of telling rather than showing. IKEA and Coca-Cola arguably have a similar vision. They
want to make life a little bit better for people in an everyday way. But with this series of statements, Coca-Cola
tries to cover all possible types of vision for almost every major relationship or facet of the corporation
imaginable. Coca-Cola has a separate mission statement on its website, shown in Figure 7.3.

5 "Mission, Vision, and Values." The Coca-Cola Company. n.d. http://www.coca-colacompany.com/our-company/mission-vision-values
258  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

Figure 7.3 This is Coca-Cola's mission statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

While this is shared as a mission statement, it reads like a vision statement. The value proposition is relegated
to an afterthought in convoluted corporate-speak. This is all tied into a vague "2020 Vision," which is not truly
a vision statement but appears more like a wrapper for the "Mission, Vision, & Values" content.[6] It is not clear
what leadership, employees, business partners, or consumers are supposed to do with this information.
Coca-Cola is one of the world's most recognizable brands. The company can grow by creating new products
and by recapturing market share from competitors. It is essential, if and when Coca-Cola revises these
statements, that it succinctly speak to all of those groups with one voice rather than trying to address each
independently.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Can You Help Coca-Cola Rework Its "2020 Vision"?

   Can you revise Coca-Cola's vision statement so that it more clearly states how the corporation can be a
   force for good in the world? Read Coca-Cola's "Mission, Vision, and Values" page (https://openstax.org/
   l/52CokeMission) then draft a new vision statement that alludes to hopes and potential accomplishments
   in the context of broad, positive, future outcomes for everyone the corporation comes into contact with.

Crafting a vision statement for an entrepreneurial endeavor is different from redrafting Coca-Cola's vision
statement. A startup is in the process of defining itself, which can make it challenging to establish a far-off
vision, but crafting and adhering to a vision statement can remind leaders and employees what they are
capable of and what their market is all about, so it is an important step. A good vision statement is sufficiently
broad to allow for your organization to move within its marketplace while still aiming to do some good in the
world.

Mission

In the chapter's opening vignette, you learned about a young woman seeking to battle social injustice.
Minkara's mission was self-evident. It followed her experience facing prejudice in society. Other
entrepreneurial missions may not be as personal or altruistic, but they can still be a force that drives
passionate solution seeking. As we saw with Minkara, entrepreneurs often develop a product or service idea

6 "Mission, Vision, and Values." The Coca-Cola Company. n.d. http://www.coca-colacompany.com/our-company/mission-vision-values

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                                     259

through a difficult or frustrating experience, whether a social injustice or a consumer frustration.

An entrepreneurial mission is a business or nonprofit organization's reason for being. It is expressed as a self-
conceptualization in the context of a marketplace and includes a sense of action. In considering a venture's
mission, relevant questions are: Who are we? What do we make or do? Why do we exist as an enterprise in the
first place? Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak, cofounders of Apple, had a mission to put personal computing in the
hands of everyday consumers, which meant they had to create simple tools (a graphic user interface, mouse,
and so on) in parallel with hardware.

A well-developed sense of mission establishes what an organization is and what it seeks to become. Even
nonprofit organizations exist in marketplaces. They have to compete for resources and define themselves by
the services they provide. Establishing a clear mission helps a nonprofit organization seek funding. It helps
entrepreneurs in the for-profit world explain to investors, to customers, and to employees why their "thing,"
whatever it is, is worth doing.

For example, the American Red Cross, one of the oldest and most well-known relief organization in the United
States, has a very specific mission statement: "The American Red Cross prevents and alleviates human
suffering in the face of emergencies by mobilizing the power of volunteers and the generosity of donors."[7]
Defining an organization's mission clearly and specifically is essential for success.

A mission statement, as you read in the chapter on Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity is a clear
expression of an organization's reason for being that defines its primary long-term goal and often includes an
abbreviated plan of action for how to reach that goal. A mission statement is written by answering these
questions:

  · Who are we?
  · What do we make or do?
  · Why do we exist as an enterprise?

Developing an effective mission statement and adhering to it puts members of an organization on the same
page, and it communicates to potential partners and consumers that your organization knows where it is
going. Mission statements can be revised, but it's best to get it right at the start. A strong mission statement
helps stakeholders prioritize the entity's action steps and should guide decisions.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   This Ted Talk from Simon Sinek (https://openstax.org/l/52TEDSinek) is entitled "How Great Leaders
   Inspire Action." Sinek is the author of two books: Start with Why and Leaders Eat Last.

When it comes to crafting an effective mission statement, clarity is key: It must be specific. What is left out of a
mission statement is often as important as what is kept in. A good mission statement is focused, direct, and
honest about the marketplace in question as well as the organization's capabilities. It strikes the right balance
between practicality and hope. For example, Patagonia, a well-known outdoor apparel company, has a
compelling mission statement: "Patagonia: Build the best product, cause no unnecessary harm, use business
to inspire and implement solutions to the environmental crisis."

7 "Mission and Values." American Red Cross. n.d. https://www.redcross.org/about-us/who-we-are/mission-and-values.html
260  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Check out this article on HubSpot about what makes an effective mission statement and tips on how to
   write them (https://openstax.org/l/52EffectMission) to learn more.

An inadequate mission statement might say this: "At Toys Inc., we make the best wooden toys money can buy,
and our mission is to continue to grow to be a market leader in the classic toy industry." A better mission
statement might say this: "Toys Inc. is a market leader in North American wooden toy manufacturing. It is our
mission to lead the global market in wooden puzzle and wooden toy car manufacturing and to serve
customers with fresh versions of classic toys." Both mission statements leave room for growth, but the second
one defines more precisely what the organization is and where it is headed in the long term.
A mission statement should refrain from using clichés since these constrain the specific and unique vision of
the venture. It should not limit innovation or creativity, and it should reference consumers or clients.
To create a strong mission statement, start by defining what the organization is. Even in a startup, you have a
core problem-solution and an idea of what the product--and therefore the brand--will be. Be specific when
defining your organization's reason for being without limiting your avenues for growth. Include or embed the
service mission within the broader mission. Again, the mission statement needs to do the following things with
a tone of optimism:

  · Define who you are.
  · Define what you do now and for whom.
  · Define what you want to do in the future.
In a startup, the mission may change substantially in the early phases. Mission statements should not be
crafted in a way that limits an organization's ability to pivot--that is, to adjust the value proposition to better
achieve product-market fit (see the Launch for Growth to Success for a more in-depth discussion of pivoting).
And while they should not be impervious to change, revise the mission statement only when it is necessary
and helpful to do so. Companies and organizations usually change their mission statement when they have
made a major shift (due to an acquisition, pivot to another market, new growth strategy, etc.) or if their
purpose has changed in a major way.
For example, the March of Dimes organization was originally founded to serve people afflicted by polio, but
with the success of polio vaccinations, the disease was eradicated in the United States. As a result, the March
of Dimes changed its mission to focus on preventing birth defects, premature birth, and infant mortality.[8] In
another example, Slack, a venture-backed startup that went public in mid-2019, was founded as a way for
online game developers to collaborate. The original venture failed (twice), but the founder noticed that his
engineers used the tool for rapid collaboration and did not need email or other functions of Microsoft
Windows. Slack quickly communicated this change in a simple mission statement: "Slack is where work flows.
It's where the people you need, the information you share, and the tools you use come together to get things
done."[9]
One thing should be clear: It is not the purpose of an organization to come up with better mission and vision
statements. The purpose of an organization is to provide value to people and try to get paid or supported in

8 Kelly Medwick. "Why, When and How to Change Your Mission Statement." Firespring. February 13, 2018. https://blog.firespring.com/why-
when-and-how-to-change-your-mission-statement/
9 "Slack Integration." FounderHub. n.d. https://founderhub.io/integrations/slack

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                                        261

doing so. The point of crafting mission and vision statements is to assist you to that end. Essentially, your
vision statement is your dream, and your mission statement is your strategy in a real-world marketplace. The
vision is a statement about why you matter as an organization with a view of what the organization will
become in the future, while the mission is a statement about those who might be served by the venture.
Refining these statements will help you clarify your entrepreneurial story.

Goals

An organization needs to establish concrete goals for its products and services to remain viable. Goals should
be stated in precise terms that are appropriate for the marketplace. For example, a new "white table" Italian
restaurant in Chicago needs an initial goal on how it will attract and retain new customers based on its vision
and mission, relative to what is already available. A new company's initial goal is probably not to crush all
competition and take over a monopoly position. Instead, it may hope to capture a percentage of a close
competitor's market share or create a new product to reach a niche market. In those instances, goals would be
stated as specific outcomes to attract competitors' customers, or in the case of a niche business (like Spanx),
to define a new category of women's comfort apparel. Lululemon Athletica, which pioneered customer-
centered designs for women's athletic apparel, recently established new growth goals that were consistent
with its mission: "Management is hard set on growing the company to $4 billion in revenue by 2020. This
involves growing historically small contributors to the top line, such as men's, international, and the digital
business."[10]

Goals can be tactical in the short term too. They should be reasonable, influenced by a detailed understanding
of the marketplace and the competition, and attainable. Nothing stunts growth and clouds the path to
achieving your vision more quickly than setting unattainable goals and holding members of an organization to
impossible standards. Instead, set SMART goals, which you first were introduced to in The Entrepreneurial
Perspective. SMART stands for specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, and timely. The best goals clearly
communicate all of these elements, as shown in Figure 7.4.

Figure 7.4 Creating SMART goals can help you realize your vision. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

10 John Ballard. "Lululemon Athletica Pushes Forward With Ambitious Goals for 2020." The Motley Fool. December 17, 2017.
https://www.fool.com/investing/2017/12/10/lululemon-athletica-pushes-forward-with-ambitious.aspx
262  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

To break these down, SMART goals should be:

  · Specific: Your goals should be precise rather than overly broad.
  · Measurable: You should be able to test, in some quantifiable manner, whether a goal has been met,

      meaning that there needs to be some method to determine whether the goal has been met.
  · Achievable: The goal must be attainable; it cannot be so lofty that it cannot be accomplished. On the other

      hand, the goal should not be so easy that it can be accomplished quickly or with little effort.
  · Relevant: The goal should be well suited for what you want to accomplish; this means that the goal should

      be relevant to the outcome needed.
  · Timely: Each goal needs to have a defined deadline: the time when the goal must be accomplished. What

      time frame do you have for completing your goals? How does this timeline fit into your overall plan?

Is it a reasonable goal for a specialty soap company to strive to capture 1.5 percent of the global market share
two years after incorporating? Let's deconstruct the goal to assess how SMART it is. It is specific because it
establishes a clearly targeted amount (1.5 percent) of a defined market (global specialty soaps). Market share
is measurable. We can assume that this is an attainable goal for our imaginary startup. Is it relevant? Capturing
market share is always relevant because it translates to near-term earnings and potential for future earnings at
the same time. The goal as stated is also timely (within two years). Thus, this is a SMART goal.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Check out the University of Virginia's detailed exercise on writing SMART goals (https://openstax.org/l/
   52UVASMART) to learn more. It includes one example of a SMART goal, and, for each letter, it includes an
   explanation of how the concept is applied. Follow the link to write your own SMART goal and analyze it
   using a helpful questionnaire.[11]

SMART goals are not guarantees of success. As an entrepreneur, you could be wrong about whether a goal is
attainable, for example. Or you may fail at measuring outcomes correctly, and your idea may not be as well
defined or unique as you thought. Nevertheless, it is much better to set goals with all of these factors in mind
than to practice wishful thinking or set abstract goals and hope to reach business benchmarks by luck.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   SMART Goals for Social Activism

   You can use SMART goal-setting methods to plan a peaceful social demonstration. Mobilizing people to
   speak out about an issue that they want political leaders to address is one of the most basic tasks social
   entrepreneurs undertake. Social entrepreneurs who go on to found successful nonprofit organizations
   often cut their teeth in this kind of base-level activism. But just because the concepts underlying
   demonstrating are somewhat straightforward--contact media, gather people, march, demonstrate,

11 "Performance Management Goal Setting." University of Virginia. n.d. https://hr.virginia.edu/career-development/performance-
management-process/performance-management-resources/goals

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                               263

speak out, tell your story, clearly state your petition for change (also known as a "redress of grievances"),
peacefully disperse, and strategize next steps--that does not mean that the process is always done
according to SMART tactics. Protest organizers often vary immensely in their organizing skills.

Here is the task: Think of an issue that you want addressed on your campus or in your community.
Define it and draft a plan for a peaceful demonstration wherein the demonstration is clearly goal-
oriented.

  · State the specific issue you want addressed, who you want to address it, and what you want them to
      do.

  · State several ways you might measure the success of your protest. Are you seeking media
      awareness, legislative change, or specific action regarding an individual victim or perpetrator of a
      crime? Be sure to clearly state not only reasonable expectations regarding reactions to your
      demonstration but also measurable outcomes you can communicate to others as you work to
      gather interest in your cause.

  · Note whether your demands target the right leaders and whether what you ask of them is
      something you can attain.

  · Demonstrate clearly how the specific action you plan to take is relevant to the cause at hand. Will
      you demonstrate in one place? Will you carry out some form of active protest such as a "die-in" at a
      certain location?[12] Will you practice nonviolent civil disobedience? Clearly explain why your action is
      relevant to your requests or demands. If you are planning an act of peaceful civil disobedience, are
      you and everyone you are encouraging to participate aware of the possible consequences, such as
      arrest? If someone is risking arrest to help demonstrate for an important cause, they are right to
      demand of protest organizers that the action be relevant and easy for target audiences to
      understand.

  · Is your strategy timely? Are you planning a demonstration with measurable outcomes that will
      occur according to a timeframe you can track? It is generally ill-advised to petition for general fixes
      to complex solutions without paying attention to existing legislative and/or communicative cycles.

Note that this is presented as an exercise only. Much more planning goes into successful
demonstrations, but this should give you a sense of how SMART goal setting can be useful for social
entrepreneurship. It is not only for taking business risks. You can use SMART tactics to peacefully push
for important changes. Recognize, obviously, that the risks are quite different for this type of social
entrepreneurship than for other types of endeavors.

Thinking like a business entrepreneur again, recognize that SMART goal setting is a tactic for getting things
done in the short term. You can line up several attainable goals over a period of several weeks or months, and
build your way to a complex, realistic business plan. The Small Business Administration (SBA) business plan
template,[13] for example, includes eleven core sections and, as a blank outline, is thirty-five pages long. If you
set a SMART goal to complete each section in about a week, in three months, you would have a comprehensive
business plan.

12 Tamar Harris. "Road Safety Advocates to Hold `Die-in' at City Hall." The Star. March 25, 2018. https://www.thestar.com/news/gta/2018/03/
25/road-safety-activists-to-hold-die-in-at-city-hall.html
13 US Small Business Administration. "US Small Business Administration 8(a) Business Plan." March 31, 2014. https://www.sba.gov/sites/
default/files/SBA%201010C.pdf
264                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

 7.2 Sharing Your Entrepreneurial Story

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support
from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify the importance of telling your own story
  · Describe the advantages and disadvantages of using stories to build a startup

The popular reality TV show about entrepreneurs making pitches, Shark Tank, is sometimes erroneously
described as a show about pitching. This is false. Shark Tank is a show about people, usually inventors, with
interesting back stories who are now looking for help getting their product to its next step. The show offers
them the opportunity to pitch their idea to a panel of investors who, if they like the idea, make a financial offer
in return to help get the product to market. Every pitch is preceded with what reality TV producers deem to be
the more interesting narrative--the entrepreneur's story. Viewers learn what inspires entrepreneurs, how
hard they have worked on their prototypes and pitches, and what they have riding on those few minutes in the
room with the "sharks." Only after the entrepreneur's story is set up do we get to the punch line, so to
speak--the five-minute memorized pitch--which, if the entrepreneurs' ideas seem viable, is followed by
further talk about valuation and mentoring.

Shark Tank is not a course in pitching products, but it does highlight an important aspect about the practice:
Stories matter. They matter to both investors and customers. Many angel investors base their decision more
so on the team giving the pitch than on the product itself.

Telling Your Story

As an entrepreneur, you need to be able to effortlessly discuss your product and its problem-solution
narrative, its value proposition, its market niche, and the competition, but in your pitches, you also need to be
able to tell your story. Prepare to tell your entrepreneurial story by applying the most universal story format:
the fairy tale. Here is a template you can use:

       Once upon a time, we had a problem. Then, we thought of the most ingenious solution. We worked
       really hard and built several versions of the solution until we found The One. This, the innovation
       you see before you, is The One. We arrived at it through great personal cost, but here it is, and you
       can own part of it, not just the innovation on the table beside us, but the idea. You can own a
       sizeable portion of this business and its potential future growth. All you have to do is trust us, and
       you can be part of the magic. We will deliver this innovation to millions and make their lives better.
       We'll grow rich together and make the world a richer place at the same time. Join us. Invest, and live
       happily ever after.

Of course, the fairy tale format is not a formula for giving a practical, professional pitch, but it can help you put
the pieces of your own entrepreneurial journey on paper so you can weave key details into your pitch as it
develops.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  265

   WORK IT OUT

   Writing Your Entrepreneurial Story

   Take the preceding fairy tale template and use it to write the story of the entrepreneur behind your
   favorite product or brand. For example: "Once upon a time, Steve Jobs had a problem. He wanted to fit a
   computer into a box the size of an oversized cell phone..."
   Conduct some biographical research on an entrepreneur and, after fleshing out the fairy tale, answer
   these questions:

      · Why does the entrepreneur's story matter to investors?
      · Is there a way to craft an entrepreneur's story so that it appeals simultaneously to both investors

          and consumers?
      · How would you weave fairy tale elements about this entrepreneur into a mock pitch for his or her

          most ingenious invention?

Once a company grows, its story grows. But the original stories of the founders still play a part. This bigger
story is called a corporate narrative. A corporate narrative is not a fairy tale but relays how a successful
company grew from something small, perhaps starting in a garage in California, into a powerful firm or
corporation serving millions of people. Companies craft narratives, often with several embellishments, for
marketing purposes, but they also serve to remind leaders and employees about the vision and dreams the
company's founders once had.
An example of a startup that still inspires many today is the Hewlett-Packard Corporation (HP). Its origins lie in
the efforts of Bill Hewlett and David Packard, two Stanford University classmates in the 1930s. Much like
members of a garage band, they started their company in a real garage, and the firm has outgrown its humble
beginnings many times over. You can see the actual (restored) garage in Figure 7.5.
266  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

Figure 7.5 Hewlett-Packard has restored the original garage in Palo Alto, California, in which its two
cofounders, Bill Hewlett and David Packard, former Stanford University classmates, began work in 1938 on the
electrical switches and sound oscillators that became their new company's first products. (credit: "HP Garage
in Silicon Valley" by "MGA73bot2"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

The Advantages and Disadvantages of Using Stories

The primary advantage of using stories in pitch development is that they are relatable. Stories are how we
make sense of our lives, so it's natural for stories to help others make sense of our new ventures. Stories are
useful for transferring concepts with imagery told from a particular point of view.
When making a pitch, it is best not only to convey the value proposition of your product but to convey the
value in the way that a loyal, enthusiastic consumer of the product (a brand advocate) would see it. Your goals
become their goals. For example, Nike's Air Jordan brand has one of the most powerful advocate communities
in the world. They are motivated by stories of being, in some small way, like one of the greatest athletes of all
time. Inspired, they not only buy Nike shoes and clothes, they camp out and wait to be a part of the latest
release--like people waiting for the next installment of their favorite film on opening night. Using narrative
structures to get your pitch points across can inspire potential investors to see and share your vision and
goals. The downside to narrative-based customer development and marketing is that it can lead to a culture of
manufactured need. A new form of consumerism, built on what marketers call the "fear of missing out," is
another way of characterizing the euphoria people feel when they are enraptured by a brand. Fear of missing
out (FOMO) refers to the sense that we need to keep up with our peers and the personas they represent in
social settings, particularly on social media. They can say they were there and that they had the best stuff first.
Critics would say that building such a strong identity to a brand, or even material goods, clouds people's sense
of what is really important in life.
Even as you develop skills in pitching products by crafting inspiring narratives, be aware of the ethical
implications of your work. You need to learn how to successfully make pitches to grow a brand and a company
or nonprofit, but this is not a license to ignore the impacts of your work. Instead, consider this a call to action
to balance your entrepreneurial, consumerist pitches and efforts with pro-social ones as well. Across a career,
this kind of balance may be achievable, and, for both mass consumer products and purposeful social
entrepreneurship efforts, good storytelling will help you achieve your objectives.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  267

There is another type of narrative that can be pernicious--that of the wildly successful entrepreneur who has it
all. Yes, this chapter starts by comparing entrepreneurs to superheroes. They do accomplish things other
people only dream about, but many of the most famous ones have anomalous careers marked also by
favorable conditions, luck, and hard work. The narrative that matters other than that of your entrepreneurial
effort is your own personal one. The same way a successful startup is expected to iterate and overcome
failures, so too are you encouraged and expected to persevere after setbacks when it is reasonable to do so.

As with the rapidly evolving tastes and habits of consumers in the face of "omnichannel" marketing practices
in the US economy, it is impossible to be out in front of all of the latest information and communication
technologies (ICTs). Even manufacturing technology evolves rapidly. If you make it an essential part of your
corporate narrative that you are always "on top" of all technologies, you may be setting your business or
service up for failure. ICTs and manufacturing are massive sectors in the global economy. You are not
expected to know everything about them. If you can conquer your FOMO regarding the latest technological
developments, your story may not be perfect, but you will be able to work from a personal and corporate
position of balance.

Also, be realistic about your own entrepreneurial story. Entrepreneurs who focus too much on their own
narrative might miss important market challenges or deep-seated problems with their design or key features.
Issues may arise and be ignored, to the peril of the endeavor, if entrepreneurs believe their own stories are a
matter of destiny. Ignoring hurdles, failures, and shortcomings within yourself, your value proposition, or your
organization can seriously hinder your ability to grow your venture. Your role as a communicator is not to spin
a fairy tale yarn and try to live in it. Rather, your role in telling your entrepreneurial story is to demonstrate
your capability to overcome challenges and show your capacity for growth as it relates to perseverance,
thoughtful inquiry, and providing value and solutions to others.

 7.3 Developing Pitches for Various Audiences and Goals

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support
from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand the various audiences an entrepreneur may pitch to and how the pitch goals vary for each
  · Define and develop the key elements of a pitch
  · Describe a pitch deck and pitfalls to avoid
  · Create and create an elevator pitch

Let's look more closely at how to develop pitches. Remember that we defined a pitch as a formal but brief
presentation that is delivered (usually) to potential investors in a startup. As such, a pitch is designed to be
clear, concise, and compelling around key areas, typically the key problem or unmet need, the market
opportunity, the innovative solution, the management plan, the financial needs, and any risks.
You will often need to craft different types of pitches for different audiences. Key audiences include potential
investors, social connectors, potential partners, key employee recruits, and the broader community,
particularly if one needs to request permits or regulatory concessions. One misconception about pitching is
268                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

that it is always done to investors who are ready to fork over a few hundred thousand dollars to the team that
presents the best idea of the day. While this is, more or less, the premise of Shark Tank, it is not how pitching
works for most entrepreneurs.[14] Entrepreneurs may pitch to friends and family as they develop an idea, and,
at another time, they may pitch to well-connected entrepreneurs and investors who have little interest in the
market sector in question but who can make the right introductions or helpful connections. Entrepreneurs
might make pitches in what is known as a pitch competition, hoping for a shot at funding and mentoring.

Pitches come in many forms, but underlying them is that to pitch is to ask for something. Table 7.3 provides an
overview of different audiences you might pitch to, outlining how the approach and presentation may vary for
each.

                           Summary of Pitch Scenarios

  Audience        Pitch    Pitch Approach         Key Content                            Notes
Friends and     Length
family        Fifteen      Usually verbal with a  Should cover basic        This common pitch can
              minutes      simple companion       elements of the           be emotional as
Elevator                   one-page handout       business model and        founders are appealing
pitch         Two to five  explaining the         concept, unmet need,      to people they know well
competitions  minutes      concept, value         and solution (including   and are counting on
                           proposition, and       if it seems patentable),  their personal
Judges for    Five to      funds needed to get    market and sales          reputation and
pitch         fifteen      the enterprise off     potential, and high-      credibility vs. detailed
competition   minutes      the ground             level risks               data to sell the idea
              depending
              on venue/    Usually a verbal       Should cover high-level   Very common at
              rules        pitch or single slide  innovation, value         accelerator or incubator
                           summarizing need,      proposition, and a "call  events, university
                           solution, market,      to action" to close the   entrepreneurship
                           opportunity            audience                  events, etc. Prizes range
                                                                            from free services to
                           Varies from basic      Presentation that may     $1,000-2,000
                           verbal to deck of      include slides and/or
                           one to eight slides,   video as specified in     These are very common
                           ending with a "call    competition rules         and help the
                           to action"; might                                entrepreneur refine the
                           require capital                                  pitch
                           needs

Table 7.3

14 Bill Rader. "The Truth about Pitching (and Why Many Entrepreneurs Fail Here)." Inc. November 22, 2017. https://www.inc.com/bill-rader/
what-theranoss-downfall-can-teach-entrepreneurs-about-pitching.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                            269

                           Summary of Pitch Scenarios

  Audience        Pitch    Pitch Approach                           Key Content                            Notes
Early           Length
Investors     Ten to       Standup                                  Presentation that may     Very common with angel
              twenty       presentation with                        include slides and/or     investors; often the deck
Employees     minutes,     slides and video or                      video; more formal        is required to be sent
              depending    demo of product/                         than pitch                before the event
Trade         on venue/    service                                  competitions with a
groups/       rules                                                 specific "ask" for        Very common in
associations               Standup                                  capital needs and use     startups; usually
              Ten to       presentation with                                                  monthly until company
Grant-        twenty       slides and video or                      Major outcome is to       is profitable
making        minutes      demo of product/                         inform and inspire; this
agencies                   service                                  can be a recurring        Very common at trade
(such as      Ten to                                                event and should be       conferences; some have
NIH, NSF)     twenty       Standup                                  informal                  their own pitch
              minutes      presentation with                                                  competitions
                           slides and video or                      Major outcome is to
              Ten to       demo of product/                         inform and connect to     Grants are often
              twenty       service; may be                          other key groups          technical and usually
              minutes if   tailored to the                          (investors, customers,    awarded for research
              in person    specific group                           etc.)                     and cannot be used for
              but usually                                                                     any commercial
              embedded     Usually written but                      Outcome is to get         activities
              in grant     can lead to face-to-                     "scored" to gain grant
              application  face meeting,                            funding; if not
                           depending on                             awarded, company can
                           agency rules                             reapply in the next
                                                                    grant cycle

Table 7.3

Pitch Audiences

No matter to whom you are pitching, you usually need to include references to your problem-solution
statement, value proposition, and key features, and how you prioritize that information will change for
different audiences. As shown in Table 7.3, once those core sections are covered, your different presentations
should be tailored for different ultimate "asks." The ask in a pitch is the specific amount of money, type of
assistance you request, or outcome you are seeking.
270  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

Investors

You have been introduced to different types of investors and will learn about them in more depth in
Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting. For now, you just need to know the different types so you can start to
think about how entrepreneurs structure their pitches to them. Individual investors want to know about team,
product, value proposition, and potential return on investment. Angel investors are individuals who use their
own money to invest in companies they're interested in. Venture capitalists are investors who pool money
from others and use that money to invest in companies.
Pitching to many potential investors without success can be time consuming and disheartening, but in most
cases, the investor's time is worth more than that of the people giving the pitch. If an investor offers feedback,
it must be considered. You will probably not get all of the answers you need regarding how to make your
venture an immediate success after giving a few pitches to individual investors and pitch competition judges,
but if they take the time to offer a constructive critique, consider the pitch development and performance
feedback a valuable experience.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   David S. Rose is the author of Angel Investing. Watch David Rose's TED Talk (https://openstax.org/l/
   52TEDRose) where he offers advice about how to pitch venture capitalists.

Friends and Family

Imagine asking friends and family for money to keep your startup going after you have maxed out your credit
cards and secured a small business loan only to build a prototype and realize you do not have enough funds to
get it to market. A common entrepreneurial journey starts with this sort of self-funded effort. Between 50
percent and 70 percent of startup companies in United States self-fund (savings, credit cards, or friends and
family) their initial capital needs.[15],[16] In one sense, you may be perceived as being more trustworthy with so
much riding on the endeavor. Still, you would frame your pitch differently when going to friends and family
than you would if preparing for an investor. You would probably make the tone less formal. You would focus
on the value proposition and the immediate outcomes of the loan. You would point out tangible deliverables
or milestones that this money would help you attain, and you would need to draw a roadmap from this
contribution to likely, not just hoped for, revenues if you were to give yourself the best shot at raising money.
Asking friends and family for, say, $10,000 might be more stressful to an individual than to ask an investor for
ten times that amount. Your friends and family may want to invest in you, but they will also want to make their
decision with a tangible narrative in mind. You want to build this narrative so that they can say: "I gave my
family member X, so that they can finish building Y, to earn revenues of Z and continue forward with their
innovation."

15 Laura Entis. "Where Startup Funding Really Comes From (Infographic)." Entrepreneur. November 20, 2013. https://www.entrepreneur.com/
article/230011
16 Meredith Wood. "Raising Capital for Startups: 8 Statistics That Will Surprise You." Fundera. October 23, 2019. https://www.fundera.com/
resources/startup-funding-statistics

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                                              271

Potential Employees

Entrepreneurs also pitch to potential employees by focusing on why they are needed to help the team create
something innovative and valuable. Once a product is under development, you must pitch to vendors. Prepare
to explain the value proposition and key features in detail and explain how the vendor shares in revenues,
such as options about accepting equity in part or in lieu of cash payments for services.

Entrepreneurs might also pitch to each other in hopes of building teams. Since most entrepreneurs are
familiar with the structure of the pitch, you might be able to streamline proposals and simply state the value
proposition and the ask. You will want to mention your team. The level of detail you share about who is
working with you and what their contributions will be depends on the level of interest of the potential
collaborator or investor. Future employees will likely want to know who they will be working with. Family and
friends may not need to know the employment history of team members, but they, like other investors, will
expect to know that there is a team capable of continuing to develop the product.

Other Audiences

Other types of audiences, which you can read more about in the Building Networks and Foundations chapter,
include quasi-governmental bodies, individual investors, incubators, trade groups, and competition judges.
(Pitch competitions are discussed at length in Reality Check: Contests and Competitions.) Understand that
governments usually care most about creating jobs or retaining jobs in their communities. Advanced
competitions and larger investment firms will want to see concrete numbers demonstrating product viability,
market relevance, and previous growth. In other words, they will expect to see more details, and they will
usually communicate ahead of time their specific interests. That being said, you must network and investigate
which elements of your pitch to prioritize based on individual investor or investment firm preferences.

Pitch Goals

Planning a pitch means researching region, potential investors, and current competitors working in the same
or similar marketplaces. A good pitch explains not only what makes the product or service good but what
makes a market good. Research markets in addition to the individual investors you would like to target. Angel
investors are hard to find, but markets can be thoroughly dissected. Marc Andreessen, cofounder of
Andreessen Horowitz, one of the most successful Silicon Valley venture capital firms in existence, once wrote,
"In a great market--a market with lots of real potential customers--the market pulls product out of the
startup."[17] This is presented as an answer to a question Andreessen posed to himself: "What correlates the
most to success--team, product, or market?" He set up this question as a rhetorical tool to teach entrepreneurs
that without a market, you do not have a product no matter how hard you work or how genius your team is.
Investors specialize: Find investors in the right geographic location and find investors who know the market
sector. Your goal should be to find mentors who can explain markets to you in significant, accurate ways. If
you find a fertile marketplace, you can practice customer development, and learn and iterate your way to
success.

Key Elements of the Pitch

A pitch is usually presented through what is called a pitch deck, alternately called a slide deck. This is a slide

17 Marc Andreessen. "Part 4: The Only Thing That Matters." The PMARCA Guide to Startups. June 25, 2007. https://pmarchive.com/
guide_to_startups_part4.html
272  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

presentation that you create using a program such as PowerPoint, Prezi, Keynote, or Google Slides that gives a
quick overview of your product and what you're asking for. As such, a pitch is designed to be clear, concise,
and compelling, and should include the key areas shown in Figure 7.6.

Figure 7.6 Key elements of pitch include identifying the need, the market opportunity, an innovative
solution, how the venture will be managed, what funding is needed, and how risks will be mitigated.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Here are six key elements of an entrepreneurial pitch from Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship.[18]
  · Element 1: Brand identity image and tagline. Your presentation slide deck should begin with a memorable
      brand image. It can be a logo representing your product in a stylized way, or it could be a screen grab of
      your product wireframe (a computer rendering if it is a product, and a schematic or flow chart if it is a
      software/service business model. The Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales chapter covers these concepts
      in detail.
  · Element 2: Problem-solution narrative. Some entrepreneurial ideas solve common problems. Some solve
      problems that users didn't know they had. Communicate the problem-solution narrative succinctly.
      Incorporate visuals and a "hook" (skit, emotional testimonial, deep question, etc.) to connect directly with
      the audience. An effective technique when addressing a generally common problem is to ask the question
      while raising your hand to prompt the audience: "How many of you have experienced this issue/problem/
      challenge recently?"

18 Mark Poepsel. "Pitching Ideas." Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship. (Montreal: Rebus Community, Fall 2018).
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/chapter/pitching-ideas/. This material is based on original work by
Mark Poepsel, and produced with support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  273

  · Element 3: Key features and your value proposition. Your pitch can introduce potential investors,
      collaborators, employees, and others to your key features, your value proposition, and your user interface
      at the same time. Consider using a mockup of your product or images of a prototype to show your design
      capabilities while at the same time pointing out key features building to a value proposition. Or if you are
      a service or nonprofit venture, explain what you plan to provide to individuals or the community.

  · Element 4: Product-market fit description. Define the market niche clearly and explain how your
      innovation serves the market purpose precisely. Not every problem is one people would pay to fix. Explain
      why there's a market to overcome this problem, how sizeable it is, and why your value proposition is the
      best. The chapter on Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity can help you hone in on this section and put
      your idea into words.

  · Element 5: Competitive analysis. Demonstrate that your product is unique by defining its competition and
      illustrating how it will stand out in the marketplace. Investors will pay close attention to any missed or
      omitted competitors. They will want to see that you can establish barriers to entry, lest some immediate
      copycat eat up market share. The Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales chapter covers these concepts as
      well.

  · Element 6: Financial projections. The business model canvas (BMC) can help you understand and be able
      to visualize how your value proposition sits at the center of two dynamics: input and output cycles. This is
      covered in Business Model and Plan, but just know that you must pay for inputs and overhead, and that
      revenues from outputs, sooner rather than later, ought to catch up to initial expenses. Show what the
      overall market is worth: How big is this pie? Then, show how big your slice and your investor slice is going
      to be. The Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting chapter gets into these issues in more depth. In many
      cases, you will want to end with a description of your team, demonstrating quickly why you are up to the
      task of growing this innovation. As mapped out here, this could be the basic framework for your pitch
      deck for a short competition. Some elements can be communicated in a single slide. Some will take more
      than one. Flesh out your essential pitch decks with further specifics or with data requested by competition
      organizers for longer contests. It is suggested that you keep your core deck to no more than ten slides
      and that you practice a two-minute version that covers all six of these concepts in case you meet an angel
      investor on the street.

If you have followed this discussion, you have established a vision for your innovation and the company you
want to build around it. You have established a mission and identified a clear purpose for it. You should have a
keen sense of your entrepreneurial story, but if you cannot express these things in a way that makes other
people see the value, your innovation may not survive. You don't build pitch decks solely for the purpose of
asking for money or support. That may be the primary objective, but when you work on your pitch, you build
the narrative case again and again for why your idea has value and why other people should buy into your
vision.

The Pitch Deck

As you can see, the primary means entrepreneurs have of sharing their vision is the pitch deck. Usually ten to
twenty slides can explain your company, its goals, and key information to persuade an audience to take action
(usually investors to consider investing in the enterprise). Pitch presentations should be visual and engaging.
They should be easy to edit and rearrange, and should engage viewers with art, panache, and reasonable
appeals. In general, they communicate the inspiration behind the innovation, its future capabilities, and the
strengths of the team. Incorporate as many visuals as you need and make sure the visuals match the script.

As an entrepreneur, you will be judged on your ability to develop and deliver a pitch. It can be taken as
274  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

shorthand for your ability to research a marketplace, guide a team, and manage a product. Sharing your vision
using slideshow software is not easy. Viewers are not impressed by status quo pitch presentations, but critical
audiences will also quickly notice when a pitch is all flash and lacks a good value proposition. A strong pitch,
content-wise, can be noticed, even if the slide design is less than stellar. In other words, developing a great-
looking pitch deck is important, but there has to be substantial content.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Explore a variety of foundational pitch decks (https://openstax.org/l/52PitchDeck) and learn what
   worked and didn't with each.

Let's use the slide deck from Airbnb as an example. It was presented after the company grew from its initial
seed funding stage into a viable operation with high hopes for future revenue growth. That is, they were
already established and making money when this deck was in use. It was presented after the initial investment
stage, when the company had done a good deal of customer development.

The track record is always in question when small firms go asking for big money, so note how Airbnb describes
its previous success and potential for future growth. When funded, AirBed&Breakfast would change its name
and grow it into a global brand. This relatively straightforward deck from 2008-2009 is a popular example
because of its simplicity and its powerful value proposition, although some experts note that the design could
be better.[19] Nevertheless, this was a successful pitch deck.

Visit https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/chapter/pitching-ideas/ to see a
SlideShare page containing the following ten slides and two more add-ons from SlideShare. The description of
this pitch deck comes from Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship.[20]

  · Slide 1: Airbnb started out as "AirBed&Breakfast." Brand identity is established with a sans-serif typeface,
      use of color, and a clear tagline: "Book rooms with locals, rather than hotels."

  · Slide 2: The problem statement is straightforward: Travelers need an affordable alternative to hotels.
  · Slide 3: The solution statement focuses on the nature of the product, that is, that it's a web platform, and

      on key features and how they create value, both financial and cultural capital. Note that key features and
      the value proposition are already addressed through three simple slides.
  · Slide 4: To establish product-market fit, you first have to have a market. The Airbnb pitch deck notes that
      at the time there were 630,000 users on couchsurfing.com and that there were 17,000 temporary housing
      listings on Craigslist in San Francisco and New York combined in one week. Thus, there existed a large
      potential traveler pool and a large pool of people with rooms for lease, but these groups were in need of
      a unified platform.
  · Slide 5: The fifth slide details the size of the market and Airbnb's share, showing potential for growth.
  · Slide 6: Completing the case for product-market fit, this slide shows the attractive user interface and
      provides a mini-narrative for how the product works.
  · Slide 7: This slide shows four years' of revenue totals as simple math: 10 million + trips × $20 average fee =
      about $200 million in revenue. This is evidence of product-market fit and whets the investor's appetite for
      potential future earnings.

19 "Airbnb Pitch Deck." Slidebean. 2009. https://slidebean.com/blog/startups/airbnb-pitch-deck
20 This material is based on original work by Mark Poepsel, and produced with support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely
available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  275

  · Slide 8: This slide shows how Airbnb has already beaten its competition to own the market for certain
      events and create partnerships.

  · Slide 9: Here, investors get the full picture of the competition.
  · Slide 10: The financial expectations are pretty well established by this point and were explained verbally.

      What this shows are the barriers to competition expected to help preserve Airbnb's position, future
      earnings, and growth expectations.

Consider what was involved in creating this Airbnb slide deck. The deck is not particularly complicated.
AirBed&Breakfast, as it was called at the time, was a market leader in a niche that other companies had
previously tried to exploit. The company's rapid growth was not a guarantee, but this offer was too good for
investors to pass up, although at the seed funding stage, some investors did not see the potential in a service
that helps people sleep in others' private residences.[21] By the point this deck was in use, the company had
gotten past initial concerns about safety and viability, and was ready to grow quite quickly. A 2018 check shows
Airbnb has secured funding through six rounds from a variety of major investors.[22]

As we have seen, pitch decks and pitches are developed and delivered for various reasons, to various
audiences, with varying content. For example, you may prepare pitches to pursue different long-term visions
for your product. Or, if you do not secure seed funding, you might scale back your idea, adjust your vision, and
rework your pitch. What remains the same is the need to convey how you will bring value to users or
customers, and demonstrate the core pitch elements, adjusted for each altered outlook.

Elevator Pitches

After looking at an exemplary pitch deck adapted by a niche market leader between seed funding and the
venture capital quest, it may seem difficult to inspire investors via a one- or two-minute elevator speech for a
project under development, but preparing for this type of pitch is essential. An elevator pitch is an
abbreviated pitch, a memorized talk that can get you in the door to put your full pitch deck on display. The
elevator pitch should touch on the key elements of problem-solution, value proposition, product-market fit,
and team, and not much else.

Giving an elevator pitch is an art. The elevator pitch can be memorized and should be. It might be delivered
informally at networking events or at dinner parties or other social engagements. You never know when you
might need to give an elevator speech. You might find yourself talking to someone who'd be interested in your
venture, and it might be at a golf outing, on the ski slopes, on the street, in a store, or, yes, in a giant
investment firm's lobby as a courtesy, as in The Big Short. And of course, in elevators. That's why it should be
memorized and up to date.

The classic example of a good elevator pitch is the one job candidates give that lands them an entry level job in
a company for they have always dreamed of working. Adapted from an article in Forbes,[23] there are six
elements of a good job-seeking elevator pitch. First, the pitch must be targeted. It cannot sound as though just
any job will do. You need to pitch yourself for the specific role the employer is trying to fill. It helps, second, to
write your pitch down in order to edit it and perfect it. Third, it should be correctly formatted and, fourth,
focused on the company where you hope to work rather than on yourself. Explain how you understand what
they are hiring for and let that be the setup to a story that ends with you being the best person to fit their

21 Alice Truong. "The Investors Who Passed on Airbnb's Seed Funding Had Their Reasons." Quartz. July 13, 2015. https://qz.com/452384/the-
investors-who-passed-on-airbnbs-seed-funding-had-their-reasons/
22 "Airbnb Investors." Crunchbase. n.d. https://www.crunchbase.com/organization/airbnb/investors/investors_list#section-investors
23 Nancy Collamer. "The Perfect Elevator Pitch to Land a Job." Forbes. February 4, 2013. https://www.forbes.com/sites/nextavenue/2013/02/
04/the-perfect-elevator-pitch-to-land-a-job/#7843035b1b1d
276                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

needs. Fifth, clear away the buzzwords and corporate-speak, and, finally, practice performing your pitch aloud.
Elevator speeches, after all, are given in person.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   NPR's podcast How I Built This is a compelling collection of first-person accounts by entrepreneurs on all
   kinds of issues relating to their startups. This episode of "How I Built This" is about Sara Blakely and her
   elevator pitch for Spanx (https://openstax.org/l/52NPRBlakely) that turned into a bathroom pitch, and
   how she seized the moment for success.

However, a personal pitch is a relatively simple and straightforward task. If you're asked to write an elevator
pitch for your proposed venture, start with about three sentences, or a 280-character Tweet. Write it first as a
set of talking points so that you don't get hung up on trying to present the exact words in the exact order.
Make your elevator speech broad enough that any member of your team could deliver it and any potential
investor could comprehend it in passing. Delivering an elevator speech is a linear process, meaning a person
can't be expected to read back or probe for more information the way they might with a written presentation
or in a formal pitch presentation with time for follow-up questions. Be sure to bring business cards and keep
your smartphone charged and ready for the exchange of contact information, a sign that you have succeeded
in this first step.

   WORK IT OUT

   Developing and Practicing an Elevator Pitch

   Part of the idea of an elevator pitch is that you never know when opportunity will strike: when might you
   have thirty seconds on an elevator with someone interested in supporting your business idea? That's
   why thinking through the pitch--including practicing it and getting feedback--can be so valuable.

      · Gather a group of 2-3 classmates or entrepreneurially minded friends.
      · Have each person spend a few minutes planning a 30-second elevator pitch.
      · Take turns pitching your ideas. Take notes on others' presentations.
      · Take turns providing feedback on the pitches. Feedback should focus less on the business idea and

          more on the presentation of the idea.

 7.4 Protecting Your Idea and Polishing the Pitch through Feedback

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support
from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  277

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand why you need to protect your idea
  · Describe both legal and unconventional tools to keep your ideas safe
  · Understand the importance of feedback and how to manage and use it

When you start to pitch your idea, it means you are sharing it with a variety of people for different purposes.
When encouraged to develop entrepreneurial ideas, students often ask, "How can I be sure no one is going to
steal my idea?" The response often is that ideas come easily, while knowledgeable, driven leaders are hard to
find. In other words, for those of you just starting out as entrepreneurs, it is important to recognize that
coming up with ideas is much easier and much less important than learning how to turn those ideas into
products that fit a market and that have a customer base already, or one you develop through painstaking
customer development strategies. Many entrepreneurs find it is more important to sell an investor on their
leadership potential and the strength of their team than on the strength of their idea or prototype. Even so, it
is common for entrepreneurs to want to protect their intellectual property because more well-established
companies might leverage deeper wells of resources and broader, more powerful networks to bring an
innovative product or service to market in the time it takes an entrepreneur to move from securing seed
funding to landing their first support for their first venture capital round (after seed funding).[24]

Protecting your business idea with a patent, should you choose to apply for one, is important. Patents are
granted for the purpose of encouraging entrepreneurship. If innovators have some reassurance that others
will be kept out of the marketplace for a certain amount of time, they may be more likely to take the risk to
pursue an innovation in the first place. Intellectual property protection (patents, trademarks, copyrights) is
covered in much more depth in the Creativity, Innovation, and Invention and Fundamentals of Resource
Planning chapters.

Products in most fields need to be developed and brought to market more quickly than the time it takes to go
through the standard patent process. For manufactured goods, it is important to seek a patent when a
product is finalized to protect the design. For intellectual property, it may be best to build first and seek
patents later, particularly in a highly competitive field where it would be difficult to show that you truly have a
unique breakthrough.
Entrepreneur.com has some helpful suggestions[25] that are paraphrased and reframed here: First, recognize
that almost nothing comes to market having been created by a sole inventor or innovator. Some ideas truly
are unique, but even they are nearly impossible to keep "under wraps." Ideas have to be shared with many
people for products or services to be developed. If nothing else, you will likely have to present your idea to
investors at some point. Protecting initial ideas is not as important as protecting versions of products and
services developed through iterative learning and testing processes because "know how" and trade secrets
are considered intellectual property and must be protected since they are not always patentable. Aim to
protect your successful value propositions, not your every technological whim. Most new business ideas are
variations of solutions that others have anticipated or even written about, but others have not had the drive,
the networking skills, or the fundraising ability of a true entrepreneur. Balance your time wisely between
trying to protect your idea and working to develop it.

24 Some of this material is based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support from the Rebus Community. The original is
freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.
25 Stephen Key. "How to Protect Your Business Idea without a Patent." Entrepreneur. May 8, 2013. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
226595
278                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

One way you can gain some peace of mind, again to paraphrase Entrepreneur.com,[26] is by thoroughly
investigating everyone with whom you plan to partner. If you have some assurance that they have not
"burned" collaborators in the past, you can proceed with a sense of security. Conduct research without
invading anyone's privacy but use all of the public tools available to you. Search online to learn about potential
partners and their previous endeavors. Request contact information and perhaps a list of references or former
collaborators from potential partners. The level of formality is going to depend on the nature of the industry
you are working to enter and the nature of the relationship you have with your collaborators, but if they resist
being researched, that could be a sign that they will probably not prioritize you or your product's protection.

Legal Agreements

Outside of patents, there are additional legal means of protecting your intellectual property.[27] You may wish
to require partners to sign a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). Typically, NDAs carry with them a penalty
should the partner disclose what they know of the proprietary information that lies at the heart of your value
proposition. These can be time limited, meaning after a certain amount of time, someone will be free to
discuss the business and its proprietary practices, or, for stronger legal controls, they may be open-ended. An
open-ended NDA can require a person to stay silent about key information for life or face possible civil lawsuits
worth potentially millions of dollars.

A noncompete agreement in a contract prevents an employee from working for the competition for a
specified period of time after working for you. The intention is to prevent them from taking your secrets or
their skills to a competitor. Some of these practices have been called into question particularly in industries
where low-level workers who do not carry around trade secrets find they are asked to sign these types of
agreements. However, they can help keep corporate espionage to a minimum, and they can prevent certain
key employees from taking the organization's intellectual property with them to their new employer, or
perhaps to create their own startup. Employees should only sign them if they are a condition for employment.
These agreements can vary from state to state. California in general does not enforce noncompete
agreements; this is due in part to the dynamic nature of startups, particularly in Silicon Valley. It also reflects a
philosophy that working professionals should not be inhibited or restrained from pursuing their livelihood.

A work-for-hire agreement between an individual employee and a company states that ownership of
innovations belongs to the company, even if an individual makes substantial contributions to the product,
service, or process. You should expect to be required to list collaborators on patents, even those working
under a work-for-hire clause, but the purpose of the contractual agreement is to ensure that you or your
company maintains exclusive rights to the patent.

Unconventional Methods

One further suggestion is to apply creativity and mask your product or service's true nature. By de-
emphasizing certain key features or by burying them in the user interface (UI), you might be able to turn
attention away from your value proposition while still building your product, platform, or prototype. The user
interface (UI) is what a customer sees when they use your product. A graphic user interface (GUI) is common
for all Windows and Apple-based devices. Smartphones use application (app) interfaces built off the base
operating system (mainly iOS or Android). UI's have become very common for many consumer and

26 Stephen Key. "How to Protect Your Business Idea without a Patent." Entrepreneur. May 8, 2013. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
226595
27 Stephen Key. "How to Protect Your Business Idea without a Patent." Entrepreneur. May 8, 2013. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
226595

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  279

professional products, as they link to microprocessors, sensors, memory, and other embedded features. From
a design standpoint, your team must decide where every button, search box, graphic element, and
information display is placed and what it will look like. Good UI is useful and feels intuitive to the user.

For digital products and services, this aspect of your product is incredibly important, which is why
manipulating it to mask functions or features is particularly risky. This is not a fool-proof approach by any
means, but in hyper competitive, rapidly evolving environments such as the web software and mobile app
industries, where invention and iteration occur at a breakneck pace and where, as soon as you go to market,
your competitors can see and try to re-create your service or platform, a little subterfuge can give your
business an edge at a relatively low cost.

An example of masking the true intentions of a product, perhaps, is the development of the mobile game
Ingress by Niantic, Inc. Ingress is a GPS-based augmented reality game played around the world where users
join imaginary factions and take over imaginary portals tied to real geographical locations in order to link up
those portals and help their faction gain territory and resources. But while Niantic was taking its global
mapping expertise and making a SciFi game out of it, it was also developing Pokémon GO. After specific
geographic "nodes" were mapped by users the world over, Niantic had a global network of points of interest
indicated by users. In many cases, nodes in Ingress--places with public art, cool architecture, or historical
markers, for example--later became PokéStops in the Pokémon GO game, where players of the global
augmented reality game gather resources to catch and battle their pocket monsters.

One way to protect your intellectual property is to strategically mask dormant features or capabilities until
they can be more fully exploited. While few startups have the technological clout of Niantic, almost every
business makes decisions on what to push forward, what to hold back, and when to release new products or
features.

Using Feedback to Refine Your Pitch

Pitching requires you to demonstrate that you have assembled a capable, professional team that can turn an
idea into an innovation. Users, partners, investors, and others will offer thoughts on how your product or your
organization should change. Investors consider it a warning sign if an entrepreneur cannot handle
feedback.[28] Applying lessons learned from feedback is the purpose of business learning.

Entrepreneurial ventures often start out as problems with no easy solutions. Your initial idea involves your
best guess at what will be an innovative solution, but that will evolve more quickly toward product-market fit if
your response to feedback is to accept it with grace. Your pitch must demonstrate that you have a great
product, that you have done your research, and that you are able to take feedback and apply it to your
products to make them better.[29] In other words, you must show you are coachable.

Your venture's development depends on gathering data to find out what customers like and what investors
are willing to fund, so you must seek out positive feedback and build on it, but you must also think critically
about the positive messages you receive. Are consumers or users enthusiastic in their support or merely polite
(this can especially be a concern when pitching to friends and family)? Can you clearly identify why you
received positive feedback about certain features and not others? Be sure to gain feedback on many product
variables and be sure you can isolate data points for meaningful analysis. The best feedback includes

28 John Rampton. "25 Reasons I Will Not Invest in Your Startup." Entrepreneur. September 15, 2014. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
236999
29 Michelle Ferrier and Elizabeth Mays. Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship. (Montreal: Rebus Community, Fall 2018). This material is based
on original work by Mark Poepsel, and produced with support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the
CC BY 4.0 license at https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.
280  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

quantitative responses indicating what consumers like and what they don't, as well as qualitative information
explaining why. Quantitative data relate to numerical measurements including actual purchase and behavior
as well as opinion research about a product. Qualitative data are complex information that answers the
questions "Why?" and "How?" It is often impossible to tell why people do what they do with your product
unless you ask them.

In the short term, you can use feedback to decide which features to focus on early in the venture. Many
entrepreneurs are faced with the dilemma of having too many good ideas.[30] If you pursue all of your good
ideas at the same time, your organization can quickly run out of resources. Focus first on features that are
most popular and relatively affordable to produce and deliver. Those high-return products, services, or
features might not be what you use to define your brand in later years, but they can sustain a startup long
enough to develop more elaborate products and features that require more time and investment. Over the
long term, feedback helps you direct your company.

Feedback may also come from employees, market leaders, and your competition. Feedback from these
sources may be more useful for guiding long-term growth projects. In this sense, feedback means more than
advice or product ratings. It can mean tactical moves in the marketplace. Your competitors offer you feedback
when they take actions in a marketplace in response to your actions. Be sure to attend to competitors' actions
with the same open mind and the same air of thoughtful skepticism you apply to other forms of feedback.

Once you have the opportunity to pitch your idea, the next step is the careful measuring of quantitative and
qualitative feedback about the pitch presentation, mockup, poster, or, in the case of many manufacturing
processes, a 3D-printed model that approximates what the tangible finished product might look and feel like.
Data from pitch competitions are sometimes out of your control, so it may be preferable to incorporate the
learning you get from pitch feedback into this customer development process.

 7.5 Reality Check: Contests and Competitions

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Mark Poepsel and produced with support
from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you should be able to:

  · Identify resources for locating contests and competitions
  · Understand the opportunities and realities of contests and competitions

Now you have an idea of how to communicate the purpose of your innovation through clear mission and
vision statements, while setting tangible SMART goals for your startup. You should also have a basic
understanding of how to pitch your innovation to different groups using different types of pitches to garner
financial support, to attract skilled talent, and/or to garner contributions if you are a social entrepreneur. You
have some strategies to protect your idea, and you have reviewed how to incorporate feedback into an
iterative process to improve and refine the concept or prototype. Now it is time for a reality check. What can
you actually do as a student entrepreneur to enter the marketplace ready to innovate and make your first

30 Mayo Oshin. "5 Things to Do When You Have Too Many Ideas and Never Finish Anything." n.d. https://mayooshin.com/5-things-to-do-too-
many-ideas/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  281

pitches?

First things first: Use your educational and professional background to conduct research to determine the kind
of entrepreneurial environment that suits you. Do you wish to work for a startup and put your creative talents
to work helping an existing team to build on their ideas? Are you looking to get in on the ground floor to help
develop a startup from scratch, adding your knowhow about pitching to the mix? Or, are you looking to be an
entrepreneur and build your own team around your own innovative ideas? You owe it to yourself to explore
these options through careful research.

Regional Resources

Just as communities invest in schools to educate students for the improvement of the entire community's
standing, some communities are starting to see the long-term value in investing in entrepreneurs. Here are
some of the resources to look for:

  · Shared workspaces where entrepreneurs come together to work on their independent projects as well as
      to build teams. HQ Raleigh in North Carolina is one such space that offers multiple membership options,
      office and kitchen facilities, and other perks. WeWork is another space, located in New York City, as is
      Spark in Baltimore, Maryland (Figure 7.7).

  · Business incubators or accelerators that do more than offer office space. They offer mentorship rather
      than a good coffee bar.

  · Pitch competitions to begin to garner the feedback you need to refine your value proposition(s) and
      develop a comprehensive business plan.

Figure 7.7 Workplace or clubhouse? Some companies offer playful perks in shared workspaces in an effort
to attract the best employees and increase worker satisfaction. (credit: work by Jason Putsche Photography/
Spark Baltimore, CC BY 4.0)

Depending on the size of the community where you choose to live, there may be different types of
entrepreneurial niches for you to target, or there may be a more generalized entrepreneurship space.
Regardless of the size of the community, it is the people in it and your ability to network that will most strongly
influence your potential. One option to pursue is to be part of a product pitch within six months of landing in a
new city. Perhaps you are pitching your own focused idea, or perhaps you take your talents to a team with a
pitch already in the works. Regardless, as an individual with an interest in being an entrepreneur, if you are not
collaborating and competing, you are not growing your business or social venture.
282  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

Contests

According to Entrepreneur.com,[31] it is essential to take the temperature of the contests available in a certain
geographic region before diving in. An entrepreneurial contest is any entrepreneurial competition other
than a pitch competition. They usually are run by nonprofit organizations and universities, but more
companies are hosting them to open up to more outside innovation to attract diverse entrepreneurs and
access nontraditional sources of new ideas with commercial potential. They usually entail submitting
documentation about your business, items such as business models (covered in Business Model and Plan),
prospectuses, and forms tailored to contest specifications.

There are many reasons for joining a contest. Finding a mentor is at the top of the list. Your first contests and
pitch competitions provide a learning experience for yourself as well as an opportunity to network and look for
mentors and potential collaborators. To prepare for a contest, find out exactly what is expected of you and do
as much research as you can so that you are writing using the iceberg principle. Following this writing
principle, each word or sentence in your contest submission should be backed up with a wealth of supporting
information and details. Even if judges never see a long-form prospectus, a detailed summary of the business,
the investment that the company is seeking, or the key risks that the company faces--ensuring you have the
hard data to back up those points in your executive summary or introduction increases your chances of
success in the competition.

Entering a contest is similar to deconstructing your pitch deck, backing up every point with careful research,
and writing and presenting the information in the various formats requested. Contests may ask for papers,
posters, videos, social media campaigns, and other materials. Whatever kinds of media product the contest
requires, you must complete them in a professional manner. If you truly want to win a contest that requires
multimedia or social media elements, you might want to hire a media professional to assist you in this, which
is essentially a marketing effort.

If and when you win a contest, make connections with organizers and seek mentorship. Great mentorship, in
the long run, is more valuable than a cash prize with strings attached. A good mentor and a good market
niche are often better predictors of entrepreneurial success than a person's ability to develop compelling
contest packets or highly charged pitch presentations. To be an entrepreneur, you need to know how a
business sector functions within a social, cultural, and regulatory geographic context. To the extent that
entering a contest can help you learn about these things, it is a valuable effort, but in most cases, the prize
funding of $5,000, $10,000, or even $20,000 won't guarantee your startup much of a head start.

Contests on college campuses may be more worthwhile than others because of the number of mentors
brought in to judge them. Mentors that understand regional markets and opportunities for networking can be
quite valuable, and contests may be one of the few times that large numbers of professionals get involved in a
college course or extracurricular exercise. Also, competitions may be put on by business groups or social
entrepreneurship groups on campus that provide great networking opportunities. Some contests compose
the preliminary phase before the pitch competition that follows. In that case, you would prepare your pitch
deck as you prep your contest application to ensure that your pitch matches your claims. It may seem fairly
straightforward, but when discrepancies exist between what you submit and what you ultimately present,
judges will notice. Regardless, a contest on a college campus or in your niche market gives you a chance to
research your market, scrutinize your own ideas, and build a team.

Building a team for a contest with the ultimate goal of creating a successful endeavor is one of the most
exciting but trying aspects of entrepreneurship. Many entrepreneurs are reluctant to relinquish control and

31 "Entering a Small Business Funding Contest." Entrepreneur. January 25, 2017. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/286209
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  283

seek people who will do things only the way they want them done. This is not usually possible, and it is not
advisable. You want to build a team of people who can see a problem from different points of view and can
offer constructive, honest input. Your best hope is to establish an ethic of clear communication and respectful
give-and-take when it comes to criticism because there will be differences of opinion and approaches. If a
contest is nothing more than an impetus to build a good team, it is a worthwhile effort. There are many ready
sources to find out about these contests; check most entrepreneurship programs at major universities (some
are open only to students and/or alumni, but others may be open to others). Also check with major startup
sources (such as TechStars or Y Combinator) as well as with local economic development entities. Finally, you
might locate contests focused on particular groups for which you may qualify, such as women entrepreneurs
or other historically underrepresented groups.

Competitions

Like contests, pitch competitions (Figure 7.8) may offer cash prizes or mentorship opportunities to the
winners. Some larger pitch competitions have seed funding agreement contingencies that winners must sign
before they can accept cash prizes. The key difference between a contest and a pitch competition is that in the
latter, you are expected to present your business idea in the form of a presentation, usually with a pitch deck,
whereas in the former, you are expected to provide a more informal summary of your idea, though the prizes
in contests are less (e.g., $1,000 in free legal or other business services vs. a much larger cash prize).

Figure 7.8 Universities, communities, funders, and other interest groups offer pitch competitions to support
entrepreneurial ventures. Shown are participants in the Road to GES (Global Entrepreneurship Summit)
Heartland pitch competition in Overland Park, Kansas. (credit: "Pitch Competition at Road to GES Heartland"
by "Global Entrepreneurship Summit Follow"/Flickr, Public Domain)

Look for competitions in your city and in locales within half-a-day's drive such that you could compete in pitch
284  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

competitions without spending too much time or resources on travel. Seek out competitions that focus on the
market sector you are most interested in. Play to your capabilities and strengths. Some pitch competitions are
sponsored by regional economic development offices. Such offices are often associated with small business
development centers, which are often based at or connected to major universities, local SCORE offices, and
SBA offices. They often offer cash prizes in the hopes of attracting nascent startups to their region. Others
connect entrepreneurs to investors waiting with seed money and a contract stipulating what percentage of the
business they will own. Some offer money toward legal, accounting, mentoring, and other services. This is how
seed funding works, but contest winners would do well to ask for legal advice before signing a contract tying
up a portion of their business as a condition of receiving an award or a level of seed funding they might be
able to secure through other venues.

This explains why some entrepreneurs seem to tank their own deal on Shark Tank. In some cases, perhaps they
are foolish to pass up a deal, but in other cases, they have other avenues for seed funding in mind that may
give them more control of the future of their company. The last thing you want to do is to win a competition
and sign a contract for an investment in the business that does not lead to or protect your end goals. While
the show American Idol has been a cautionary example[32] (winners of American Idol usually sign an exclusive
recording contract that is restrictive for the artist and limits them from signing with a major recording
company for several years), most investors will almost always want to own a piece of the long-term future of
any entrepreneurial effort they help fund. Before entering a competition, learn whether the nature of the prize
requires this type of seed funding agreement or not. Base your decisions on your own comfort level with this
type of arrangement as well as research how previous winners have been treated and what successes and
failures they have had.

To win a pitch competition, find out exactly who you are pitching to and what criteria they will use. Be sure to
thoroughly read through the competition guidelines and learn what you can about the specific judges and
their backgrounds. Tailor your pitch to fit contest objectives as much as you can without changing your value
proposition or promising features or deliverables you cannot make good on. Match the ask with what the
contest offers. Nothing annoys contest judges more than when the prizes and offers are clearly laid out in the
contest guidelines and then pitch presenters ask for much more money or for something completely different
than what they have on offer.

You should develop one core business model (which you'll learn about in the Launch for Growth to Success
chapter), pitching several times to individuals, entrepreneur groups, investors, and competition judges (unless
that is your day job). This will help you develop your pitch for the market niche. Over time, you will learn what
to stress and what to downplay or cut, and this may help you win competitions.

As a college student, you can participate in campus pitch competitions to practice learning a market niche.
Perhaps the market niche you explore in college will be similar to the ones in which you work after graduating.
If you are in a college town, it may be a peculiar marketplace, but it will usually have an abundance of
mentorship opportunities making up for what it may lack in business infrastructure. Make your pitch decks
professional and rehearse your presentations until they are perfect. You must also be a studious audience
member at such competitions. It is not uncommon for an entrepreneur to master their own approach after
watching others present for a year or two.

The Collegiate Entrepreneurs' Organization, for which the initialism, CEO, is apt, has chapters in more than 300
universities around the United States. It champions entrepreneurship as a field unto itself rather than as a
byproduct of an MBA program or a limited track in a business school, as it is treated in many universities.

32 Nasir Pasha and Matt Staub. "The Prize for Winning American Idol? A One-Sided Contract." Pasha Law. February 6, 2015.
https://www.pashalaw.com/prize-winning-american-idol-sided-contract-e148/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                          285

Regardless of the institutional infrastructure, many colleges have chapters.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Collegiate Entrepreneurs Organization

   Research the CEO and whether there is a chapter on your campus. Table 7.4 shows the information from
   the national organization's website.

Collegiate Entrepreneurs' Organization Vision and Mission[33]

Vision Statement                                                    Mission Statement

To serve more than 400 colleges and    To inform, support, and inspire college students to be
universities helping students achieve  entrepreneurial and seek opportunity through enterprise
their entrepreneurial dreams and       creation. With a diverse entrepreneurial community and
goals, CEO provides student            global network, CEO provides student entrepreneurs with
entrepreneurs with opportunities,      opportunities, events, chapter activities, and conferences to
events, chapter activities, and        help start businesses. The highlight of the year is the annual
conferences to help start              Global Conference hosted each fall.
businesses.

Table 7.4

If your campus has a chapter, contact leadership and find out how to join. If you are already a member,
explore how you can become a student leader in the organization. If you are in CEO and are a student
leader, come up with a plan to leave a positive, lasting impact on your local chapter. If your campus does
not have a local chapter, check with the Student Activities/Campus Life Office to see how you can start
one there. There might be a similar group with this focus under a different club/organization title.

  · What are some successful businesses that CEO chapters or groups within chapters have started?
  · What one or two key changes might be made to make your local chapter stronger?
  · Whom can you contact and work with to make that happen?
  · What will your primary entrepreneurial objective as a member of CEO be? Can you use the group as

      a launch pad for your own startup? How?

The entrepreneur website resource AlphaGamma.com lists many of the largest business plan competitions for
recent and student entrepreneurs. Here is a list of the top competitions that took place in 2019. Check its
website for listings on future competitions.[34] In most cases, aggregate yearly awards are listed along with
other information specific to the competition:

  · Harvard Business School New Venture Plan Competition - $300,000
  · Rice Business Plan Competition - $1.5 million

33 The Collegiate Entrepreneurs Organization. "About Us." n.d. http://www.c-e-o.org/page/aboutus
34 8 Kima Mayes. "12 Best Business Plan Competitions in 2019." Alpha Gamma. February 12, 2019. https://www.alphagamma.eu/
opportunities/12-best-business-plan-competitions-in-2019/
286  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

  · Milken-Penn GSE Education Business Plan Competition - $1,000,000
  · Utah Entrepreneur Challenge - $100,000
  · Next Founders - $30,000
  · Technovation world Challenge - $42,000
  · CodeLaunch - $67,000
  · Burton D Morgan - $100,000
  · Edward L. Kaplan Business Model Competition - $100,000
  · UPitch Competition - $10,000
  · The Hult Prize Student Competition - $1,000.000
  · Thiel Fellowship - $100,000

This list doesn't include some other valuable competitions. The George Washington University business plan
competition, called the GW New Venture Competition, in 2017 awarded more than $300,000 worth of cash and
in-kind services in all.[35] The Baylor University New Venture Competition is open to colleges across the country
and awarded a total of more than $85,000 to student teams from Arkansas, Iowa, and Pennsylvania with
finalists coming from California and Illinois as well.[36] Singapore hosts a global business plan competition with
prizes totaling $1 million.[37] Smith College's Draper Competition for Collegiate Women Entrepreneurs offers
more $60,000 in total prizes, including a top cash award of $10,000 plus a scholarship.[38] Arizona State,
Indiana, and many other universities host these contests. Deadlines are staggered year-round. Competitions
are sometimes open to nationwide competitors, but some are open to students in only a particular campus
community or region. Competitions are not necessarily tied to academic schedules. Research the competitions
that are most appropriate for you and your program, and collaborate with a professor to enter, learn, network,
and ideally, win funding.

Successful entrepreneurship happens when innovative people find fertile ground, develop ideas and concepts,
and persevere through learning to fit new products in appropriate marketplaces. College graduate
entrepreneurs owe it to themselves to research the entrepreneurial community they would prefer to target.
Economic development offices all over the world encourage entrepreneurs to come to their cities because they
need innovative people with energy and a willingness to take risks to come up with the economic engines of
the future.

One of the ways regions incentivize entrepreneurship is through contests, which are any means of competing
for startup funding that does not involve a pitch competition. If you can build a team for a static contest, you
are well on your way to building a team to pitch new innovations.

35 "New Venture Competition." George Washington University. n.d. https://newventure.gwu.edu/history-mission
36 "Baylor New Venture Competition." Baylor University. n.d. https://www.baylor.edu/business/newventurecompetition/
37 "Lee Kuan Yew Global Business Plan Competition." Singapore Management University. n.d. https://www.smu.edu.sg/lky
38 "Draper Competition." Smith University. n.d. https://www.smith.edu/academics/conway-center/entrepreneurship/draper-competition

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  287

     Key Terms

ask specific amount of money or type of assistance requested in a pitch
corporate narrative story about how a successful company grew from something small into something

     broad and powerful, serving thousands or even millions of people; it may have marketing purposes, and it
     may serve as an inspirational story for leaders and employees
elevator pitch abbreviated pitch, a memorized talk that can get you into the door to put your full pitch deck
     on display
entrepreneurial contest any entrepreneurial competition other than a pitch competition; contests may
     entail submitting business models, long-form prospectuses, or forms tailored to contest specifications
fear of missing out (FOMO) need to keep up with peers and the personas they represent in social settings,
     particularly on social media
iceberg principle writing principle useful for preparing contest documents and pitch decks; following this
     principle, each word or sentence in the submission or presentation should be backed up with a wealth of
     supporting information and details that go unspoken in the pitch or proposal, but which you have at the
     ready should an investor take interest in the details and your knowledge of them
ideation purposeful process of opening up one's mind to new trains of thought that branch out in many
     directions from a stated purpose or problem
mission statement statement of an organization's reason for being that defines its primary long-term goal,
     explains what the venture will do, what value it will provide to the end customer, and how it will
     accomplish that action
noncompete agreement formal agreement that the person signing the document will not work for another
     organization that is a direct competitor of their current employer during employment and usually for a
     specified length of time after employment ends
nondisclosure agreement (NDA) contract that carries harsh financial penalties should one party to the
     agreement disclose what they know of the proprietary information
pitch formal presentation in which you ask for something and that is delivered (usually) to potential
     investors in a startup
pitch competition competition that may have cash prizes or mentorship opportunities for winners; you are
     expected to present your business idea in the form of a presentation, usually with a pitch deck
pitch deck slide presentation that you create that gives a quick overview of your product and what you're
     asking for
problem-solution narrative brief story of a sentence or two that states a problem affecting many people
     and offering a solution that is innovative, unique, insightful, or all of these
user interface (UI) what a customer sees when they use your product; having a variant of a UI is not
     necessarily grounds for establishing a patent, but having unique design in the broader sense may help
     you to secure patent protection
value proposition summary describing the benefits (value) customers can expect from a particular product
     or service
work-for-hire agreement agreement between an individual employee and a company states that
     ownership of innovations belongs to the company, even if an individual makes substantial contributions
     to the product

     Summary
288                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

7.1 Clarifying Your Vision, Mission, and Goals
The most basic formula for telling the story of your innovation is the problem-solution narrative.
Entrepreneurs are problem solvers, but they need to strategize to battle competitors and to weather the risks
inherent in starting a new venture. Vision and mission statements are crucial to planning a venture. Vision
statements are broader than mission statements. Entrepreneurs can set attainable goals with the help of the
SMART goals framework. All of these tools--vision statements, missions, and SMART goal formulation--help
build on the venture's origin story and serve as a general and specific organizing narrative.

7.2 Sharing Your Entrepreneurial Story
This section outlined the importance of conceptualizing and communicating your venture in narrative form.
Not every startup venture is a fairy tale, but if you can recognize and apply trusted story formats, you can help
establish prominence for your brand, your products, and their specific features. Eventually, your story might
be the genesis of a corporate narrative if the startup grows to become one. There are advantages and
disadvantages to crafting stories. The advantages are that stories help you communicate the problem your
innovation addresses, the solution it offers, and its market need. The disadvantages are that a story can create
the fear of missing out in consumers and can set unattainable, rigid goals that can cause you to miss key
factors in the venture's development.

7.3 Developing Pitches for Various Audiences and Goals
A pitch is a request for support, either financial investment or some kind of support. A great pitch takes into
account the intended audience and the goal of the talk, and prioritizes information accordingly. In other
words, it answers the questions Who? (Who are we pitching?), What? (What are we pitching to them?), and
Why? (Why are we pitching: What is the "ask"?). Once you establish these elements, you need to develop a
professional pitch deck and include engaging materials that share your passion and communicate your vision.
Your pitch should paint a picture of a successful product or service delivering strong returns for investors or
for those who choose to work for you or do business with you.

This section offered an outline of elements for a professional pitch deck and provided a few details about what
ought to be included. Pitches may vary in length and should take into consideration the demands of contest
rules and the quirks of potential investors. That said, there are elements that almost every pitch needs to
include, and they are presented in the approximate order in which they might appear in your pitch deck. In
general, you should cover all elements of the pitch as outlined here, but the level of detail may vary based on
the audience. The entrepreneur should ask the key contact what specific area(s) she should cover so as to
make the best impact.

We also discussed crafting different pitches with different senses of vision in mind, which can be particularly
helpful post-pivot when an organization has a product but needs to adjust it to target new markets. Finally, we
looked at the elevator pitch, which is miniature version of your more complete professional pitch and an
introduction to your vision. The pitch before the pitch, if you will, should be clear, concise, and catchy--enough
to get an investor's attention without driving him or her to hop off the elevator.

7.4 Protecting Your Idea and Polishing the Pitch through Feedback
Protecting your intellectual property is something you must plan for as an entrepreneur. In crowded
marketplaces, small innovations or variations on a theme might be difficult to patent, and the process takes
time; thus, not every product or iteration needs to be patented. Investors are often more interested in the
potential of a leader and her or his team than the potential of an idea. With that in mind, the protection of an
idea shouldn't supersede building a great team or pitching your idea widely enough to tap into appropriate

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                       289

funding channels.

A patent can protect your intellectual property. Other protections are nondisclosure agreements, work-for-
hires, and noncompete agreements. If someone breaks a contract, your only recourse is through legal
channels. It is better to conduct thorough research to be as confident in your team as possible before you
share your ideas, designs, and prototypes with those who will be helping you make your innovation a reality.

Entrepreneurial learning comes from seeking feedback on your ideas from potential customers and investors.
Feedback on your pitch itself can help you refine how you present those ideas.

7.5 Reality Check: Contests and Competitions
Pitch competitions may be global, national, or regional in scale. There is no single model for a pitch
competition, but teams can prepare based on the terms that organizers set forth, and they can anticipate the
need to demonstrate key core elements including value proposition, marketplace and competition, funding
strategy, brand, and team. Winners of pitch competitions would do well to examine any contracts they must
sign before accepting cash awards or investments; some deals are structured unfavorably for the
entrepreneur.

If you lose a pitch competition or contest but enhance your network of contributors and collaborators and/or
find a mentor, it has been a successful early effort. Consider developing your collaborator network while still in
school using social media tools and entering into college competitions, some of which are listed in this
chapter.

     Review Questions

1. ________ is like the origin story for a brand.
    A. problem-solution narrative
    B. purpose
    C. mission statement
    D. vision statement

2. Identify the correct terms used in this text for setting SMART goals.
     1. specific, measurable, attainable, relevant, time-bound
     2. specific, marketable, attainable, relevant, time-bound
     3. specific, measurable, achievable, relevant, timely
     4. specific, measurable, attractive, relevant, time-bound

3. What is defined as the thing your organization does that people will pay for or contribute to?
    A. earnings statement
    B. profit proposition
    C. value for revenue proposal
    D. value proposition

4. When an entrepreneur's story becomes part of the mythology of a corporation and its purpose, this is
known as a/an ________.

    A. mission statement
    B. vision statement
    C. purpose statement
    D. corporate narrative
290                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

5. When someone supports your products and your brand so much that they begin speaking on your behalf in
person and on social media, they are known as a/an ________.

    A. brand advocate
    B. corporate narrative sponsor
    C. impetus
    D. entrepreneurial drive

6. In previous decades, a term for a related phenomenon was "Keeping up with the Joneses." This refers to a
sense that if we are not living our best life, having the most fun, enjoying the best foods, fashion, and so on,
then we are not living the life we should. This term can refer to both a short-term concern and a general
anxiety that others are enjoying life more than we are.

    A. brand advocacy awareness
    B. FOMO, or fear of missing out
    C. "Jonesing"
    D. happy ever anxiety

7. Pitches have different purposes, depending on the target audience. The constant in every pitch is that it
________.

    A. must be short
    B. makes a request for support
    C. includes six elements and about ten slides
    D. is derived from a corporate narrative

8. An abbreviated pitch that you memorize is called an elevator pitch. Meant to be given in person, is should be
________.

    A. brief
    B. memorized
    C. connected to a request for more time to make a more complete pitch
    D. All of these options are correct.

9. A graphic worksheet that sets forth the value proposition of any startup and allows you to identify
stakeholders, and key inputs and outputs is the ________.

    A. business model generator
    B. business model canvas
    C. business mobility canvas
    D. business meditation and creativity matrix

10. An agreement between an individual employee and a company that states that innovations belong to the
company, even if an individual makes substantial contributions.

    A. nondisclosure agreement
    B. work-for-hire agreement
    C. noncompete clause
    D. patent

11. A ________ is a license granting exclusivity, as in the exclusive rights to manufacture and sell a specific
product.

    A. patent
    B. UI
    C. nondisclosure agreement
    D. noncompete clause

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                              291

12. Numerical measurements providing data on how people use a product or service results in ________ data.
    A. qualitative
    B. quantitative
    C. lean
    D. build-measure-learn

13. More complex data indicating why and how people use or might use a product or innovation is known as
________ data.

    A. qualitative
    B. quantitative
    C. lean
    D. build-measure-learn

14. The ________ is the specific request for funding, mentorship, collaborators, and/or business partners that
appears in a pitch.

    A. ask
    B. request
    C. pitch
    D. contest

15. The student entrepreneurship organization highlighted in this chapter is ________.
    A. CEO
    B. CFO
    C. Future Entrepreneurs of America
    D. Pitch Competitors International

     Discussion Questions

1. After a search, give examples of companies with clear vision but poorly defined mission statements.
2. What are the pitfalls in crafting a vision statement that is too broad or too narrow?
3. Place the SMART goals in order of importance and discuss why you chose that order.
4. How can telling your entrepreneurial story help build a brand?
5. What is the risk of falling in love with your own entrepreneurial story?
6. What would it take to rework a pitch deck created for a campus competition and present it to an individual
angel investor?
7. In what ways is an elevator pitch an abbreviation of a longer professional pitch? In what ways does it differ?
8. Reflect on the Airbnb pitch deck. What would the elevator pitch version of that presentation sound like?
What would the ask be for the new elevator pitch?
9. At what stage of product development for a manufactured good should you file for patent protection?
10. Are noncompete clauses fair in entrepreneurial work? Why so? Are noncompete clauses always fair for
employees? Why or why not?
292  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

11. Research the average time it takes to win a patent in an industry you are interested in. What are some
factors that contribute to delays in patent seeking?

12. It is common to develop a product based on limited feedback using as few resources as possible only to
watch as no one uses or buys the product. Can failure be a valuable part of finding product-market fit? Why or
why not?

13. This section advocates using qualitative and quantitative data to develop products and find the right
market for them. When might it be appropriate to rely heavily or solely on quantitative data? Can you think of
a product that had very high usage rates that was incredibly popular but that almost as quickly fell out of
favor? Which is better at predicting a fad: qualitative data or quantitative data?

14. Imagine entering your campus pitch competition. What is your strategy to win?

15. If your campus does not have a competition, what national competition might you enter? What is your
strategy to win? Do some research online to find what has put past winners ahead.

     Case Questions

1. The John Deere Company has one of the most enduring corporate narratives in the world. John Deere was a
real person who developed an early, successful steel plow that in some ways contributed to the agricultural
revolution the world over. Research and re-tell the John Deere story. What drove John Deere's success? How
does the corporation foster brand advocacy today through its media presence and publications? Some would
argue that the John Deere Company has achieved the entrepreneur's vision. Is it possible for a company to
truly live up to its vision statement? Does that describe what John Deere the company did for John Deere the
person, or is that an overstatement?

2. Princeton University professor, president, and CEO of New America, a think tank dedicated to "renewing
America in the Digital Age," Anne-Marie Slaughter wrote an article for The Atlantic in 2012 called "Why women
still can't have it all."[39] Slaughter starkly and personally lays out the challenges of maintaining the elusive
work-life balance. She advocates for taking a long-term view in one's life and balancing the needs of family
with career aspirations. Can a successful entrepreneur have it all? What do entrepreneurs' stories and
corporate narratives suggest? What do you think of the serial entrepreneur who builds a company to sell it
and then takes time between ventures to spend time with family and friends? Is this version of the
entrepreneurs' story rare? If you find it to be rare, do you think this might be because it rarely happens or
because it doesn't fit social expectations of workaholic success stories?

39 Anne-Marie Slaughter. "Why Women Still Can't Have It All." The Atlantic. July/August 2012. https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/
2012/07/why-women-still-cant-have-it-all/309020/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea  293

3. Design plays a major role in how investors and other audiences respond to your pitch deck, but for one
startup, achieving near perfection in their slide design did not create a pathway to success. Wattage Inc. was
pitched as a modular electronics company that would allow users to design their own electronic equipment
from modular parts, add art and other customized pieces, and have it shipped directly to them. To take a
massive market--consumer electronics--and add a customization element was incredibly ambitious. The deck
made for an aesthetically pleasing failure.[40] Potential investors would not open their checkbooks, but would
smile and suggest that these guys could always go into business making pitch decks for other startups.[41] The
innovation that promised to make us all inventors failed, at least for now, but it can teach us many lessons
about developing pitches. View Wattage's pitch deck (https://openstax.org/l/52WattPitchDeck) to learn more.

    A. Can great design hurt a pitch presentation? How, or if no, why not?
    B. What do you think was missing if investors loved the pitch deck, appreciated the tactile prototypes, and

          yet decided not to invest?
    C. There is a "go-big-or-go-home" sentiment to this kind of startup that tries to shake up a massive

          marketplace. After visiting these links and reviewing what Wattage Inc. was trying to build, could you
          come up with a scaled-down or more focused version of the concept that might work? One issue with
          this type of startup is that it can only target very large investors. How might you build different pitch
          decks targeting different types of investors (electronics investors, those who invest in value-added
          customization products, modular tech enthusiasts, and so on)?

4. Zappos is sometimes cited as an example of the leanest of lean startups conducting the build-measure-learn
process successfully.[42] The company started with no inventory and instead started taking orders to ship shoes
to customers who ordered online. They let the market pull the inventory needs out of their startup rather than
buying a store of shoes and hoping to sell them all. Their inventory was their local shoe stores. They started
out buying their inventory at retail price and then marking up a surcharge for the service of seeking, sorting,
and shipping.

There may not be many pairs of shoes worth more than retail price, but people were willing to pay for
convenience, and Zappos could measure popular sizes, brands, and trends in ways that would help them
anticipate inventory needs as they grew.

    A. In what ways is the Zappos lean startup story about feedback?
    B. Ideate a potential startup, besides a food delivery service, built around efficiently or conveniently

          packing and shipping something others have already made.
    C. Ideate a potential startup where you could conceivably earn revenues even when buying your

          inventory at retail price. What makes you think some online customers would pay a premium? What
          kind of business learning would you have to do to improve on the Zappos lean startup model?
    D. As soon as a retailer or other service provider notices that a startup is making a profit adding
          convenience to their existing business infrastructure, what is to keep them from entering the
          marketplace? Are there any protections for the service you propose? How might you protect such a
          business?

40 Jeremy Bell. "Well, We Failed." Medium. May 5, 2017. https://medium.com/inside-wattage/well-we-failed-77e795e16ecf
41 Taylor Lorenz. "Everybody Kept Telling This Startup That Its Pitch Deck Was Beautiful--But They Didn't Invest." Business Insider. May 12,
2015. http://www.businessinsider.com/wattage-pitch-deck-couldnt-save-startup-from-failure-2015-5
42 Anastasia. "How the Build-Measure-Learn Cycle Really Works." Cleverism. July 26, 2015. https://www.cleverism.com/how-build-measure-
learn-cycle-really-works/
294  Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

5. Entrepreneur.com is cited or referenced several times in this chapter, but even contributors to this
publication, which relies on serving a culture of entrepreneurs as part of its value proposition, sometimes
question its own community's trends. Their article, "We've Become So Obsessed with `Innovation' That It's
Now Meaningless" challenges a perceived overuse of the term "innovation." Read the article here:
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/249408.

Look for news of college pitch competition winners. Are they all truly innovations? Find a college pitch
competition, business model competition, or elevator pitch competition winner who truly is innovative, and
find ones, perhaps, who are variations of Uber--delivering stuff and charging a premium for convenience and
little more.

    A. Do you agree with the guest commentary published in Entrepreneur.com? If so, why? If not, why not?
    B. What can you do in your work as an entrepreneur to develop value propositions that go beyond what

          can be dreamt up in a classroom?
    C. What can you read and do to come up with truly fresh ideas? What places can you visit? What networks

          and mentors can you tap?
    D. How can you as an individual move past an "innovation" obsession to solve people's problems.
    E. Can you be more than another college innovator? Can you be a superhero entrepreneur?

     Suggested Resources

7.1 Clarifying Your Vision, Mission, and Goals
This publication offers a thematic analysis of how mission statements are used in higher education:

  https://muse.jhu.edu/article/
  196947?casa_token=c_jU2qubpM4AAAAA:q2toMk4pXZEf4cYt0mE7ZFk7_rDz_q_FNyoHULHKWmGTGjEGbZO-
  5LQ9ychtjRZ3phUJV60jxg
This video provides a walkthrough for crafting your mission statement: https://www.entrepreneur.com/
  article/65230

7.2 Sharing Your Entrepreneurial Story
Using empathy in storybuilding: https://www.inc.com/craig-bloem/all-strong-startup-brands-have-a-great-

  story-heres-how-to-tell-yours.html
Harvard Business Review's how to craft a corporate narrative: https://hbr.org/2016/03/how-to-build-a-

  strategic-narrative

7.3 Developing Pitches for Various Audiences and Goals
Pitch deck templates: https://articles.bplans.com/what-to-include-in-your-pitch-deck/ and

  https://www.forbes.com/sites/allbusiness/2017/03/04/how-to-create-a-great-investor-pitch-deck-for-
  startups-seeking-financing/#4bbce7c2003e and https://www.startupgrind.com/blog/the-quick-and-dirty-
  guide-to-creating-a-winning-pitch-deck/

7.4 Protecting Your Idea and Polishing the Pitch through Feedback
Patent pitfalls to avoid:

http://www.ipwatchdog.com/2016/01/23/patent-drafting-learning-from-common-patent-application-
  mistakes/id=65243/

Giving and receiving better: https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/219437

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea                                      295

NDA templates: https://www.rocketlawyer.com/

7.5 Reality Check: Contests and Competitions
The International Business Model Competition that focuses on Lean Startup models, sponsored by BYU and

  Harvard: http://www.businessmodelcompetition.com/
296                                                                               Chapter 7 Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     8

              Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Figure 8.1 Birchbox founders Katia Beauchamp and Hayley Barna have disrupted the beauty and fashion
retail industries with their monthly cosmetics sample boxes. (credit: modification of
"487908877AP00050_TechCrunch" by TechCrunch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        8.1 Entrepreneurial Marketing and the Marketing Mix
        8.2 Market Research, Market Opportunity Recognition, and Target Market
        8.3 Marketing Techniques and Tools for Entrepreneurs
        8.4 Entrepreneurial Branding
        8.5 Marketing Strategy and the Marketing Plan
        8.6 Sales and Customer Service

      Introduction

   Birchbox founders Katia Beauchamp and Hayley Barna loved shopping for beauty products but found the
   experience expensive and frustrating. So many brands making so many claims--how could anyone find the
   best beauty buys without wasting money on products they might not need? There had to be an efficient and
   cost-effective solution to this problem.
   Their solution was to start Birchbox: an easy and affordable way to shop online for the best and newest beauty
   products by trying out samples first. Their entrepreneurial concept requires customers to share lifestyle and
   grooming preferences with Birchbox via an online form. The company then sends a personalized box of
   beauty product samples from brand partners along with information about each product. If customers like the
   offerings, they can purchase the full-size merchandise from big cosmetic manufacturers through Birchbox
   with a few clicks. Birchbox was a success from the start. Beauchamp and Barna were able to create
   relationships with cosmetic brands, fund their website, and hire the necessary workforce. However, they did
   not turn a profit until a few years later.
298  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

While Birchbox was initially an innovator and disruptor within the cosmetics and beauty supply market by
supplying products in a new and different way, competition increased as retailers like Macy's, Target, and
Walmart started to offer similar services to customers worldwide. Birchbox was valued at $485 million in 2014,
but stiff competition plus the high costs of operations and customer acquisition pressured the new company.
In 2016, Birchbox aggressively cut costs in marketing, logistics, production, and staffing, and invested in
mobile platforms that allowed the company to secure their competitive advantage, resulting in the company
turning a profit for the first time in 2017.[1] Birchbox has continued to expand its business, thanks to the
founders' ability to distinguish their brand from competitors by collecting customer information to customize
experiences and by providing the experience through platforms that reach a vast number of customers online.

 8.1 Entrepreneurial Marketing and the Marketing Mix

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between traditional marketing and entrepreneurial marketing
  · Describe the seven elements of the marketing mix

Being a successful entrepreneur often means being able to balance the many different aspects of a business,
such as financing, accounting, and management. One of the most important of those aspects is marketing.
After all, if no one hears about the new product, how can it be successful? According to marketing research
company CB Insights, in a survey of 101 companies that failed, 14 percent of them failed due to poor
marketing.[2] Marketing is an umbrella term given to those activities that companies use to identify
consumers and convert them into buyers for the purposes of achieving a profit. No matter the size of the
enterprise, marketing lays the foundation for how a company reaches and serves its target customers.
Whether it's a global brand such as PepsiCo or Apple, a small- to mid-size company such as Birchbox, or a
small restaurant or local gym, marketing refers to the core strategies companies use to reach and sell to
customers. As you might expect, the way entrepreneurs market their new product is somewhat different from
how a large company markets an established brand.

Traditional Marketing

Traditional marketing for large businesses such as Coca-Cola, Disney, and Dell tends to focus on managing
and growing existing programs and brands. Companies like these enjoy greater resources such as substantial
financial support and large numbers of marketing professionals to steer their efforts. However, marketing for
small- and medium-sized businesses (those with 500 or fewer employees and less than $7.5 million of yearly
receipts, as defined by the Small Business Administration)[3] is different because financial resources are limited,
and it is often the entrepreneur alone who is in charge of marketing efforts. If they do have funds for
marketing expenses, they might use a small agency on a fee-for-project basis.

As you have learned in previous chapters, small start-ups are usually tight on resources, so they need to
augment their resources through creativity and hard work. While having limited resources creates obvious

1 Clare O'Connor. "Pioneering Beauty Startup Birchbox Turns Profit after Tough 2016." Forbes. April 12, 2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/
clareoconnor/2017/04/12/pioneering-beauty-startup-birchbox-turns-profit-after-tough-2016/#1223b3c46fd5
2 Erin Griffith. "Why Startups Fail, According to Their Founders." Fortune. September 25, 2014. http://fortune.com/2014/09/25/why-startups-
fail-according-to-their-founders/
3 "Meet Size Standards." Basic Requirements. U.S. Small Business Administration. n.d. https://www.sba.gov/federal-contracting/contracting-
guide/basic-requirements#section-header-6

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                      299

challenges, being small also has its advantages. For example, it allows new companies to be more flexible,
agile, and creative than their established competition. These qualities can allow new companies to disrupt
their industries and become major global players by employing entrepreneurial marketing practices.

Entrepreneurial Marketing

On a basic level, entrepreneurial marketing is a set of unconventional practices that can help start-ups and
younger firms emerge and have an edge in competitive markets. The main difference between these and
traditional approaches is that entrepreneurial marketing tends to focus on satisfying the customer and
building trust by providing innovative products and services that disrupt or appeal to a specific market. Table
8.1 provides an overview of differences between traditional and entrepreneurial marketing.

                             Traditional versus Entrepreneurial Marketing

Traditional Marketing                             Entrepreneurial Marketing

Greater amount of resources                       Few to no resources; founder drives efforts
                                                  (sweat equity)

Management of an established brand, reminder      Must be ingenious, energetic, and persistent to
advertising                                       develop story and brand; leads to trust

Financial and market share goals                  Satisfaction and awareness goals

Manage existing customers                         Capture first customers; develop a client base
                                                  and long-term relationships

Manage existing products, promotion, pricing,     Develop new products, price points, channels
placement, people, physical environment, and      (placement), communication, process, training,
process (the "7 Ps")                              and design

Continue doing what works                         Trial and error; market pilots

Communication with customers standardized, one-   Communication with customers is more fluid and
directional; more difficult to create one-on-one  spontaneous; two-way relationships
relationships

Table 8.1

As the table shows, entrepreneurial marketing emphasizes flexibility and innovation as a way to stake a claim
within competitive markets. For example, consider how Drybar founder Alli Webb used her understanding of
market needs to create a niche within the traditional hairstyling industry. A hairstylist by trade, Webb spent
five years as a stay-at-home parent, drying hair for friends and family members at their homes to make extra
cash. During this time, she realized there was a market need for "just" blowouts, or professional hair drying
and styling.

Seeing this need, Webb developed a business model that would offer women a way to get a blowout without
having to also get a cut or color. Webb didn't invent the blowout; she just reinvented the space to do it,
300  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

focusing on that sole aspect of hair styling, and offering the service in trendy settings (Figure 8.2). By being
flexible and innovative through a new space to provide this service, Drybar was able to carve a niche in the
hairstyle industry. In business since 2008, Drybar is still expanding. Webb expected to open at least 20 new
locations in 2019.[4]

Figure 8.2 Simple innovative ideas such as Drybar can carve new market niches that weren't served before.
Drybar has now grown to over 100 locations across the US.[5] (credit: work by ralph and jenny/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Marketing Mix

One of the biggest misconceptions people have about marketing is that it is all about promotion, or how a
company sells or advertises something. But the truth is, promotion is just one facet of the marketing mix,
which describes the basic set of strategies and approaches that marketers use to identify and reach their
target market. A target market is the specific group of consumers for which a company seeks to provide a
good or service.
One common way of understanding and remembering the components of the marketing mix for products and
services is by thinking in terms of the "7 Ps." While each of these can be part of a company's marketing mix,
the first four relate more to products: product, pricing, promotion, and place (and traditionally have been
called "the 4 Ps of marketing"). The remaining three relate more to services: physical environment, process,
and people. While the 7 Ps are conceptually the same for all businesses, how a company addresses each "P"
will be specific to that company's needs and goals.
For a better understanding of the marketing mix, look at how Figure 8.3 breaks down the 7 Ps into their
related activities.

4 Diana Blass. "Drybar's Rise to Success with NetSuite Has a Hidden Message for Partners." CRN. October 4, 2019. https://www.crn.com/
news/cloud/video/drybar-s-rise-to-success-with-netsuite-has-a-hidden-message-for-partners
5 DryBar. "About Us." n.d. https://www.thedrybar.com/about-us/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  301

Figure 8.3 Each P of the marketing mix should work with the other Ps to create value for a business and its
customers. Product, promotion, price, and place relate more to goods, while the people, physical environment,
and process relate more to services. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Product

Within the marketing mix, product refers to a good or service that creates value by fulfilling a customer need
or desire. Goods are tangible products that can be touched, smelled, heard, and seen, such as a pair of tennis
shoes, a granola bar, or a bottle of shampoo. In contrast, services are intangible products. They usually entail
paying an expert to do something for you, such as car repair or house cleaning.

Companies can bundle both goods and services together to create extra value for their customers. Birchbox,
for example, provides goods (product samples) and services (customized product recommendations) to satisfy
their customers' desire to be able to buy beauty products in a hassle-free manner. The value Birchbox
provides to customers relies on their ability to do both. In the United States, service-oriented businesses are
increasingly playing a larger role in our local and national economies.
302  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

For start-ups, defining the value of the products they are going to offer is an important step toward identifying
their competitive advantage within a marketplace. On a basic level, if you don't know what benefit your
product provides or what need it fulfills, neither will your customers. Kevin Plank, founder of Under Armour,
knew that the value of his product would benefit many athletes who were tired of having to frequently change
their wet sportswear. As a former football player, he had spent many hours training and enduring drenched
practices, and wondered how he could alleviate this problem that companies didn't address well with cotton
sportswear. After college, he decided to take his idea to the next level and started a company making athletic
wear that had special microfibers that kept athletes dry throughout practice and games. He then embarked on
a trip to try to sell his value proposition to college football teams on the east coast. Nearing the end of 1996, he
landed his first sale of shirts to Georgia Tech, which totaled $17,000--and the rest is history. Under Armour
became a strong competitor to Nike and Adidas by providing a new type of athletic wear that has
revolutionized performance by keeping athletes dry.[6]

In contrast, Jawbone, the company that manufactured Bluetooth speakers and other hardware, has gone out
of business because it changed its focus from audio to health devices, which placed it directly in competition
with FitBit and similar hardware companies. Product failures, among other problems, caused this tech
company to flop.[7] The company is now working on reinventing itself and will use artificial intelligence and
sensor hardware to provide customers information about their health through a subscription. The wearable
sensors will record vital customer information that will be tracked on an online platform that will then provide
suggestions for medical action.[8] The company's redesign is not yet complete, so it is not officially in business
again yet.

Promotion

Communicating a product's benefits to customers is a significant aspect of any marketing mix. Even if a
product is the best in its class, a company must communicate this value to customers, or it will fail. This is what
promotion does: It is the process of communicating value to customers in a way that encourages them to
purchase the good or service. Promotions must have a goal, a budget, a strategy, and an outcome to measure.
Companies must use their promotional budget wisely to create the best results, which can include sales, profit,
and awareness through the use of a cohesive message throughout the campaign.

Some typical forms of promotion are advertising, social media, public relations, direct mail, sales promotions,
and personal selling.

Advertising is a form of mass communication that allows companies to reach a broad audience through TV,
radio, newspaper, Internet, magazines, and outdoor ads. Many of these media can be quite expensive for
small companies, forcing them to choose one strategy, or to opt for other less expensive tactics such as
guerrilla marketing or viral marketing (which will addressed in Marketing Techniques and Tools for
Entrepreneurs). As Table 8.2 shows, the advantages of advertising include reaching a mass audience and
increasing sales, but on the downside, the cost may be too much to bear, and the company might face a
difficult time reaching the right target. As we move from advertising to social media, we can see that social
media allows for more accurate targeting and better metrics to assess results.

Social media is a must-use tool for entrepreneurs to connect with consumers, especially younger

6 Under Armour. "Our Story." n.d. http://www.uabiz.com/company/history
7 Lauren Goode and Chris Welch. "Jawbone Is Going Out of Business." The Verge. July 6, 2017. https://www.theverge.com/2017/7/6/15931080/
jawbone-going-out-of-business-report
8 Conor Allison. "Jawbone Health: Everything We Know So Far about the New Premium Health Platform." June 17, 2019.
https:www.wareable.com/health-and-wellbeing/jawbone-health-hub-medical-health-wearable-2144

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  303

demographics. Many customers can be found online in one social media platform or another. The goal is to
find the customers who fit your target market. The benefits of social media include targeting customers more
accurately using the platform of their choice and being able to communicate directly with them. These
platforms include networking sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn; photo and video sites such as
Snapchat, Instagram, and Pinterest; blogs; and news sites. A business must find the time to connect with its
customers wherever they are. As a budding entrepreneur, the best way you can start connecting with them is
by identifying your target customers and by figuring out what kind of social media they frequent. You can ask
your current customers about their social media habits; you can look up reports about the types of social
media your customers frequent; or you can use special software that tracks conversations on social media that
pertain to your business and industry.

For example, you may find out that your young customers hang out mostly on Twitter and Instagram, and not
so much on Facebook. You could benefit from focusing on only those two platforms and finding out about
their conversations. You may want to search hashtags and stories that pertain to your type of business so you
can join their conversation. You could then set up your profile, write relevant content and hashtags that make
sense to your consumer, and request to follow influencers who can help you create awareness of your
business and product. Once you have a profile set up, there are many ways you can create campaigns:
contests, discounts, or by simply providing useful content that your customer appreciates. The goal is to be
part of the conversation and not sound like you are selling something.

In addition to posting good content and reaching out to influencers, you may also benefit from buying ads
that can be geographically targeted to your customer and that are more affordable and effective because
you're directly targeting someone who is specifically interested in your product. The disadvantages of
targeting social media include the time and skills required to engage with customers, and the need for
consistently fresh content. Many start-ups believe that having a Facebook page will be enough to reach their
customers, but their customers may spend more time on other social media platforms. The time and effort
required to find the right platform, develop good content, and connect with customers on a daily basis is
worth it.

Public relations are the efforts and tools companies use to connect and develop goodwill with their
constituents. Constituents can include customers, investors, employees, business partners, government
entities, and the community at large. The goal is to highlight the company in a positive light by contributing as
a community player. Tools can include newsletters, press conferences, community service, events,
sponsorships, press releases, articles, and stories that help entrepreneurs create a positive image about their
company and get its name out there. If participating in an event, for example, the sponsor will display the logo
and name of the company in a place where everyone can see it. This shows the company as a supporter of the
community and as a provider of not just products and services, but of intangible contributions, such as
supporting the dreams of the event participants. The goal is not to make a sale at that point, but to impact the
community and create positive relationships in general because it's the right thing to do--it may positively
influence the consumer when they make a purchase in the future.

Direct mail, which is a way to connect to consumers via email or through printed, mailed pieces, is also a
necessary tool to keep in touch with customers, especially when creating long-term relationships. The
advantage of this strategy lies in connecting to a customer who is already interested in your product and
would like to receive news and promotions from you; however, the disadvantage is that it usually takes time to
create these lists because it involves collecting information about customers during events, through online
requests, or at the cash register. It also can be expensive to send out pieces of mail that might end up in the
trash.
304                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Sales promotions are incentives that attract attention and push the customer to take action. These incentives
include discounts, samples, rebates, rewards programs, gifts, and premiums. Sales promotions can attract new
customers, but it may also reduce profits because coupons and discounts are offered for trying a product.

Personal selling is a tool that uses face-to-face interactions to communicate and influence a customer to
make a purchase. It is especially suited for luxury goods. Usually, higher-priced products will need a longer
selling process, and sales personnel will need more training on the product to learn about its unique qualities.
This is one of the most expensive ways to reach and retain customers, but it can be worth the investment.

Overall, a good entrepreneur must find the right mix of marketing communications to reach customers. This
will vary depending on the start-up's budget, goals, and strategies. Table 8.2 identifies the advantages and
disadvantages of each, as they relate to small and new businesses.

             Advantages and Disadvantages of Promotion Types

Promotion    Examples          Advantages                                         Disadvantages
    Type
             · TV ads          · Can reach a mass                                 · Can be expensive
Advertising  · Radio spots        audience                                        · Access can be limited
             · Newspaper                                                          · Some targeting is possible,
                               · Great for creating brand
                and magazine      recognition                                        but it is impossible to fully
                spreads                                                              control who sees the ad
             · Internet ads    · Increased sales
             · Billboards

Public       · Sponsoring      · Develops positive brand                          · Big events and public
Relations       community         recognition                                        relations campaigns can be
                events                                                               resource intensive
                               · Creates goodwill toward
             · Charitable and     company and brand within                        · Not focused on generating
                civic             the community                                      sales
                involvement

             · Scholarships
                and grants

             · Press
                conferences

Social       · Social          · Pervasive and inexpensive                        · Many companies use social
Media           networking        access to massive                                  media, so it is hard to stand
                sites such as     audiences                                          out from the crowd
                SnapChat,
                Twitter, and   · Target markets are highly                        · Can be time-consuming
                Facebook          customizable based on                           · Success requires dedicated
                                  available data
                                                                                     personnel with special

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                305

             Advantages and Disadvantages of Promotion Types

Promotion    Examples                          Advantages                     Disadvantages
    Type

             · Blogs and                       · Easy access to young            expertise
                vlogs                             people                      · It is often difficult to track

             · Influencers                     · Can be used to create           conversion (customers taking
                (industry                         goodwill and a loyal fan       a desired action, such as a
                experts who                       base                           purchase) and sales numbers
                act as                                                        · Requires the creation of
                advocates)                                                       unique/engaging content

Direct Mail  · Mailed letters,                 · Subscribers are already      · Building an email list of
                marketing                         interested in your product     interested customers can
                flyers,                           and thus more likely to        take time
                postcards, and                    convert to paying
                coupons                           customers                   · Direct mail campaigns can be
                                                                                 expensive
             · Email                           · Keeps already interested
                newsletters                       consumers up-to-date on     · Results cannot be precisely
                                                  product news, sales,           tracked
                                                  product releases
                                                                              · Consumers often discard
                                               · Can target market based         physical and digital "junk
                                                  on location, average           mail" without looking at it
                                                  income, and other census-
                                                  derived information

Sales        · Sales                           · Incentivizes buying and      · Reduces profits in exchange
Promotions   · Limited-time                       encourages consumers to        for promotion
                                                  take action
                offers                                                        · The promise of future sales
             · Coupons                         · Appeals to consumers'           and discounts can discourage
             · Free samples                       desire to "get a deal"         regular buying
             · Rewards
                                               · A good way to attract new
                programs                          and reluctant buyers

Personal     · Sales                           · Personalizes the             · Can be resource intensive
Selling         meetings                          relationship between the    · Requires salespeople who are
                between a                         business and the
                salesperson                       customer                       well-trained and effective
                and a                                                         · Consumers are turned off by
                potential                      · Effective salespeople can
                                                  convert reluctant parties      sales tactics they perceive as
                                                                                 aggressive
306                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

           Advantages and Disadvantages of Promotion Types

Promotion  Examples  Advantages                                                   Disadvantages
    Type

           customer     into paying customers                                     · Requires constant lead
                     · Salespeople can customize                                     generation

                        purchase options for each
                        buyer

Table 8.2

Price

One of the most important and challenging elements of the marketing mix is pricing. Price is the value that
must be exchanged for a customer to receive a product or service. This is usually monetary and has a direct
impact on sales. Many entrepreneurs are intimidated by financials and the prospect of using statements and
other information to make projections (you will learn about these in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting).
Correctly pricing your product enables your company to be competitive while maximizing your product's profit
potential.

Here are several methods that entrepreneurs can use to effectively price products:

Cost-led pricing is the easiest way to price a product. This involves taking the cost of making the product and
creating a profit margin, which is how much profit your business stands to make after costs have been
deducted. For example, if you add the direct costs for materials and labor to the indirect costs of salaries,
marketing, rent, and utilities, you determine that your product costs $5 to make. Adding, say, a 30 percent
profit margin would give you a sales price of $6.50. The percentage added depends on the business's goals.
This type of pricing is helpful when start-ups do not have much information about their target market and
need more time to define their value proposition and business identity.

Another way to price a product or service is to consider what the competition is charging and determine
whether to go above, below, or match their prices. If going above, or using premium pricing (also called
perceived value pricing), you need a clear reason why customers would want to spend more on your product.
While using penetration pricing, or pricing below competitors, can give you a competitive advantage, it may
also lead to "price wars" in which competitors keep dropping prices in an attempt to beat each other.
Obviously, the disadvantage is diminished profits for all. While pricing the same as your competitors seems
like a logical choice, if your product offers no added value, this strategy is unlikely to entice customers to
switch to your brand.

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Warby Parker is an example of a company that prices its eyeglasses below competition prices. Dave

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                             307

Gilboa and Neil Blumenthal started the online company in 2008 with the intention of providing attractive
and trendy $95 eyeglasses for everyone. This was a departure from competition, which usually priced
eyeglasses at hundreds of dollars. Listen to the interview with Warby Parker founders Dave Gilboa and
Neil Blumenthal (https://openstax.org/l/52WarbyParker) to learn more about their venture and its
pricing strategy.

Customer-led pricing is just as described: pricing led by the customer. You ask what the consumer is willing
to pay and charge that. You can find this by doing research and asking customers what they would be willing
to pay for a product. Many technology products are priced that way. Companies survey customers about what
they are willing to pay, and they create products that deliver the value at the market price.

Loss leader pricing uses a below-standard price to attract business in the hope that customers will stay and
shop for other, more profitable products. It is called a loss leader because companies lose money on the
lower-priced product. Grocery store ads usually contain several loss leaders that are designed to lure you into
their store in the hopes that you do the rest of your food shopping there.

Introductory offers use lower initial prices to attract new customers and build a customer base before prices
return to "normal." This method is a form of penetration pricing, as its goal is to help new products penetrate
markets with established competitors and brands. Many subscription-based products such as gyms are
introduced this way to gain market share and revenue.

In contrast, skimming is a pricing strategy that leverages the newness of a product to justify the highest price
possible in order to "skim" the most profits off the top, meaning in the first phase of sales. As time passes, the
price is lowered to accommodate for more price-sensitive customers. Apple often introduces its products with
this particular method, charging the highest price for them until it has exhausted the market willing to buy at
that price and when newer and more technologically advanced products are introduced. Then, Apple slowly
lowers its pricing.

In bundling, a discount price is set for a bundle of products to encourage customers to buy in bulk. While they
pay more than if they were buying just one good or service, they do so because the overall price for a bundle
reduces the individual price of that product, giving them a better deal than if they were to purchase items
separately. An example of this strategy is used by DirectTV, which bundles its phone, Internet, and satellite
services for a monthly fee. If a customer were to purchase these services separately, they would be more
expensive. The benefits of bundling include gaining more revenue per customer, as they would not have paid
for some services separately, and making the order-taking task simpler. Take fast-food chains, for example.
Instead of asking the customer to list everything separately from the menu, they give you the name or number
of the bundle. They make more profit by including the drink and sides to the main entrée, and the customer
saves money and time ordering.

The odd numbers strategy is a psychological pricing strategy often used in conjunction with other pricing
methods to make a product's price point more attractive to consumers. Using odd numbers takes advantage
of the idea that such numbers have a positive psychological effect on customers. For example, instead of
pricing something at $20, the price would be set at $19.99, which consumers perceive as closer to 19 than 20.
308                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Explore the five strategies of psychological pricing (https://openstax.org/l/52PsycPrice) in an article
   published in Entrepreneur magazine.

While pricing must be established when starting a new business, pricing strategies should be reviewed on an
ongoing basis. These occasions in particular merit consideration:

  · When adding a new product or service to your offerings
  · When demand shifts (due to market, consumer, or other factors)
  · When entering a new market
  · When competitors are making changes
  · When your costs are changing
  · When adjusting products/services or strategies

Place

Place refers to the channels or locations--physical or digital--where customers can purchase your products; it
is sometimes called distribution. For the entrepreneur, the choice of place lies in figuring out which channels
will create the most profit. In other words, which channels will reach the majority of the target market at the
most efficient cost. Choosing the right distribution channels is one way to create a competitive advantage and
generate more success for your business. Certain channels have specific capabilities such as reaching more
customers, providing promotions, and providing credit.
As Figure 8.4 shows, distribution channels fall into two main groups: direct and indirect. Direct channels, such
as physical or online storefronts, require no intermediaries and allow you to sell directly to consumers. For
example, if you own a bakery, you would likely have a retail storefront that sells directly to consumers.
Indirect channels require intermediaries such as distributors or sales agents to sell your products to the end
customer or to other physical or online retail outlets. Indirect channels often have more than one
intermediary. For example, to acquire more customers than you could reach on your own, your bakery would
use indirect channels such as wholesalers or agents to get your products into local markets and grocery stores
across the country. These companies would also help with logistics, which include transportation,
warehousing, and handling of products.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  309

Figure 8.4 The "P" of "Place" may include distribution through direct or indirect channels. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Taking advantage of multiple distribution channels is one strategy companies use to expand their brand and
grow their profits. This can include having a physical storefront, developing an e-commerce website to sell
goods online, and distributing goods through wholesalers and retailers. Including multiple touchpoints with
the customer can increase the likelihood that they will choose your product.
The longer your distribution channels, the longer it takes for your product to reach the end consumer, and the
less control you have over the product and the price. As an entrepreneur, you must decide which channels
best fit your product and pricing requirements.

Additional Ps for Services

As you have learned, products include services as well. These include legal, accounting, consulting, medical,
entertainment, advertising, banking, and other professional services. When providing services, three
additional Ps should be considered in the marketing mix.
310                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

People
People, or a company's human resources, will always be a key factor in any successful business. In a service-
oriented business, the people who interact with customers are especially important. Because the service is the
product, they are the face of the brand and a direct link between the company and the customer.

When an employee delivers an acceptable or outstanding service, customers are encouraged to return to
purchase the service again and also share their positive experience with others. When customers go into a
jewelry store and receive good service from the salespeople, they will likely let their friends and family know
about the positive experience through a personal referral or on social media.

When service is poor, customers don't return. If customers have a bad experience at a restaurant, it is likely
they will not patronize the establishment any longer and will probably share a negative review online.
Sometimes, poor service has to do with factors other than employees, but as online review sites such as Yelp
become more common, poor customer service reviews can have a crippling effect on a brand, especially for
start-ups trying to break into a market. It is important to hire experienced people and have a good training
system in place with rewards that will help employees deliver the best service to customers. Companies should
take into consideration that no matter the size of a business, they must market not only to their customers but
also to their employees, as they are the face of the company and the ones who interact with customers.
Employees can make or break the brand.

Physical Environment
The physical environment where a service is provided is an important part of the marketing mix. It can
influence the company's image and convey a lot of information about the quality of a product, service,
company, or brand. The old adage that you "get only one chance to make a first impression" is especially true
for new businesses. Tangible cues--décor, smell, music, temperature, colors--send an immediate message to
customers about quality and professionalism.

For example, if you walked into two dentists' offices (remember, they are also entrepreneurs), and one office
smelled and looked clean, and one did not, which one would you choose? The same goes for restaurants, retail
stores, and any other physical environment. Since a service cannot be inspected before it is received, these
cues help customers make their decisions.

Process
Process is the chain of procedures or activities required to provide a service to the customer. It is all of the
activities that take place between the service provider and the customer, from beginning to end.

In the case of a doctor's office, this would include making the appointment, filling out paperwork, waiting to
be seen, seeing the doctor, and paying. Because processes can be long and involved, they need to be designed
to flow as efficiently and logically as possible. In the case of services that are provided online, process includes
the website's design and functionality, and all of the steps customers take from browsing through check out. A
strong website design helps the entrepreneur say what the company is about, what it does and for whom, and
what actions the customer can take. Actions can range from clicking for more information, the ability to
purchase a product, or checking whether there is availability for a service and being able to book it or make an
appointment. An example of a great website is Airbnb's website (https://openstax.org/l/52AirBnb) whose
design is focused, inspiring, and to the point. What do you think is its main call to action?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                              311

ARE YOU READY?

Determining the Marketing Mix

Imagine that you are opening a new yoga studio in a local area. Based on your research, you found that
certain styles of yoga are not taught by local studios but are increasingly being sought by women aged
twenty-five years and older. Your task is to create a marketing mix that focuses on this market and has a
clear competitive advantage over other studios. Develop a marketing mix that includes all 7Ps and define
them as they relate to your business.

 8.2 Market Research, Market Opportunity Recognition, and Target Market

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between primary and secondary market research
  · Define a research goal and the importance of research design
  · Understand how to choose a sample, and collect and analyze data
  · Identify common sources for secondary market research
  · Understand how to identify the target market within the total available market and serviceable available

      market

Now you know the components of the marketing mix. But, as an entrepreneur, before you can make decisions
about them, you need to roll up your sleeves and do some research. This type of research is similar to the
concepts covered in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity; however, that research focused on whether an
entrepreneur has what is needed to move forward with an idea. This research is more market focused, and it's
done after the entrepreneur has decided to move forward and start the enterprise or launch the product.
Essentially it is about the product, not the entrepreneur's readiness.

Market research is essential during the planning phases of any start-up; otherwise, you're shooting in the
dark. On a basic level, market research is the collection and analysis of data related to a business's target
market. Market research can entail everything from information on competitors' products to the
interpretation of demographic data related to potential customers.

The main purpose of market research is to gain an understanding of customer needs and wants in an effort to
reveal potential business opportunities. When you have a clear picture of what your target market is and what
it wants, you can more effectively design your marketing mix to engage that demographic.

Imagine that you are creating a cosmetic line that is organic, contains vitamins and minerals, and is easy to
apply. Your target market is women who are interested in high-quality beauty products that are not harmful to
themselves or the environment. But after conducting extensive market research, you learn that women aged
eighteen to forty-five years tend to be interested in the benefits your product line provides, but that women
over fifty years of age are not. In light of these findings, you can either adjust your line's benefits to serve the
market you initially wanted to serve (all women), or you can cater to the needs of a smaller audience (eighteen
312  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

to forty-five-year-old women).

A good exercise for better understanding your target market is to detail the everyday life of your ideal
customer. You can do this by describing in detail a set of possible customers who would buy your product.
Details could include demographic information such as gender, age, income, education, ethnicity, social class,
location, and life cycle. Other information that would be helpful would include psychographics (activities,
hobbies, interests, and lifestyles) as well as behavior (how often they use a product or how they feel about it).
The better you know your ideal customer, the better you can focus on capturing their attention by matching
their preferences with your offerings.

Market research also helps you understand who your competitors are and how they serve the target market
you want to engage. The more you know about your competition, the easier it will be to determine and
differentiate your offerings. Let's dive into how marketers gather all of these data and the value the data
provide to entrepreneurs.

Primary Market Research

Primary research entails collecting new data for the purpose of answering a specific question or set of
questions. While conducting your own research can be resource intense, it is also the best way to get answers
specific to your business and products, especially if you want to penetrate niche markets that have not been
studied. It also allows you to get specific. By asking the right questions, you can determine people's feelings
and attitudes toward your brand, whether they like your product design, whether they value its proposed
benefits, and whether they think it is priced fairly. Figure 8.5 shows the steps common in conducting primary
market research.

Figure 8.5 There are six steps in primary market research. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

Define the Research Goal

You should start by defining the goal of your research project. What are you trying to find out? Do you want to
know more about your target market, their preferences, lifestyle choices, and culture, or do you want to know
more about your competitors and why your target market buys from them? What are your criteria for
validation of the research goal or goals?
The more time you take to clarify your research questions, the more likely you will be to achieve your research

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  313

goals. If you can't figure out exactly what you're looking for, that's okay. Exploratory research using a focus
group can help you decide what kind of research questions to ask. A focus group is a gathering of people,
typically six to twelve participants, who come together to discuss a topic presented by a moderator, who
usually poses questions and collects qualitative data that can be used to answer questions or define research
further.

For example, a manufacturer of water bottles might know there is a problem with their products as sales have
been declining over time. The company doesn't know exactly why or where to start, so it would use a focus
group to better define the research goal or problem. Using focus groups, they might find out that they are
targeting the wrong segment or that there is a need for better water bottle designs. Talking to the focus group
can uncover possible research questions to undertake.

Merkadoteknia Research and Consulting is a Hispanic-owned company that conducts research for different
industries that cater to Hispanic consumers. This company helps fast-food companies, retailers, and
pharmaceutical companies, among others, conduct focus groups and gather insights about specific groups of
people that may have different cultural backgrounds. These companies may not know exactly how to start
researching their target market, so they use Merkadoktenia Research and Consulting to learn more through
the use of focus groups. This approach helps better define the research goal or problem.

Determine Research Design

The next step is to determine which research techniques will most effectively help you answer your questions.
Considering what you want to learn and determining what your budget is will help you decide if qualitative or
quantitative research best suits your needs. Well-designed research projects often use some combination of
both.

Qualitative research uses open-ended techniques such as observation, focus groups, and interviews to gain
an understanding of customers' basic reasons, opinions, and motivations. Simply observing potential
customers, whether at a store or in daily activities, and noting their behaviors are a simple, effective form of
ethnographic research that can help you better understand the lifestyles and habits of potential customers.
Ethnographic research includes the personal observations of the subject by being immersed in the subject's
environment. Research like this helps companies see how people use their product over the course of a day.

For example, if you manufactured a water bottle and wanted to design a "better" water bottle, you could
watch how people use their water bottles while working, exercising, during their commute, and so on to better
understand their needs and habits. This "ethnographic" research can often uncover latent, or unstated, needs
that you can use to build your concept. Unstated needs refer to those that are expected from a company, such
as a certain level of quality or good customer service. These are default expectations that a customer has
based on their experience with products in general.

Employing a mystery shopper, or pretending to be one yourself, is another way to learn how customers and
employees act within a specific retail environment. A mystery shopper is a person who has been hired by the
company or a third party to pose as a real shopper and has gone undercover with a specific goal of testing
certain aspects of a business. This can take the form of purchasing a product, browsing and asking questions
of an employee, interacting with other customers, or simply observing what is happening inside the store.
After the experience, this person will provide feedback to the company.

Focus groups and one-on-one interviews can be useful to obtain more thoughtful answers and explore
debatable topics. Both are good methods for digging deeper into the specific motivations and concerns of
314                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

people, especially as they pertain to personal, privately held beliefs. This research is useful when trying to
develop a more novel product, but you must do your best to eliminate "support bias" in that the panelists
might seem favorable to new concepts to please or accommodate the moderator. For one-on-one interviews,
it is important to develop a thorough interview or discussion guide, so other team members can also conduct
the interviews. By doing this, you will ensure a consistent approach to asking key questions and documenting
responses to help guide the next step of the development of your product.

Quantitative research focuses on the generation of numerical data that can be turned into usable statistics.
This kind of research most often takes the form of surveys or questionnaires that pose multiple-choice
questions with predefined answers. While these surveys do not allow for much free expression on the part of
the participant, the focused nature of the answers means marketers can identify trends, such as which social
media platforms are preferred by customers or potential customers. For example, the researcher may very
well find that Instagram is the most used social media app because of its ease of use and its ability to incite
emotional responses to pictures.

Sample survey questions can be anything from "How many times have you gone to the corner store this
week?" to "Which age range do you belong in?" This kind of approach is an efficient way to collect a lot of data
because once the survey is written, it can be distributed in person or online to as many participants as you like.
Typically, the more people you survey, the more accurately your data will reflect the demographic you are
examining.

Another way to generate quantitative results is through causal research and test marketing. In both cases,
you present participants with a cause and record the effect. An example of this might be a taste test in which
people's reactions to and preferences for different juice flavors are recorded. Given the limited resources of
many start-ups, test marketing is a great way to make sure your product works before you start investing in its
distribution.

An even more sophisticated--and expensive--method is conjoint analysis, in which respondents must rank,
choose, or a rate a number of "conjoint," or linked, features or benefits. This real-life scenario approach will
give you very useful results from potential buyers, often with features or benefits ranked relative to perceived
value or importance.

For instance, let's say your company is trying to create a reusable water bottle to compete in a crowded
marketplace. If you were to use conjoint analysis, you would create a survey that lists the water bottle
attributes and prices to show consumers different choices. For example, customers could be given a set of
very similar water bottles, each with a set of features the company would like to test. Features can include a
locking lid so the water doesn't leak, different bottle shapes for easier hold and water retrieval, and different
colors and sizes. Each of the choices could have its own price point and the customer can choose, rank, or rate
each of the choices based on those attributes and prices. Each of the choices could be described on a surve y
with words or pictures, and it would ask customers to choose their favorite or rank all of the choices. After
collecting information and data from many consumers, researchers would use statistical analysis by applying
linear regression (a predictive tool that measures the causality of one marketing variable on another) or other
techniques to determine which attributes of a water bottle are more important to the customer and what price
they would be willing to pay. Based on this knowledge, the company would create a product that could
possibly beat the competition.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  315

Choose a Sample

Next, researchers need to determine the sampling method. In terms of research, your sample refers to who
you will survey and how many people you will include. In most cases, you will want a sample that reflects your
target market, especially if you are trying to figure out your ideal customer's interests and how to get them to
buy your product. Untargeted samples can be useful when trying to figure out who your target market might
be, but they aren't an efficient way to get to know your ideal customer.

Generally speaking, larger samples provide more accurate data, although researchers should not feel like they
need to survey everyone in a market. For example, if you have a list of 5,000 contacts, you might choose to
contact 500 people who would be representative of the total group of contacts. Surveying all of your
population could be time consuming and expensive, so choosing a subset of the right people can yield good
results. The sample must be large enough to be statistically significant, meaning that the relationship between
variables is not a result of chance. The sample can then show the researcher an accurate depiction of a specific
phenomenon.

For example, you can test whether men and women actually have different or similar tastes in water bottle
attributes. In this case, the significance rests on the gender of the potential customer. If your sample is large
enough (say 500 out of 5,000), and you find that men look for different attributes than women do, it is unlikely
that the differences found were by chance. The cause of the differences would be the gender.

Therefore, keep in mind that errors of reliability and validity can arise if your sample is not thoughtfully
selected. Statistical significance is then important in measuring reliability because it means that there is an
actual difference in what is being measured. If there is a difference between men's and women's responses in
our water bottle example, checking the significance will determine whether the differences really matter or if
they are due to chance. Significance is measured by looking at the probability value, or P value, of the result. If
it is 5 percent or less, it is usually considered a significant difference that is not due to chance, and the
researcher can determine that the answers are indeed different between the two genders. Validity, on the
other hand, means that the item that is being measured is relevant to the research. This means that the
questions that are being asked will actually answer your research objective.

While random samples can be useful for some types of research projects, many researchers intentionally
choose their sample participants based on economic and ethnographic factors to make sure they accurately
reflect the nature of the demographic they seek to understand.

Collect Data

Once you've identified your research goals, chosen your design, and determined your sample, you are ready
to start collecting data. The data may be collected through observation and taking notes. For example, if you
are trying to figure out if your store layout is yielding the most productive sales, you can observe traffic flow
and note what people look at and what they actually purchase. Then, you may change the merchandise layout,
or the aisle size or space, to see whether people peruse other merchandise that they hadn't seen before.
Based on your observations and sales data, you can determine the best flow for your floor.

Interviews can also help secure open-ended answers. You might interview potential customers on what they
think is the best way to communicate with them and what they like about certain competitors' products. This
can help you obtain additional options that you may not have thought to add on a survey, which is another
way to get aggregate data.

Surveys can be done by hand or through online tools such as Survey Monkey or Qualtrics. Surveys are very
316                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

helpful because you can ask question to current or potential customers about your product, competitors'
products, customer service, and any other information you may seek to create or improve your business. They
are an easy way to collect large amounts of data from many customers, and they allow you to calculate
responses. Online tools are particularly useful in providing repositories of data that can be later exported to
other analytical tools such as Excel or SPSS.

Regardless of what research technique you use, be on the lookout for data collection errors. Recording the
wrong answers, failing to convey the right instructions to participants, or having to translate on the fly can all
create biases that skew the answers and give you inaccurate results.

Analyze Data

Once you collect your data, the next step is to make sense of it. How you analyze the data depends largely on
what you want to get out of it. Typically, you will be looking for patterns and trends among the answers. Data
analysis is a field unto itself, and when complex analysis is required, seeking the assistance of experts is often
worth the extra cost. You can find experts within research marketing firms that specialize in collecting and
analyzing data for businesses, such as Merkadoteknia Research and Consulting. These can be found online or
through local business organizations, such as chambers of commerce.

Results and Next Steps

At this stage, the entrepreneur seeks to reconcile the results of his or her examination with the goals of their
research. For example, if you were doing exploratory research about a potential product you wanted to bring
to market, now would be the time to ask questions such as whether the research suggests market potential.
Similarly, if the goal was to figure out what customers like about competing products, now would be the time
to list those results and determine whether they are worth incorporating into your product. Regardless, it is
important to be open to what the data say, even if they indicates results that are contrary to what you were
hoping for. Research should be an opportunity for growth and a roadmap for the refinement of your idea.

Secondary Market Research

Secondary research is research that uses existing data that has been collected by another entity. Oftentimes,
these data are collected by governmental agencies to answer a wide range of questions or issues that are
common to many organizations and people. Secondary research often answers more general questions that
an entrepreneur may have, such as population information, average purchases, or trends. If there is a specific
question that cannot be answered, such as how many people would be interested in a new product with
certain attributes, then primary research will have to answer that. While some of this kind of research must be
purchased, much of it is free to the public and a good option for entrepreneurs with limited financial
resources. Some commonly used sources for free data include the US Census Bureau, Fact Finder, Pew
Research Center, Current Population Survey, the Small Business Administration (SBA), and the Texas State
Data Center.

Other useful resources are trade organizations that provide information about specific industries, as well as
newspapers, magazines, journals, chambers of commerce, and other organizations that collect local, state,
national, and international data. Resources such as these can provide information about everything from
population size to community demographics and spending habits. Table 8.3 lists several free databases that
are rich sources of information.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                  317

                                               Databases for Secondary Research

      Database                                 Information                       URL Address
Census Bureau
                   Economic, demographic, geographic, and     https://www.census.gov/
Fact Finder        social data
American
Community Survey   Economic, population, and geographic data https://factfinder.census.gov/
Pew Research
Center             Updated census data                        https://www.census.gov/programs-
Pew Hispanic                                                  surveys/acs/
Center
Current            Fact tank that surveys trends, issues,     http://www.pewresearch.org
Population Survey  attitudes, and demographics
Texas State Data
Center             Surveys on Hispanic trends, demographics,  http://www.pewhispanic.org/
IBISWorld          and issues
Mergent Online
Demographics       Monthly survey of US households on labor   http://www.bls.gov/cps/home.htm
Now                data

                   State demographic data                     http://txsdc.utsa.edu/

                   US industry trends                         http://www.ibisworld.com
                   US businesses data                         http://www.mergentonline.com/
                   US demographic and business data           http://www.demographicsnow.com/

Table 8.3

While free sources can provide a lot of information, their research tends to be less specific than that by sources
that charge for their data. Companies such as Nielsen/Arbitron, Simmons, and Geoscape can provide more
detailed information about specific behaviors on media use, lifestyle choices, specific product consumption,
geographic segmentation data, and others. Table 8.4 lists some sources for this research.

                   Syndicated Sites for Secondary Research

        Site       Information                                URL Address
  Nielsen
  PRIZM       Geodemographic                   https://segmentationsolutionsdev.nielsen.com/mybestsegments/
  Nielsen TV  segmenting                       Default.jsp?ID=20&pageName=ZIP%2BCode%2BLookup
  ratings
              TV ratings, media,               http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights.html
Table 8.4     research
318                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

             Syndicated Sites for Secondary Research

      Site   Information                                                          URL Address
Nielsen
Audio        Audio ratings,        http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/solutions/capabilities/audio.html
Experian     media, and research
Simmons
Scarborough  Consumer research,    http://www.experian.com/
             trends, and insights
Geoscape
             Consumer research,    http://www.scarborough.com/
             trends, and insights

             Multicultural         http://geoscape.com/
             consumer research

Table 8.4

In the end, there is no perfect way to conduct research. It all depends on what you are trying to find out and
what the best approach is to do that. If you are just starting out, you may want to maximize secondary
research because it is free. You can also try primary data collection by speaking to friends, family, and others
you encounter in your local and online communities. If you are working at a university, you will likely have
access to free market research reports (marketresearch.com, Frost & Sullivan, etc.).

     ARE YOU READY?

     Researching Your Market

     Pretend you are an entrepreneur who would like to create a new, educational toy for toddlers to develop
     their motor skills that uses figures, shapes, or blocks. While in college, you worked in the children's
     section at a well-known retailer. From this experience, you learned that there might be a need for
     educational toys within the market that isn't being addressed, but you aren't exactly sure how to exploit
     it.

       · Using the market research process, develop a research plan that will help you determine the viability
           of your idea.

Market Opportunity Recognition and Validation

One common goal of market research, which has been mentioned earlier in other chapters, especially the
Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity chapter, is the identification of a market opportunity, or an unmet
need within a target demographic that might be fulfilled by an existing or new product. Looking for gaps or
unmet needs within a marketplace is one way to identify market opportunities for both goods and services.
For new products, this entails looking at the needs of a demographic, identifying which of those are not being
met, and determining what kind of product could fulfill it. Based on our earlier discussion on secondary

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                                              319

research, there are many places where data can be found online or offline to determine these needs.
Similarly, you might identify common local, national, or global problems through observation and directly
interacting with potential customers, and try to create services that would solve them. Social, economic,
technological, and regulatory changes all have the potential to create market opportunities.
When inventor David Dodgen saw the suffering that Hurricane Katrina had left behind, he saw an unmet need
that this event had created. By witnessing the disasters, he realized that when hurricanes or other disastrous
events strike, they can contaminate the water supply in a region or city, or prevent access to clean water. As a
result, he created the AquaPodkit, a plastic container that can temporarily store fresh water for weeks at a
time in the event of an emergency. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) recommends that
people fill their tub if they feel that there may be a chance that water will be scarce. Oftentimes, tubs can be
dirty, and people may not have the time to clean them. With this in mind, Dodgen developed a plastic lining, or
bathtub bladder, which is manufactured in the United States and is safe to drink from, together with a pump
that helps seal and open the plastic when the water is needed. This kit can hold up to 100 gallons of fresh
water in the tub and has proven successful; it has also been featured by CNBC, Entrepreneur, and the New York
Times.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   View this video about the AquaPodkit (https://openstax.org/l/52AquaPod) to learn more. Dodgen also
   created smaller bags and pumps (https://openstax.org/l/52BagsPumps) that can be stored anywhere,
   not just in the tub.

WHAT CAN YOU DO?

Climate Change

Background: Earth's climate change is a topic of discussion with great importance these days. For many
hundreds of thousands of years, Earth's temperature changes were attributed to tilts on its axis that
allowed for more or less energy to enter our atmosphere. Recently, Earth's climate has experienced a
dramatic increase in temperature, and most scientists around the world agree that it is attributed to
human activities that emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.

Greenhouse emissions have increased the temperature of Earth to the point that glaciers in Antarctica
and Greenland are now disappearing ten times faster than on a normal ice age recovery session, not to
mention the many weather catastrophes that are seen around the world.[9] These changes in
temperature have caused ice sheets to melt, snow caps to retreat, oceans to warm and become more
acidic, water levels to rise, and severe weather to increase.

As harmful as it sounds, there is still time to change the negative effects of global warming. This can
present some opportunities for social entrepreneurs who care about Earth's environment and business.

Your task: As a social entrepreneur, determine one or two opportunities for a business you could develop

9 National Atmospheric and Space Agency (NASA). "Climate Change: How Do We Know?" n.d. https://climate.nasa.gov/evidence/
320                                                                       Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

     and test for market validity.

       · What kind of opportunities are there to create positive change?
       · How can you validate your assumptions?
       · How would you test unmet needs?
       · What kind of research would you conduct? Why?

Sometimes unmet needs are not uncovered immediately. One way to better understand a market's
opportunities is to conduct a market analysis, which is an analysis of the overall interest in the product or
service within the industry by its target market to determine its viability and profit potential. Validation, not to
be confused with validity, is the act of verifying that a specific product is needed in a target market. This can be
done by conducting formal or informal interviews or surveys with potential customers to gather their
feedback. Dropbox is an example of a company that conducted validation over and over until they created a
product that could work with a mainstream audience (see Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup).

In addition to identifying competition and determining growth and profit potential, a good market analysis will
identify the total available market (TAM) for a specific product, which is the total perceived demand for a
product or service within the marketplace. It will also identify the serviceable available market (SAM), which
is the portion of the market that your business can serve based on your products, services, and location
(Figure 8.6).

Figure 8.6 Entrepreneurs must focus on the target market within the TAM and the SAM and allocate
resources to attract customers who can be satisfied by the value proposition. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

To calculate this, let's go to our water bottle example. Let's say that you are trying to figure out what your
target market is based on this concept. To calculate the TAM, you would look at the whole industry and
determine the total number of customers available for water bottles or total revenue available. To find the
number, you can look up the industry numbers for the category on databases such as IBISWorld, mentioned
earlier, or any other data available through the World Bank or World Factbook to see the potential number of
customers or revenue. This is called the top-down approach, as you are looking at macroeconomic factors to
determine an industry's potential.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  321

Another way to calculate the TAM would be by using the bottom-up approach, which involves counting local
market sizes and figuring out the competitors' number of customers. After collecting this information, then all
the local markets would be added up and multiplied by the average amount they spend on the product per
year. Since your company cannot service all markets, the next step is to figure out the SAM. You could estimate
the number of customers you can service by splitting the market into those you can service given your product
characteristics and geographic, demographic, and cultural factors, among others.

Finally, considering the constraints of the company and strength of the competition, you would determine
your focused target market to avoid wasting valuable resources marketing to people who are generally not
interested in buying your product.

As an entrepreneur, you want to segment the market and figure out if there are possible pockets of people
that you can serve. Segmenting, targeting, and positioning (STP) will help you figure out who is your best
customer and will allow you to allocate your resources so that you can more effectively serve that customer.
Let's look at these processes now.

Segmenting means that you separate the total population by homogeneous groups of people that have
similar tastes, backgrounds, lifestyles, demographics, and even culture. You may segment along lines such as
age ranges, gender, ethnicity, line of work, earnings, or activities. There are many ways to separate these
groups to choose the right one for your business.

The next step is targeting. You select a target based on their ability and willingness to buy. As stated earlier, a
target market serves to specify which group of the total market you will serve and how you will position
yourself to distinguish your company or product from your competitor.

Positioning (value proposition) is a statement of how you want the customer to perceive your company, good,
or service. For example, ModCloth is an online indie retailer that sells vintage, or vintage-looking, trendy, fun
clothing that appeals to the global consumer who wants to be stylish. Another example is Wag! which
positions itself as the app that lets the pet owner look for a walker on demand. Kind of like the Uber for dogs
who want a walk when their owners can't take them!
322                        Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION
   Wag! Dog-Walking App

   Figure 8.7 The Wag! app allows busy people to choose from prescreened dog walkers so their furry
   friends will be well-taken care of while they're at work. (credit: modification of "A woman with her
   dog@Takayama" by JAR/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

   As a dog owner, Wag! CEO and co-founder Joshua Viner struggled to find the time to walk his beloved
   dog after a long day at work. He knew it was unfair to keep her cooped up all day. He even considered
   finding her a new home. This canine conundrum led him to create Wag! in 2015 as a way to help people
   like him who loved their dogs but didn't always have the time to make sure they were properly exercised.
   To start, Viner got together with Jason Meltzer, who, like himself, had experience creating consumer tech
   companies. Meltzer was the founder of pet services company Surfdog LA, which already had a proven
   track record of success. Together, they developed an app and website with the goal of making dog
   ownership easy and guilt free. Wag! gave customers access to trusted, prescreened walkers who could
   take their dogs out on short notice without them having to be present. Customers could even see their
   dog being walked via the app.
   Since its inception, Wag! has been growing and entering new markets at a steady pace. After launching
   its service in Los Angeles and San Francisco in 2015, it continues to add cities across the United States.
   Because the app's dog-walkers have access to their client's houses, one of the challenges Wag! faced
   was making sure customers trusted them and their dog walkers (Figure 8.7). Another challenge was the
   safety of the dog itself. What happens if a dog gets hurt or lost? It wouldn't take much for issues like
   these to turn into major problems.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                                                 323

· Describe the target market for this service.
· Are there other potential customers who can be a good target for this service?
· How can Viner position his business to assure pet owners that their dogs will be well taken care of?

 8.3 Marketing Techniques and Tools for Entrepreneurs

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe effective entrepreneurial marketing techniques (guerilla, relationship, expeditionary, real-time,
      viral, digital, word-of-mouth)

  · Discuss the pros and cons of these marketing techniques

One of the hardest facts for entrepreneurs to absorb when starting a new business is that financial and human
resources are limited. Fortunately, there are many marketing techniques available to entrepreneurs that
require little more than a good dose of "sweat equity."

Guerilla Marketing

Coined by business writer and strategist Jay Conrad Levinson in 1984, guerrilla marketing refers to creative
approaches to marketing that seek to gain maximum exposure through unconventional means. Guerilla
marketing often means staging some sort of event or interaction that is designed to attract attention to a
brand or product. The goal is to intrigue consumers by standing out from normal sales messages and the
thousands of advertisements they are exposed to every day. These approaches usually have a component that
encourages potential customers to interact with a company or product in a fun way.

Dennis Crowley, a serendipitous entrepreneur who taught himself to code and who was laid off by Google
while working on his social networking site Dodgeball, was able to create and grow Foursquare through the
use of guerrilla marketing techniques. Foursquare, the search and discover nearby businesses app, used this
technique at the Austin, Texas-based South by Southwest film and music festival. The idea was to set a real
game of foursquare in front of the convention hall that also raised awareness for the app (Figure 8.8). The
games were an instant success and attracted thousands of participants who played all day long. If someone
didn't know what the game was, a marketing team of 11 people helped them find it on their phones. Their
efforts resulted in 100,000 views for the app that that day alone.[10] All of this was achieved for the cost of a box
of chalk and two rubber balls. Although the company had plenty of investments to sustain its operations,
guerrilla marketing was a clever and helpful way to get users to test it and enjoy it.

10 Knowledge @Wharton. "How to Generate Buzz on Social Networks." Forbes. April 23, 2010. https://www.forbes.com/2010/04/23/
foursquare-facebook-yahoo-entrepreneurs-technology-wharton.html#13e159097b2d
324  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Figure 8.8 Foursquare's guerilla marketing idea generated 100,000 new views for the app at the South by
Southwest film and music festival in Austin, Texas. (credit: work by betsyweber/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Another example of guerrilla marketing that has been prominent over the last few years is flash mobs. A flash
mob is a gathering of people at a public place to perform an act, be it a dance, entertainment, political stance,
or some sort of artistic expression that conveys a message to the public for a brief period of time. This is
organized through social media calls or emails to gather enough people to perform them. Flash mobs have
been effectively used by companies to create awareness and reminders about their brands.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   You can watch videos of some of the best choreographed flash mobs (https://openstax.org/l/
   52FlashMob) in business.

Relationship Marketing

One of the main differences between start-up companies and established brands is the need for start-ups to
nurture and maintain relationships with new customers. One way to accomplish this is through relationship
marketing, which seeks to create customer loyalty through personal interactions and long-term engagement
strategies. A small company can try to have a closer relationship with clients by writing personal notes by hand
or sending an email thanking them for their business, by acknowledging their presence by their first or last

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  325

name when they come into the establishment, by offering beverages, and by offering other personalized
services.

An example of successful relationship marketing from a larger company comes from MooseJaw, a retailer
specializing in outdoor clothing for hiking and snowboarding. At one point, a MooseJaw customer returned a
piece of clothing that he had bought as a gift for his girlfriend. In his explanation for the return, he wrote,
"Girlfriend dumped me." Seeing this as an opportunity to engage with a customer, the company decided to
send the man a care package.

A few weeks later, the man received a surprise shipment with a note saying they were sorry his girlfriend
broke up with him so they decided to give him a gift. The box contained shirts, stickers, and other goodies.
There was also a card with notes from MooseJaw's employees.[11] MooseJaw's efforts were rewarded when the
situation went viral on social media, which generated more exposure and support for the company.

Another way companies maintain relationships with their customers is through regular email newsletters. By
using sales history and other market data, companies are able to customize the content of these usually free
newsletters to the needs, concerns, and desires of their target market. This allows them to stay connected to
their customers while developing strong connections and brand loyalty. Start-up companies can take
advantage of the free and affordable options offered by such newsletter management software companies as
MailChimp, Constant Contact, Mad Mimi, Marketo, Insightly, Slack, and Salesforce.

Expeditionary Marketing

One of the toughest aspects of entrepreneurship is to stay in business and grow in a highly competitive
landscape. Businesses are born every day with the goal of making a name for themselves by providing better
goods and services. One way that companies big and small can stay relevant is through expeditionary
marketing.

Expeditionary marketing refers to strategies that are aimed at moving established companies and their
products into new markets and territories. As the name implies, there is an element of risk and discovery
involved in expeditionary marketing strategies as they help a company grow into new areas. Determining
where and how to effectively enter these new markets often begins with an analysis of a company's current
market and its financial and human resources. Entrepreneurs will choose new markets based on where those
resources might be able to fulfill an unmet need. Many small businesses need to leverage their gains as they
move into new waters and perhaps more competitive landscapes. Having awareness of changes can foster
planning and look for new ways to expand.

This type of marketing is very similar to entrepreneurial marketing, and the terms are often used
interchangeably, except that expeditionary marketing involves existing companies continuing to innovate
whereas entrepreneurial marketing also involves new companies. Companies that have succeeded in taking
their businesses into new markets and consistently pivoting to create new products for current and new
markets can be thought of as entrepreneurial companies. Big companies such as Apple, Google, and Dropbox
Launch for Growth to Success have consistently developed products and entered new markets to keep abreast
of the competition. Companies that did this while small like Birchbox (see Introduction) also use this method
to grow and fight off competitors.

11 Joshua Kraus. "The Dos and Don'ts of Relationship Marketing." Sitepoint. April 16, 2015. https://www.sitepoint.com/relationship-marketing-
examples/
326  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Real-Time Marketing

Real-time marketing attempts to turn immediately available sales data (often collected from social media,
websites, point-of-sale systems, and the like) into actionable and timely strategies that target the shifting
landscape of consumer tastes and trends. Some of the tools entrepreneurs can use to secure information
include analytics from Facebook, Twitter, and Google, as well as internal sales data. The information can
include preferences for one brand over another, lifestyles, behavior, purchase frequency, and dollar amount
spent. This helps entrepreneurs set up strategies that focus on providing the customer what it needs in
today's instant gratification society.

For example, a company such as Birchbox creates a post on Facebook or Twitter regarding a new promotion. It
can then confirm the number of "clicks" the post gets and determine the depth of engagement for each of the
posts. Clicks can be likes, shares, comments, and purchases that can be tracked immediately, minute by
minute, hour by hour, or day by day, depending on the length of the promotion. Real time allows the marketer
to assess the action followers take immediately after this happens. Success will depend on the goal that was
set by the company. For example, if for one of their promotions, Birchbox expects 1,000 likes, 100 shares, and
30 conversions or purchases per day, it will be very easy to track whether the company is accomplishing its
goal just by looking at the results every hour. This makes it very easy to gauge and to change. If a post is not
getting the desired results in likes, shares, comments, or conversions in the desired timeframe, then the
company can make changes to the communication sent to provide a different incentive, such as providing a
deeper discount, or using different language, a new picture, and a better call to action. In addition, real-time
tracking also allows for the company to answer tweets and comments from its followers immediately. This
enables direct communication from customer to company without any interference or time constraints.

Viral Marketing

Viral marketing is a technique that uses engaging content in the hopes that viewers will share it on their
personal and social media networks. Successful content then spreads like a virus, creating exponential
exposure to a company's message.

The most important element of any viral marketing campaign is developing content that is not only engaging
but that people also feel must be shared. Generally speaking, viral content is not "salesy" in nature; rather, it
tends to be subtle about its presentation of branded items. In this way, the product or brand reaps the indirect
exposure that comes with being part of content that people want to consume. A very successful campaign that
included viral marketing is the Dove Real Beauty Sketches campaign (https://openstax.org/l/52DoveReal)
where a real-life forensic artist sketches women's faces based on their own descriptions and sketches them
again through other people's descriptions of their faces. When these sketches were revealed to the women
who were asked to participate, they saw how much kinder and more beautiful other people had described
them. This video never mentioned any Dove product at all. The result of this campaign was astounding, as it
had more than 140 million views worldwide, becoming the best viral video of 2013 by connecting to the
customer in an emotional way that was sincere and warm. This campaign also enabled the company to track
results in real time and answer comments from viewers in a timely manner, while enhancing brand
awareness.[12]

Another example of an effective viral campaign is that of Dollar Shave Club (https://openstax.org/l/
52DollarShave) which has garnered more than 26 million views on YouTube in response to the low budget and

12 Nidhi Dave. "Top 3 Viral Marketing Campaigns to Take Inspiration From." SEMrush. March 9, 2018. https://www.semrush.com/blog/viral-
marketing-campaign-inspiration/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                                                         327

entertaining video by the owner of the company. Founded in 2011 in California with the goal of providing low-
cost razors to men every month through a membership, the company has been so successful that it has since
been acquired by Unilever.

The benefit of this kind of marketing is that it can lead to massive exposure for little or no effort or investment
once the content is developed. The challenge, though, is that it is difficult to predict what will be successful
viral content. Viral marketers often create a lot of content that does not go viral before finding content that
does.

Digital Marketing

Digital marketing refers collectively to all digital (online) marketing efforts, which can include social media,
email communications, websites, blogs and vlogs, and search engine optimization (SEO). This is an important
area for entrepreneurs to explore because learning how to leverage digital channels and online analytics is key
to remaining competitive in this technological era.
Digital ad spending has outpaced television ad spending in recent years.[13] Digital ads include display ads,
search ads, and social media ads. These can be very successful at targeting specific people in your target
market and are usually more affordable than a TV ad. They are cheaper to make and to place than TV ads,
which can cost millions of dollars for production and air time to reach a wide number of people. Digital ads are
important for entrepreneurs because they are an effective way to redirect traffic to their websites and gain
conversions on a budget. It does not matter how big your budget is. These ads can be strategically bought to
be as cost effective as possible. They can range from a few dollars to millions of dollars, depending on your
resources. Display ads are those that resemble banners and showcase a product or company on a website in a
noticeable way. They come in various sizes, and the entrepreneur may buy them on third-party websites or
search engines that provide space for ads. These ads are usually paid using a pay-per-click model, which
means that you only pay for the times that someone clicks on your ad, or you can pay for impressions, which
means that you only pay for the number of times the ad appears on readers' screens.

Search ads, conversely, are those text ads you see while you are looking for something on a search engine,
whether it's on your laptop, tablet, or mobile device. Google, Bing, and Yahoo! are the three biggest search
engines in the United States that provide businesses the ability to create targeted ads to reach customers who
are looking for something in particular. These ads are created using keywords that are strategically chosen to
target people typing those specific words in the search engine and are paid through a bid system that allows
the business to specify how much they will pay for an ad to be displayed in a better position on the engine's
display pages. Google Ads and Google Analytics are tools that allow a digital marketer to search for popular
keywords and create ads based on these terms to target the right consumer. These tools are so well designed
and complex that it takes some time to get acquainted with all of their features and capabilities. Their main
features, however, are to look for the right keywords, create the ad campaigns, and track their success.

Go to your favorite search engine and try to search for something (Figure 8.9). What kind of ads do you see on
your screen? Someone on the other side has created these ads to connect with you. Did they do a good job?

13 Greg Sterling. "Digital Now Makes Up 51% of US Ad Spending." MarketingLand. September 20, 2018. https://marketingland.com/report-
digital-now-makes-up-51-of-us-ad-spending-248617
328                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Figure 8.9  The Google Ads tool is effective for reaching targeted audiences searching online for specific
products.

Social media platforms also have the capability for users to create similar ads on their systems to target people
based on their behavior, likes, profiles, and searches for products online. Their popularity has increased as
more people join the platforms and more information is gathered from them.

     ARE YOU READY?

     Solar Panels Are Hot

     During the last ten years, solar panels have increased in popularity, as they are a great alternative to
     fossil fuels. Solar panels enable homes and organizations to transition from electricity generated from
     fossil fuels to clean energy. Given the current climate state and changes in the energy industry, solar
     panels have become an excellent way to save money on electricity over the long run, a great way to
     receive tax credits, an incentive to add equity to homes and buildings, and a help to the environment.
     The cost of installing such technology has decreased over the years thanks to the new technology
     available, the increase in competition, and the overall increase in demand of the product. Consumers can
     install the cells on their roofs at a more affordable price.

     Given the recent trends and interest you have in helping the environment, you've decided to get a part-
     time job at a new local solar panel company. This company has a very small market share (less than 1
     percent), or percentage of customers, compared to the rest of its competitors. Their goal is to increase
     that percentage to 2 percent of total customers by the end of the year. To reach that, they have hired you
     as their marketing coordinator.

     As part of your job, you decide to create a plan for a promotion to reach a targeted number of people.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                          329

This promotion must be conducted online and on a budget. On your first few days on the job, you
research the various types of ads that could most effectively reach the most people looking for solar
panels. Once your research is over, you come back to the owner and help her decide which ads to use.
Focus on the following three areas and provide your advice to the owner.

  · What are the best types of ads and platforms for this type of company?
  · What is the average price per ad clicked or seen?
  · What are five to ten common keywords that can be used in the ads?

Blogging has become an important tool for business owners. It allows them to share information about their
companies, products, and their experiences in written or video form. Blogging enables entrepreneurs to
create a name for themselves, especially when the content is useful and people are interested in what the
blogger has to say. Strategies that help entrepreneurs include making the time to blog, having a specific niche,
choosing interesting topics that matter to the blogger and the audience, and using other branding and SEO
techniques that help the blog become more visible.

Content marketing is an important topic for digital marketing, as content has become more important in
recent years. Content can be displayed as a story, a blog, a website, social media posts, a newsletter, an article,
videos, or anything else that has the ability to convey a message to the consumer. This is a valuable tool to
distribute content that is useful, which can engage the target audience and entice them to take some sort of
action. The entrepreneur must take the time to create useful content to connect with current and potential
customers online. Entrepreneurs can also tap influencer marketers to disseminate information about their
brands. This includes tapping into social media celebrities, who usually have millions of followers on YouTube,
Facebook, Instagram, or similar platforms. This has been one of the biggest recent trends in marketing.[14]
When working with influencers, it's important that they disclose that they receive compensation for any
product or service they are talking about to avoid legal risks.

Email marketing is a form of direct mail that connects to consumers in a personal way. Emails can contain
useful content for consumers, promotions, and tips that entice them to try or be aware of a product. Many
email marketing platforms offer services at an affordable price, including Constant Contact, Mad Mimi, Mail
Chimp, and Drip. All of these platforms allow the entrepreneur to upload a list of customers or potential
customers and create email marketing campaigns that are tailored to each target market. These platforms
also offer useful metrics, such as open rates, click-through rates, time spent viewing the message, and
conversion rates, which can measure the effectiveness of a campaign.

Word-of-Mouth Marketing

Word-of-mouth (WOM) marketing occurs when a satisfied customer tells others about their positive
experience with a good or service. Although similar to viral marketing, WOM does not involve active
participation from the marketer and almost exclusively involves only customers, whereas viral marketing
attempts to build awareness and buzz mostly via videos or email.

When consumers are very happy with their purchases, they will let people know, whether it is in person or on
social media. The company has less control over this type of marketing because it happens organically. While
effective WOM marketing can have a huge impact on a brand's sales and visibility, creating WOM is

14 Sumit Gharal. "7 Reasons Why Content Marketing Is Important! Number 7 Is a Must Read!" Digital Doughnnut. April 4, 2019.
https://www.digitaldoughnut.com/articles/2019/march/7-reasons-why-content-marketing-is-important
330                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

tricky--people have to want to talk about your product.

One way to encourage WOM is to ask satisfied customers to help you spread the word by talking to their circle
of friends and family, or by sharing comments online on the website, through portals, or through social media.
Companies often include call-to-action cards in their shipments that direct customers to post reviews on their
website, the website where they purchased the item (Ebay and Amazon), or on public review sites such as Yelp.

Entrepreneurs who do this need to make sure they monitor what is being said about their businesses so that
poor reviews don't undermine their marketing efforts. Many of these sites allow businesses to address and
resolve bad reviews, which is a good way to turn a potentially damaging situation into one that creates
goodwill and positive brand recognition.

Lululemon is a yoga and athletic wear company that knows well about customer reviews. On its site,
customers have the opportunity to leave comments about each of the garments regarding the size, fit, quality,
and ease of use. Although the quality of Lululemon garments is high, some customers still have negative
experiences and don't hesitate to share their comments on the site. The company responds with an apology
for the negative experience and redirects the unsatisfied consumer to an email so they can move the
conversation off the site. This allows the company to make amends with the customer and hopefully remove
the negative comments if the issue can be resolved.

Table 8.5 summarizes entrepreneurial marketing techniques.

 Marketing                           Entrepreneurial Marketing Techniques                     Example
 Technique                                      Description
                                                                                  Events, such as flash
Guerilla       Aims to gain maximum exposure through unconventional               mobs
marketing      means
               Creates customer loyalty through personal interaction              Personalized
Relationship                                                                      communication to
marketing                                                                         individual customer

Expeditionary  Strives to move established companies and products into            Pivots that create new
marketing      new markets                                                        products or attract new
                                                                                  markets
Real-time      Seeks to turn immediately available sales data into
marketing      actionable and timely strategies that target the shifting          Analyzing clicks or "likes"
               landscape of consumer tastes and trends                            and modifying posts/
Viral                                                                             offerings in response
marketing      Uses engaging content in the hopes that viewers will share
               it on personal and social media networks                           Subtle branding
                                                                                  embedded in stories users
                                                                                  want to share

Table 8.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                     331

 Marketing                         Entrepreneurial Marketing Techniques              Example
 Technique                                    Description
                                                                         Online ads and use of
Digital      Uses online marketing strategies                            search engine
marketing                                                                optimization (SEO)
                                                                         Online customer reviews
  Word-of-   Relies on satisfied customers telling others about their
  mouth      positive experience
  (WOM)
  marketing

Table 8.5

 8.4 Entrepreneurial Branding

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand the importance of customer-focused branding
  · Explain the steps in defining and developing a brand
  · Describe the benefits of brand advocacy

In a business context, the word brand has multiple meanings. First, a brand name is the name of a product or
service offered by a company. For example, Coca-Cola and Goodyear are brand names. But the brand also
means the image a company promotes and the connotations it fosters of itself and its products. For example,
the Coca-Cola brand might be seen as refreshing, youthful, and quintessentially American. The Goodyear tire
brand might be seen as performance-driven, affordable, and reliable. A logo, advertising messages, public
perception, celebrity endorsements, promotional strategies, and other factors all play a part in promoting a
company's particular brand.
Branding is often less about a product's actual benefits or value, and more about how it positions itself within
its target market and connects with its loyal customers. Establishing a brand at a company's inception is more
challenging than managing a brand that has been present for many years. In the case of a start-up, the
initiatives undertaken must be customer centric and should speak directly to the heart of the consumer. These
must have a trustworthy and emotional appeal to create a bond with the customer. Let's delve deeper into
this.

Customer-Focused Branding

The image a company conveys to its customers is managed through what is called brand strategy, which can
include advertising, public relations, customer service, and sales promotions.
One common branding strategy is the use of taglines, which are short and catchy positioning statements that
332                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

quickly communicate some core aspect of the brand to the consumer. Taglines can be a powerful tool, and in
some cases can become as recognizable as the brand names themselves. Consider the list of taglines from
recent start-ups in Table 8.6. Do they do a good job of communicating the key attributes or benefits of the
brand name they are linked to?

          New Companies      Taglines of New Companies
Hello Fresh                                                           Tagline
Airbnb
Uber                     Simply Delicious Meals
BirchBox                 Belong Anywhere
Snapchat                 Get There
LuminAID                 Open to Beautiful
Uptown Cheapskate        Life Is More Fun When You Live in the Moment
                         Makers of Brilliant Things
                         Buy. Sell. Trade.

Table 8.6

Consider the taglines shown in Table 8.7. They have been around for a long time, and most customers are
familiar with them. Why do you think these taglines have endured over time?

Mature Companies                  Taglines of Established Companies
Nike                                                Taglines That Have Endured Time
Apple
Subway            Just Do It
Walmart           Think Different
State Farm        Eat Fresh
Master Card       Save Money, Live Better
Maybelline        Like a Good Neighbor, State Farm Is There
Red Bull          There are some things money can't buy. For everything else, there is Mastercard.
                  Maybe She's Born With It, Maybe It's Maybelline.
                  Red Bull Gives You Wings

Table 8.7

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                               333

Mature Companies                  Taglines of Established Companies
General Electric                                    Taglines That Have Endured Time

                  Imagination at Work

Table 8.7

Consider, also, how jingles can have a powerful effect on people's recollection of a message. A jingle is a very
short song or sound that brands a product or company and helps promote it. These tunes are very easy to
remember, bold, and fun. Jingles are similar to taglines in that they feature a sound that is catchy and easy to
understand by the recipient. Which jingle do you remember off the top of your head?

LINK TO LEARNING

Taglines are not just visual. They can also employ sound. Consider the "Intel Inside" riff or the three
notes of NBC's network chime. Sound plays a big role in brand recognition. And jingles are sure bets that
entertain as well as forge a connection to a brand. Check out this website for a history lesson in some of
the most famous radio and TV commercial jingles (https://openstax.org/l/52Jingles) of all time.

Other components in a brand include the website, social media, customer service, and packaging. These are
important components of a branding strategy that use technology to convey the message. A website allows a
company to create an image of its business pages that are linked to each other. These pages convey branding
information about a company that sends a message to the consumer through the use of the business logo,
colors, copy, ease of use, product information, and e-commerce capabilities. The LuminAID website conveys an
image and at the same time has important calls to action (https://openstax.org/l/52LuminAID) and serves as
an example of successful branding. This site uses colors, images, and fonts that create a specific image of
modern lighting that entices customers to purchase the products and other stakeholders to give light to
people who need it.

In addition to the ability of a business's website to convey the company's story, social media platforms
reinforce the connection to the consumer. Social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and
YouTube allow companies to invite customers to join the conversation by posting pictures of their use of
products, making recommendations, participating in contests and giveaways, and obtaining coupons and
other perks. Entrepreneurs have these tools at their disposal to continue creating the image of the business
that perhaps got started as a brick-and-mortar business. Today, tools such as Wix, an easy, online website
builder, can be used to develop this branding. Entrepreneurs with larger budgets can hire a website designer
to create and help promote the site.

Customer service is another tool that can create a strong company image. Training salespeople and cashiers
to be courteous, resourceful, and knowledgeable creates an image in the customer's mind about the product
and the business. Wearing uniforms can also create a positive image. Customer service is particularly helpful
when dealing with services because it gives some tangibility to the product that the customer cannot see. For
334                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

example, a hairstylist cannot provide a tangible depiction of how a haircut might look on a customer, but his or
her demeanor, attire, and hair, can give the customer clues as to what treatment and results he or she can
expect. Packaging is an important component of branding. The design of the package, the color, the
information that is conveyed on the package, and the practicality of the package all create an image of what is
to be expected from the product.

Method, an environmentally conscious and customer-focused brand of cleaning products, is an example of a
company that distinguished itself from the competition by employing effective branding strategies. By using
recycled, environmentally friendly packaging and promoting their commitment to using plant-based, nontoxic
chemicals, the company was able to attract the attention of, and eventually place their products in, Target
stores nationwide.

First, Method convinced Target to use their products to clean their own stores; after a successful test, they
convinced the company to carry its line, which includes soaps, detergents, and cleaners (Figure 8.10). Its quirky
brand message helped land the account, as Target is a progressive and innovative retailer. The brand message
that Method conveyed to them was that everything inside the cleaning bottles was plant-based, and no harsh
chemicals were used in creating the product. The products were either as or more effective than leading
brands. In this case, the brand message conveyed the mission of the company in all of its products by
integrating all the aspects together in a simple manner through the use of clear bottles, quirky fonts, and
(nontoxic) colored liquid.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  335

Figure 8.10 Method's quirky packaging, design, and plant-based ingredients were all part of its successful
brand strategy. (credit: work by Carol Bleistine/Flickr, CC BY 4.0)

The benefits of developing a good brand are several. A brand is the image of a product or service that conveys
to customers who when they purchase from a particular brand, they will receive the value (quality, price, and
experience) they expect. The next time they see that brand, they will choose it again because their previous
expectations were met, simplifying their buying-decision process. New products must also break through
crowded marketplaces and be visible to consumers who already have an attachment to other brands.
Trust in a brand can save the consumer time and may create an emotional connection to the company.
However, not all benefits work for all brands and all purchase decisions. When a customer is purchasing low-
commitment products and services, like cleaning products, the decision process can be quick and heuristic.
When purchasing more expensive items such as electronics, vehicles, or vacations, the brand is just one of
many attributes the consumer will consider.

Defining and Developing a Brand

A brand should have a clear purpose derived from the company's mission. If the purpose is to provide plant-
based cleaners that are not harmful to people, pets, or the environment, as in the case of Method, then the
brand must communicate this throughout all of its interactions with its consumers. The unique selling
proposition, as described in Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity, benefits, qualities, and overall image
should be conveyed throughout the marketing mix to tell a story. In addition, the brand should have a well-
336                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

designed logo, the company/product name, merchandise, promotional items, location of the business (that
also provides an image or tells a story), and any other tools that communicate with buyers.

Keep in mind that there are differences in branding regarding business size and type. When starting a
business, it is likely that you will brand your entire business with one logo, one name, and matching
promotional items, business cards, and product packaging. As your number of products grows, you would
likely develop different packaging and different images for other product categories.

Figure 8.11 provides a checklist of items that help develop a brand for your venture.

Figure 8.11 When starting a business venture, following a few key steps will help in establishing a strong
brand. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Promotion through Brand Advocacy

One way to promote your brand is to identify loyal customers who are willing to share positive feedback about
it. A brand advocate is someone who is a fan of your products and passes on the word to others. Brand
advocacy is a potentially inexpensive means of building a brand and one that entrepreneurs should explore.
One simple way to motivate brand advocacy is by asking your best customers and fans to refer other
customers to you, leave online reviews, and/or to blog or comment about your company and products online.
Companies often offer discounts and promotional codes to encourage brand advocates to spread the word.

The key to effective brand advocacy is to know the goal of your advocacy campaign, look for ambassadors
(there are many online and in-person events), ask them to perform a task, and reward them for doing so.

An example of advocacy branding is to create a contest to engage consumers who love your product so they
can share pictures on social media. IKEA did this in 2016, when it started a contest to win a personalized
wardrobe using the hashtag #JoyOfStorage to entice its most loyal fans to share their IKEA products online.
The contest asked customers to post pictures of their IKEA products on Facebook (Figure 8.12). This campaign
allowed IKEA to engage and reward loyal customers in a fun way, while also using word-of-mouth marketing
to expand their marketing reach.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                                       337

Figure 8.12 The IKEA #JoyofStorage contest engaged loyal fans and rewarded them for being brand
advocates. (credit: work by this_could_be_my_house/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

   WORK IT OUT

   Forever 21

   After living in Los Angeles for a few years, South Korean natives Jin Sook and Do Wong Chang decided to
   open a clothing store. They named it Fashion 21. The store became a success, bringing in over $700,000
   in revenue in 1984. Next, they decided to open new stores twice a year while at the same time changing
   the name of the store from Fashion 21 to Forever 21, expanding their brand globally. While the stores
   have historically generated over $3 billion in annual sales, the retailer recently filed for bankruptcy, citing
   struggles to pay vendors and landlords. The filing comes along with the closing of 178 underperforming
   US stores and allows Forever 21 to "simplify things so we can get back to doing what we do best."[15]
   Bankruptcy aside, Sook and Chang have remained at the helm of the company and their children are also
   in management, one working in marketing and the other in branding. Branding helps the company
   remain relevant to its youth segment by positioning itself as trendy, innovative, and particularly adaptive
   to ever-changing tastes in fashion. The company uses its logo, retail stores, and website to showcase its
   trendy image.
   Forever 21 has been sued several times for copyright infringement, as the essence of the company is to
   provide fashion looks inspired by runway designs but offered at a lower price point. Forever 21 has a
   long history of settling copyright suits, including a case involving H&M. It has been in legal battles with
338  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

     Adidas, Puma, and Gucci as well.

       · If you were the branding manager, how would you prevent these suits from happening?
       · How would you develop a better image of the company?

 8.5 Marketing Strategy and the Marketing Plan

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between a marketing strategy, a marketing plan, and a pitch
  · Describe the elements of a marketing plan

Now that you have a better idea of what marketing is, you are ready to start developing a marketing strategy
and plan. A marketing strategy describes how a company will reach consumers and convert them into paying
customers. Having a solid-yet-flexible marketing strategy is a good business practice, no matter what kind of
business you are in.

A marketing plan is a formal business document that is used as a blueprint or guide for how a company will
achieve its marketing goals. A marketing plan differs from a business plan in that it focuses more on market
research, attracting customers, and marketing strategies, whereas the business plan covers much more than
that, as you will see in Business Model and Plan.

Marketing plans are important tools because they act as roadmaps for everyone involved in an enterprise.
Writing a marketing plan forces you to specify goals and develop strategies to reach them, and encourages
you to research markets and competition. A strong marketing plan will encourage entrepreneurs to think
deeply about their business and profit potential, helping them make better business and marketing decisions.
Additionally, a marketing plan can create greater involvement and cohesiveness among employees by
clarifying goals and expectations.

A variety of marketing plan templates are available that can be modified to fit your business's product and/or
services. One thing to consider is why you are writing your plan and who your audience is. In addition to
planning for your venture, will it be used by employees or potential investors? Different audiences will require
different kinds of information. If it's an employee, then you must include extra details about the operation of
the business. If the plan is geared toward acquiring an investor, be sure to highlight the value that will be
gained from investing.

Keep in mind that the various parts of a plan do not need to be written in a certain order. Plans should also be
seen as flexible guides rather than absolute rules. All good marketing plans are living, breathing documents
that help you measure success while allowing for course corrections when necessary. Table 8.8 provides the
standard components of a marketing plan.

15 Erica Gonzales. "Forever 21 Has Officially Filed for Bankruptcy." Harpers Bazaar, September 30, 2019. https://www.harpersbazaar.com/
fashion/trends/a28849065/forever-21-bankruptcy/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                                      339

                                               Sample Marketing Plan Sample

  Marketing Plan                                             Description and Purpose
        Section
                    Provides a snapshot of the whole plan, including profit potential and major strategic
Executive           ideas
Summary

Situation Analysis  Overviews internal and external environments related to the business and product;
                    internal environments include company background and mission; external
                    environments can include market needs, competition, market research, and an
                    analysis of strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT)

Marketing           Validates the market opportunity being exploited by the business and articulates the
Opportunity         potential gain for stakeholders
(Unmet Need,
Proposed Solution,
Value Proposition)

Business Model      Presents the framework for generation of sales and the business's competitive
                    advantage

Marketing           Specifies goals for sales (in units or dollars), market share growth, brand awareness,
Objectives          secured distribution channels, inventory, and pricing

Marketing           Explains target market, projected positioning, and strategies as they relate to the
Strategies          marketing mix (7Ps)

Action Program      Defines who will do what and when

Financials          Discloses sales estimates, projected budgets, and financials that will help readers
                    understand the present and future economic condition of the company

Control             Describes procedures for measuring results, monitoring goals, and adapting the
Procedures          plan as needed

Table 8.8

Executive Summary

The executive summary is just that--a clear and concise summary of the major points of your marketing
plan. Though it is placed first, it is generally written last because it is based on the information presented in
other subsequent sections.

The executive summary is typically one or two pages long and includes key indicators of success for the
business and its stakeholders, which may include company owners, managers, consultants, investors, and
340                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

banks. Your goal is not merely to summarize everything in your plan but to highlight why people should be
interested in your venture. Whether the reader is an employee or a potential partner or investor, the executive
summary should seek to not only inform but to excite.
Focusing on the opportunity at hand, what makes your business model special, and the potential financial
reward is a good way to capture a reader's attention. For example, if your business' strengths include a great
marketing team and a significant competitive advantage, you should highlight them as reasons for success.
Some readers may only read this section, so make sure you highlight what makes your company special and
how you plan on turning that into profit.

Situation Analysis

In many ways, the basis of your marketing plan is found in your situation analysis, which is an examination of
the internal and external circumstances relevant to your business and product. A good analysis will provide the
logical support for the strategies you choose. For example, the research you conduct here explains why you
will develop a certain product, how you will price it, and what you will do to reach your target market.
Good situation analyses often include a SWOT analysis, which looks at a company's strengths, weaknesses,
opportunities, and threats. They also look at future and current competitors, and include market validation
research that has surveyed potential customers. This information is critical because it proves that you have
done your due diligence on your product and market.

Marketing Opportunity

Assuming your background research has led you to determine that there is a business opportunity, this is
where you explain what and where that opportunity is. For example, if your research led you to discover a gap
in the market for educational children's toys, this is where you explain the depth of the opportunity. Here you
use your research as evidence to prove to your reader that there is a market gap and that you know how to fill
it. If your goal is to get an investor interested, this is where you would let them know what they stand to gain
and when they would gain that.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The US Small Business Administration (https://openstax.org/l/52SBAMarketing) strives to help business
   owners initiate and succeed in developing enterprises. Their website is loaded with helpful information,
   classes, and templates that can help the entrepreneur navigate the intricacies of marketing, as well as
   provides helpful tips on developing a marketing plan.

Business Model

In this section, your job is to marry the opportunity you saw with the solution you have created. Here you
articulate how your competitive advantage and points of differentiation (nature of the solution and its key
features and benefits) will provide value to customers and earn profits that will sustain your business into the
foreseeable future. What will you do to create value that attracts customers? How will you generate sales?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  341

Who is your target market? If you were opening a gym, this is where you would lay out how you will capture
customers, the value they will receive, what types of membership contracts will be available to them, and so
on.

A great tool for capturing this information is the Business Model Canvas (Figure 8.13), which is discussed in
Launch for Growth to Success and Business Model and Plan. The nine building blocks of this model will help
you to determine the targeted customer segment, value proposition that you will present each of your
segments, channels for the distribution of the proposition or touchpoints, type of customer relationship you
will build with your target, types of cost structures and revenue streams based on pricing means, and key
resources, activities, and partners that will help you to succeed.

The canvas also allows the entrepreneur to innovate and to change if something doesn't work out. The point
of this tool is to put the pieces of a plan together.[16]

Figure 8.13 A business model canvas brings together key strategies about the product being launched.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Marketing Objectives

Here you present your specific goals and their tangible outcomes. It is not enough to say that you will be very
successful without defining what exactly success means. The point of this section is to quantify your goals as
units sold, sales/revenue, market share, or some other practical metric. Goals can also include creating
measurable brand awareness and developing a certain number of distribution channels.
For example, good, measurable goals might be selling 300 units per month, selling $600,000 worth of product
in a year, or gaining brand awareness of 10 percent of your target market in three months. Avoid goals that
are unmeasurable or vague, as they won't help you now or later.
No matter what your goals are, they should be reasonably achievable and as specific as possible. The reason
for this is so that later on, you can determine whether you have been successful. If you haven't, you will know
something needs to change.

Marketing Strategies

As mentioned earlier, having a good marketing mix will help your business succeed. As an entrepreneur, you
want to segment the market and figure out if there are possible pockets of people whom you can serve. The
process of segmenting, targeting, and positioning (STP) will help you figure out who is your best customer and
allow you to allocate your resources effectively to serve that market.

16 "The Business Model Canvas." Strategyzer. n.d. https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas
342  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

After going through this process, you can look at the marketing mix, and depending on whether you have a
product, service, or a mixture of both, which is usually the case, you will outline your approach to the 7Ps of
the marketing mix.

Action Plan

In the action plan, you detail how things will get done in your business on a day-to-day basis, when they will
get done, and who will be doing them. Often, new business owners develop extensive strategies, but they
don't have the people power to implement them. Obviously, ensuring that you have the necessary human
resources in place to execute your goals is important. This is the section where you make it clear that you do.
For example, if you have a marketing team in place, highlighting their ability to execute your plans will help
convince potential investors that you can put your plan into action.

Financials

Here you include budgets, forecasts, and any other information that will give readers and potential investors a
clear picture of your business's financial situation. Being transparent and truthful will create trust and goodwill
between your company and potential investors.
This section is also important because it will help you determine how profitable your business might be. One
place to start is by determining your expenses and future profits. Since most entrepreneurs tend to
overestimate these numbers, it is best to develop financial projections for best- and worst-case scenarios, as
well as a projection for an average case scenario.
Many entrepreneurs develop one-, three-, or five-year projections to get a sense of future profits and to prove
that their business model is sustainable over the long run. Figure 8.14 provides an example.

Figure 8.14 Growth projections appear in the financial section of the marketing plan. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Key Performance Indicators

Finally, you need to determine your key performance indicators, or how you will evaluate the effectiveness of
your strategies, by looking at the progress you have made during a specific timeframe. These include the
quantitative milestones that will tell you if you are on the right track, help you analyze your decision-making
process and focus on specific strategies, and make changes if these don't work.
For example, one of your milestones might be a sales goal of $50,000 within the first six months. If you ar e not
on track by the time you hit this milestone, it can be an indication that you either overestimated your sales or
your strategies are not working. In either case, you will need to make actionable steps to revise your
projections or find more effective strategies.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                         343

 8.6 Sales and Customer Service

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the importance of sales strategy and provide an example
  · Explain the importance of customer service

A sales strategy is a plan that the entrepreneur uses to identify and engage a consumer, from prospecting to
securing the sale. This strategy should keep in mind the core benefit or competitive advantage that the
product or service has and make sure this information filters through the entire sales execution process. The
strategy should include a six-step process that is an integrated sales system for how to prospect, pitch, handle
rejections, and the like.

Setting objectives is important before reaching out to prospects and current customers because they allow the
salesperson to detail the strategy, have an end goal, and measure the results. For example, a salesperson may
have a goal of closing one client out of ten prospects he or she sees per week (or through a sales cycle). So the
detailed strategy would be:

 1. doing research about prospective clients and creating a list,
 2. calling them to set up an appointment to talk about your product or service,
 3. meeting with them to present a proposal,
 4. handling objections,
 5. closing the deal, and
 6. nurturing the relationship after close.

The end goal would be to gain a prospect as a client and develop a good relationship for future business. And
the salesperson would measure the results by looking back at goals and outcomes.

There are many methods, tools, and techniques to sell, and there is no perfect set of strategies for a business.
It depends on the goals and resources of the entrepreneur, as well as on the type of product he or she is
launching. When selling to customers who are going to be spending a substantial amount on a product or
service, like a piece of equipment, a luxury yacht, or an expensive software program, there must be a sales
system in place to take consumers from prospects to customers. The preceding six steps are general stages in
this system. Let's take a look at each step.

Sample Six-Step Sales Strategy

Figure 8.15 outlines an example of an effective sales system or strategy using a six-step approach.[17]

17 Stephen Castleberry and John Tanner. Selling: Building Partnerships. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2019.
344  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Figure 8.15 The six-step sales process does not end with the sale but with a positive customer relationship.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Prospecting and Preparing

Prospecting focuses on finding potential new customers for the product or service. This helps acquire new
customers, replace customers lost to attrition, and expand sales from current customers. In essence,
prospecting allows salespeople to collect information about potential customers and identify any who are not
a good fit for the company. It is important to get as many prospects as possible to secure a few customers, as
the pool of prospects diminishes through successive steps of the sales process.
You may need to have a list of twenty prospects to secure one or two customers. Prospecting also tends to be
more important in certain industries such as financial advising or business-to-business industries. To
determine whether a person or organization is a qualified prospect, the salesperson must consider several
issues, such as whether this person/business needs my product or service, and if they can afford it.

Making the Sales Call

The next step of the sales system is to prepare for a sales call, contact, or meeting with a prospect. Effective
sales people usually prepare well in advance of contacting a prospect. A salesperson can look for information
regarding the company's demographics, its competition, clients, and other companies they purchase from.
Information can be gathered from online sources or referrals. It is also helpful to set objectives before
contacting the prospect. Some of those objectives can include securing an appointment for a presentation,
understanding the prospect better, scheduling a second call/contact, or perhaps starting a sale.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  345

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Neil Rackham wrote a book in 1998 called Spin Selling. It's a classic in the sales world. In it, he outlined a
   new way to approach winning big sales deals. SPIN stands for situation, problem, implication, and need
   payoff. Visit the SPIN site (https://openstax.org/l/52SPIN) to learn about Rackham's nontraditional
   approach to sales and the main principles he advocated.

Presenting the Proposal

Once the salesperson has made a connection with a prospect and understands the prospect's needs, the next
step is to meet with the prospect for a sales presentation. A presentation is a great way to expand the
prospect's understanding about the offering. Strong presentations include good communication skills with
strong visuals and testimonials. In this step, the salesperson can make a better case for the value proposition,
citing the strengths of the product and how this would help the prospect in his or her life or how it would help
a company's objectives. The presentation can also include the cost of the investment and a projection of the
return on investment. In the case of a financial advisor, a presentation at a prospect's home would show the
potential products that the prospect might invest in, such as a variety of retirement accounts, life insurance, a
college savings plan, or long-term care insurance, along with the costs and benefits of each. In the case of a
business, the presentation could take place at the prospect's office, and the meeting could include a slide
presentation about a piece of equipment, with video showing how it is used and how it can benefit the
company, including cost savings.

Handling Objections

During or after the presentation, a salesperson will likely encounter objections or questions from the prospect.
This is a good way for the salesperson to gain feedback and respond to concerns from the prospect.
Objections can arise during the appointment setting, during the presentation, or while trying to close the sale.
The salesperson must be proficient at dealing with these in a truthful manner so the relationship that is
established is based on trust. Some of those objections can include cost concerns, credit capabilities, product
benefits, or plain rejection of the product. In this case, the financial advisor could answer questions about the
potential benefits of one type of insurance over another, or handle objections on the monthly payment plan. If
dealing with a company, these questions can take the form of credit opportunities and amount of cost savings
in comparison to a competitor.

Closing the Sale

Once the presentation and objections are handled, the next step is to close, or ask for the sale. This is as
important as being prepared to present and handle objections because it signals to the prospect that the
product is a good fit and the relationship can be created. A good closing includes a trustworthy and logical
process. Doing a trial close by asking "How is this so far?" or "Can I answer anything else?" can help the
customer feel more at ease with making a decision. The customer will help set the pace for a final closing.
Then, the salesperson can set up the next steps or ask the following questions: "Can I place the order for
you?" "Can we open the life insurance account for you?" "Can you come see the demonstration at our office?"
346  Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

"Can we meet next week for the financial terms?"

Fulfilling Orders, Fostering Relationships, and Asking for Referrals

Finally, the salesperson must fulfill the order and make sure that the customer is satisfied with the product or
service. The salesperson, in the end, is the one who is the main contact for the customer and therefore is
responsible for the fulfillment of a correct order. The order needs to be closely monitored in case there are any
delays or issues with it, so the customer can be immediately notified. The process of the order fulfillment has
to be monitored until it is fulfilled. Software has now made it easier to keep track of these orders, so the
salesperson can spend more time selling and less time on the order process. Customer relationship
management tools such as Salesforce (https://www.salesforce.com/crm/) can help a small entrepreneur or a
larger business keep track of its customers, their orders, troubleshooting, and strategies for cost effectiveness.

Building a direct relationship with the customer is also important; therefore, calls or emails to check in
consistently is important to assess customer satisfaction and t build the relationship bridge to ask for referrals.
Customer retention is more important than ever, as even a small percentage of customers can make up the
majority of your sales. Wooing new customers is 5 percent more expensive than keeping your current ones,
and in the long run, those who are your VIPs will generate most of your sales.[18] Research shows that retaining
even 5 percent of your current customers can generate anywhere from 25 percent to 95 percent of your
sales.[19]

Customer Service

One of the most important aspects of making the sale, and one that often wins or loses customers, is
customer service. If you have ever stepped into a business where you have been greeted with a smile and
treated kindly throughout the purchase process, you will probably want to come back and purchase from that
store or salesperson again. However, if the sales associate is rude and doesn't help you find what you need,
chances are you will not return to the store a second time. For start-ups, customer service can be an
advantage, as the business can focus on a few customers at a time in a more personal manner. The bigger a
company is, the harder it is to manage many customers and sales associates on a personal level.

According to Hubspot's top statistics on customer service, 70 percent of the customer experience or journey
depends on how they are being treated. The majority of customers fall in love with a brand and are willing to
pay a premium for amazing customer service, and they feel that great customer service is more important
than price. They will also share positive experiences with other people--an average of eleven, according to
Hubspot.[20] When a customer has a negative experience, or feels unappreciated, they are more likely to switch
brands, and a company has to work harder to counteract a negative experience. It takes twelve positive
reviews to counteract just one negative, unresolved customer issue.[21]

As an entrepreneur, focusing on customer service before and after the purchase is an effective reminder that

18 Matt Mansfield. "Customer Retention Statistics: The Ultimate Collection for Small Business." Small Business Trends. August 22, 2019.
https://smallbiztrends.com/2016/10/customer-retention-statistics.html
19 Jia Wertz. "Don't Spend 5 Times More Attracting New Customers, Nurture the Existing Ones." Forbes. September 12, 2018.
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jiawertz/2018/09/12/dont-spend-5-times-more-attracting-new-customers-nurture-the-existing-
ones/#723fd9e15a8e
20 Swetha Amaresan. "31 Customer Service Stats to Know in 2019." HubSpot. March 19, 2019. https://blog.hubspot.com/service/customer-
service-stats
21 Swetha Amaresan. "31 Customer Service Stats to Know in 2019." HubSpot. March 19, 2019. https://blog.hubspot.com/service/customer-
service-stats

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  347

the company is trying to build trust and have a relationship with its customers. This also helps with the process
of branding, as you've learned. Even in business-to-business sales transactions, the most important aspect of
the sales process is building that trust relationship so the customer purchases from a "friend" again. Often
when companies lose accounts, it is due to a change in sales personnel and the loss of the associated
relationship.

One effective way to ensure great customer service is to create an operating manual for your employees that
includes proper techniques for customer service. These techniques can include how to greet a customer, how
to listen and help them get what they need, the philosophy of your company, how far to go when insuring
great service, and how to be creative with customer service. Employees can review the manual when they are
hired, and every year after that to ensure they continue to follow the procedures. Training programs before
starting work and during the year can be facilitated by the entrepreneur or a consultant to sharpen the skills
of the employees. These programs are a great way to energize salespeople to be more people oriented and to
develop the proper attitude and positive thinking that is required when helping customers. Sales training
programs are a great way to learn more about customer service. Zig Ziglar and Dr. Cialdini programs are
designed with the salesperson in mind.

Also, when hiring, focus on candidates who already have customer service experience and those who come
with good referrals. Incentives for great customer service such as an employee of the month/year award or
financial incentives can also encourage employees to provide great service. Finally, the entrepreneur and any
administrators are the leaders of a company who must show the same customer service to their employees.
Walk the talk! If they realize that they are there to serve their employees and enable them to create a great
customer service atmosphere, then the employees will share the same enthusiasm and energy toward their
customers. Happy employees turn into profitable customers. Figure 8.16 shows a quick checklist for beginning
entrepreneurs.

Figure 8.16 The quality of customer service can make or break a company. Following a few basic steps can
ensure great customer service. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Customer service doesn't happen just in person or on the phone. Technology has enabled people and
companies to connect through email and social media, taking the conversation and interaction online.
Customers can now talk to the company employees, voice their concerns, and get issues resolve through these
avenues. These technological advances have provided a bigger platform for customers to rave about
companies or complain about them.[22] This love or dislike can translate into social media posts, tweets,
pictures, videos, and reviews for thousands or millions of people to see and can help or tarnish a company.

22 Liz Greene. "Social Media Is a Customer Service Channel Whether You Like It or Not." Digital Marketing Institute. n.d.
https://digitalmarketinginstitute.com/en-us/blog/social-media-is-a-customer-service-channel-whether-you-like-it-or-not
348                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

     Key Terms

advertising mass communication that allows companies to reach a broad audience through TV, radio,
     newspaper, Internet, magazines, and outdoor ads

brand image a company promotes and the connotations it fosters of itself and its products
brand advocate someone who is a fan of your products and passes on the word to others
brand strategy image a company conveys to its customers
bundling bundle of products that is discounted to encourage customers to buy in bulk
causal research identification of cause-and effect-relationships between two or more variables
close step in the sales process in which the salesperson asks for and gets the sale
conjoint analysis survey tool in which respondents must rank, choose, or a rate a number of "conjoint," or

     linked, features or benefits
cost-led pricing easiest way to price a product by taking the cost of making the product and marking it up to

     create profit
customer-led pricing pricing led by what the customer is willing to pay
digital marketing online marketing
direct mail connecting to consumers via email or through printed mailed pieces
entrepreneurial marketing set of unconventional practices that can help start-ups and younger firms

     survive in competitive markets
ethnographic research use of personal observation of the subject by being immersed in the subject's

     environment
executive summary initial section of a business plan document that summarizes the key elements of the

     entire plan
expeditionary marketing marketing designed to move established companies and their products into new

     markets and territories
focus group gathering of people, typically six to twelve participants, who come together to discuss a topic

     presented by a moderator, who usually poses questions and collects qualitative data that can be used to
     answer questions or define research further
guerrilla marketing creative approaches to marketing that seek to gain maximum exposure through
     unconventional means
introductory offers using lower initial prices to attract new customers and build a customer base before
     prices return to their standard amount
jingle short song or sound that brands a product or company and helps to promote it
loss leader pricing using a below-standard price to attract customers in the hope that they will purchase
     other, more profitable goods and services
market analysis analysis of the overall interest in the product or service within the industry by its target
     market
market opportunity unmet need within a target demographic
market research collection and analysis of data related to a business's target market
marketing umbrella term given to those activities that companies use to identify consumers and convert
     them into buyers
marketing mix basic set of possible strategies and approaches that marketers use to reach their target
     market
marketing plan formal business document that used as blueprint for how a company will achieve its
     marketing and business goals

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  349

marketing strategy company's game plan for how it will reach consumers and convert them into paying
     customers

odd numbers strategy psychological pricing strategy that uses odd numbers in the prices to make a
     product's price point more attractive to consumers

penetration pricing pricing below that of a competitor's price
people company's human resources
personal selling using face-to-face interactions to communicate and influence a customer to make a

     purchase
physical environment where a service takes place or a product is manufactured
place channels or locations--physical or digital--where products can be found by customers
positioning (or value proposition) statement of how you want the customer to perceive your company,

     good, or service
premium pricing charging a price above a competitor's price
price value that must be exchanged in order for a customer to receive a product or service
primary research research that involves gathering new data
process chain of procedures and/or activities required to provide the product to the customer
product good or a service that creates value by fulfilling a customer need or desire
profit margin amount by which revenue exceeds costs, typically described as a percent
promotion process of communicating value to customers in a way that encourages them to buy
public relations marketing that focuses on connecting with constituents by developing goodwill
qualitative research use of open-ended techniques such as observation, focus groups, and interviews to

     gain an understanding of customers' basic reasons, opinions, and motivations
quantitative research generation of numerical data through techniques such as surveys and questionnaires
real-time marketing seeks to turn immediately available sales data into actionable and timely strategies

     that target the shifting landscape of consumer tastes and trends
relationship marketing creates customer loyalty through personal interaction and strives for long-term

     engagement
sales promotion incentives such as coupons and discounts that help attract customers and help them take

     action
sales strategy plan that the entrepreneur uses to identify and engage a consumer, from prospecting to

     securing the sale and beyond
sample group of people participating in market research
secondary research research that uses existing data
segmenting separating the total population by homogeneous groups of people that have similar tastes,

     backgrounds, lifestyles, demographics, and culture
serviceable available market (SAM) portion of the market that a business can serve based on its products,

     services, and location
situation analysis examination of the internal and external circumstances relevant to a particular business
skimming high-pricing strategy that leverages the newness of a product in order to "skim" the most profits

     off the top at the beginning of a sale
social media online communication tool for entrepreneurs to connect with consumers, especially younger

     demographics
tagline short and catchy positioning statement that quickly communicate some core aspect of the brand to

     the consumer
target market specific group of consumers for which a company seeks to provide a good or service
targeting selecting a customer group based on their ability and willingness to buy
total available market (TAM) total perceived demand for a product or service within the marketplace
350                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

validation act of verifying that a product can be successful with a target audience
viral marketing marketing that uses engaging content in the hopes that viewers will share it on their

     personal and social media networks
word-of-mouth (WOM) marketing promotion in which a satisfied customer tells others about their positive

     experience with a good or service

     Summary

8.1 Entrepreneurial Marketing and the Marketing Mix
Marketing refers to those activities companies use to identify consumers and convert them into buyers.
Entrepreneurial marketing is a set of unconventional practices that can help start-ups and younger firms
survive in competitive markets. One way to think of the marketing mix is to break it into the 7Ps: product,
promotion, price, place, people, physical environment, and process. Entrepreneurs often don't have deep
enough resources to use all of these marketing tools, so they need to be strategic in which ones they choose
and how they execute them.

8.2 Market Research, Market Opportunity Recognition, and Target Market
Market research is an important aspect of being an entrepreneur. Research can help you vet ideas as well as
reveal opportunities that you may not have seen before. Whether you are using secondary data or performing
primary research, it is important to know your research questions and goals. Good market research and
analysis can help you position your product within your target market.

8.3 Marketing Techniques and Tools for Entrepreneurs
Marketing doesn't have to be expensive; entrepreneurs have many affordable techniques at their disposal.
The only input necessary for these techniques is plenty of passion, creativity, and energy. These tools include
guerrilla, relationship, expeditionary, real-time, viral, digital, and WOM marketing. The pros of using these
techniques are plenty, as you can see from the examples shared for each of the tools. They include being able
to reach many people at the same time; leveraging the timeliness of feedback; and making real, sincere
connections with people. In addition, affordability, creativity, and good results (clicks, shares, comments,
purchases, and awareness) can stem from using these techniques. On the negative side, customer reviews
that are not so positive can also make their way through these channels and damage the reputation of a
company if they are not handled with care.

8.4 Entrepreneurial Branding
Branding gives an identity to the product and company to which the customer can identify. It is based on its
mission, goals, and product benefits, and it must be integrated with the marketing mix for greater impact.
Brands help communicate a message to the consumer about product quality, pricing, and overall benefits.
When the communication strategy is not cohesive, the consumer may become confused by the different
signals the company sends. The entrepreneur must work hard to create a unified message all the way
through.

8.5 Marketing Strategy and the Marketing Plan
Once you have an idea of your marketing mix, the next step is to develop actionable strategies and write them
down in a marketing plan. A marketing strategy describes how a company will reach consumers and convert
them into paying customers. A marketing plan is a formal business document that is used as a blueprint or
guide for how a company will achieve its marketing goals. A good marketing plan can be used to guide

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales                                                  351

internal decisions and attract external investors.

8.6 Sales and Customer Service
Sales drives profit. They may require a simple sales approach or a complicated sales system. An example of a
sales system is a six-step sales strategy: doing research about prospective clients and creating a list; making
an appointment to talk about your good or service; meeting with them to present a proposal; handling
objections; closing the deal; and nurturing the relationship after close. When selling luxury and expensive
items, the sales approach is usually more thorough and requires more sales training and finesse. Customer
service is a component that is linked to this process and with proper training can really differentiate a
company from the competition.

     Review Questions

1. What are the differences between traditional and entrepreneurial marketing?
2. What is a target market? Why is it important to know the target before creating the marketing mix?
3. What are the components of the marketing mix? Explain each component.
4. What is the difference between pricing a product based on what a competitors charge and pricing a product
based on the company's costs?
5. Check out the website http://www.flyzipline.com/. Who is the target market? What are their 7Ps?
6. What is market research? Why is it important to do research before you start a business?
7. How does primary data differ from secondary data?
8. How does STP help entrepreneurs?
9. How does guerrilla marketing differ from viral marketing?
10. What types of activities are involved in digital marketing? Choose one and explain.
11. What is a brand? Why is it important to work toward gaining recognition for the brand, especially for a
start-up brand?
12. How does a tagline help with positioning?
13. How does a marketing plan help an entrepreneur?
14. What is the difference between a marketing objective and a marketing strategy?
15. What are the steps in the sales process?
16. How does customer service impact sales of a new business?

     Discussion Questions

1. If you could open a business right now, what would it be? Who would be your target market?
352                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

2. Look at the Wag! website https://wagwalking.com/ and determine the 7Ps of this service. Do they work well
together? Why or why not?

3. Give an example of a company that uses bundle pricing and explain why it uses this method.

4. Discuss how market research can benefit entrepreneurs.

5. What is the difference between qualitative and quantitative data?

6. Give examples of how entrepreneurs can leverage marketing activities even when strapped for cash.

7. If you had a business that was highly dependent on WOM marketing, how would you ensure the
information passed along was positive? If the message passed along was negative, what would you do about
it?

8. Describe how a brand advocate might help IKEA position itself as a cost-effective and design-oriented
furniture store. Now discuss how a brand advocate can help a new product on the market establish a good
reputation.

9. Discuss how the business model canvas can help an entrepreneur create a framework for generating sales.
Think of a business you like and describe how it generates sales.

10. Negative referrals can have a great impact on a company's sales. Remember an instance where you were
the source of a bad referral for a product or service, and determine what made the experience so negative.
What would you have done differently as the sales person to prevent that?

     Case Questions

1. Claire is a young artist who has decided to sell her paintings to make some money while she finishes
college. She doesn't know much about promoting her work, especially through online channels. Since you are
studying business, she has asked you for your advice on promoting her work to a young professional
demographic who would be inspired by her message through the arts. Describe two types of promotional
tools she can use to connect with her ultimate customer.

2. You have recently been hired to work as a marketing manager for a boutique hotel in San Diego. This hotel
is the only one of its kind and is not part of a chain. It only has 50 rooms that have been carefully designed to
fit a younger, eclectic, design oriented, and higher-income demographic. The owner needs help pricing the
rooms and other hotel services (see the following). Determine which pricing strategy you would use
(customer-led, cost-based, competition-based, premium, etc.) for each of the following items and explain why.
If necessary, look at some industry reports on how hotels price their services and decide if you should go the
same route or try something else.

    A. Room rate (weekly and weekend)
    B. Restaurant food
    C. Parking
    D. Internet and movie access

3. One of your classmates would like to open a food delivery service in town. This service would allow people to
buy lunch or dinner through an app from a list of restaurants. She's in the early stages of her analysis and she
is asking your advice on possible sources of data that she can use. What kind of resources would you direct her
to? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales  353

4. One of your classmates recently opened a new gym in an up and coming professional area. She is an
accomplished trainer, but has little experience in business. She asks your help in coming up with a specific
target market. You share with her the STP process.

5. Visit the current Birchbox website, its online promotions, social media, online ads, and anything you can find
about its digital marketing strategies. If you were in charge of digital marketing for Birchbox, what would you
include or delete from their current activities?

6. Visit the Method website at https://methodhome.com/ and describe all of the branding components they
use to position themselves as the best cleaning products in the US market.

7. You have recently become a supplier of heavy equipment to manufacturing plants that build automotive
components. You have acquired one customer and would like to add more within the next three months. How
would you go about prospecting?

     Suggested Resources

8.1 Entrepreneurial Marketing and the Marketing Mix
American Marketing Association: https://www.ama.org
Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov/

8.3 Marketing Techniques and Tools for Entrepreneurs
AMA Digital Marketing Certification: https://www.ama.org/events-training/Certification/Pages/digital-

  marketing-certification.aspx
AMA on Demand course: Digital Marketing: Delivering a Custom Experience: https://www.ama.org/events-

  training/virtual-events/Pages/digital-marketing-virtual-conference-051717.aspx
Google Ads: https://ads.google.com/home/
Google Analytics: https://analytics.google.com/analytics/web/provision/#/provision
Hubspot Google Ads guide: https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/google-adwords-ppc

8.4 Entrepreneurial Branding
Hubspot's Beginner's guide to branding: https://blog.hubspot.com/agency/develop-brand-

  identity#.WgSASHcJI2E.mailto

8.5 Marketing Strategy and the Marketing Plan
Business Model Canvas: https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas
Hubspot Marketing Plan templates: https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/marketing-plan-template-generator
Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/manage-your-business/marketing-sales

8.6 Sales and Customer Service
Cialdini online tools: https://www.influenceatwork.com/
Hoffman Sales Training: https://sellhoffman.com/
Neil Rackman: http://neilrackham.com/
354                                                                               Chapter 8 Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales

Spin Selling: https://blog.hubspot.com/sales/spin-selling-the-ultimate-guide
Zig Ziglar: https://www.ziglar.com/
The State of Customer Service: https://offers.hubspot.com/state-of-customer-service?hubs_post-

  cta=anchor&hsCtaTracking=9c545446-aacf-47a3-bfb3-1998f78b79c8%7C4f98051f-03f6-4061-9a68-5de8fcbb40c1
Cialdini, R. B. (2001). Influence: Science and Practice (4th ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon: Explains some aspects of

  the sales process in a fun and fact-based manner.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
     9

              Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.1 An advertisement showcasing the features of the iBackPack.

 Chapter Outline

        9.1 Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting Strategies
        9.2 Special Funding Strategies
        9.3 Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs
        9.4 Developing Startup Financial Statements and Projections

      Introduction

   In 2015, Doug Monahan, the CEO and founder of iBackPack of Texas, Inc., introduced a revolutionary
   technology package encased in a typical backpack. The iBackPack boasted the capacity to incorporate WiFi/
   MiFi, a battery system, smart power transfer cables, and a car-charging system--while carrying four notebook
   computers and their accessories. Monahan promised that the iBackPack would be a "communication hub and
   corresponding electrical powerhouse for students and business professionals alike."[1] To bring the project to
   market, iBackPack sought crowdfunding through an Indiegogo campaign that raised $723,395 from 4,041
   backers. An additional $76,694 was raised from 252 Kickstarter backers.
   In 2016, iBackPack raised over $800,000 to fulfill investors' orders, but the product never materialized. The only
   update from the company was a Facebook post alluding to issues sourcing "safe" batteries. By 2017, the
   iBackPack crowdfunding campaign failed to deliver the product promised to its investors.[2],[3] According to an
   article on the website The Verge in August 2018, the founders of iBackPack were under investigation by the

   1 "iBackPack Planning Kickstarter Launch on Black Friday." Cision PR Newswire. November 24, 2015. http://www.prnewswire.com/news-
   releases/ibackpack-planning-kickstarter-launch-on-blackfriday-300183934.html
   2 Lewis Leong. "Sorry, iBackPack Backers. You Got Scammed." Crowdtoolz. January 9, 2017. http://crowdtoolz.com/sorry-ibackpack-backers-
   you-got-scammed/
   3 Kylie McGovern. "Hundreds Still Waiting for Bulletproof `iBackPack' Delivery a Year Later." KXAN. July 13, 2017. http://kxan.com/2017/07/13/
   hundreds-still-waiting-for-bulletproof-ibackpack-delivery-a-year-later/
356  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Federal Trade Commission.[4] Although crowdfunding can be a great option for startups, those who abuse the
system may find themselves subject to legal action.

 9.1 Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting Strategies

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between financing and accounting
  · Describe common financing strategies for different stages of the company lifecycle: personal savings,

      personal loans, friends and family, crowdfunding, angel investors, venture capitalists, self-sustaining,
      private equity sales, and initial public offering
  · Explain debt and equity financing and the advantages and disadvantages of each

The case of iBackPack demonstrates that entrepreneurial success is not guaranteed simply because a
company can secure funds. Funds are the necessary capital to get a business, or idea, off the ground. But
funding cannot make up for a lack of experience, poor management, or a product with no viable market.
Nonetheless, securing funding is one of the first steps, and a very real requirement, for starting a business.

Let's begin by exploring the financial needs and funding considerations for a simple organization. Imagine
that you and your college roommate have decided to start your own band. In the past, you have always played
in a school band where the school provided the instruments. Thus, you will need to start by purchasing or
leasing your own equipment. You and your roommate begin to identify the basic necessities--guitars, drums,
microphones, amplifiers, and so on. In your excitement, you begin browsing for these items online, adding to
your shopping cart as you select equipment. It doesn't take you long to realize that even the most basic set of
equipment could cost several thousand dollars. Do you have this much money available to make the purchase
right now? Do you have other funding resources, such as loans or credit? Should you consider leasing most or
all of the instruments and equipment? Would family or friends want to invest in your venture? What are the
benefits and risks associated with these funding options?

This same basic inquiry and analysis should be completed as part of every business plan. First, you must
determine the basic requirements for starting the business. What kinds of equipment will you need? How
much labor and what type of skills? What facilities or locations would you require to make this business a
reality? Second, how much do these items cost? If you do not possess an amount of money equal to the total
anticipated cost, you will need to determine how to fund the excess amount.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Ted Herget and Gearhead Outfitters

     Gearhead Outfitters, founded by Ted Herget in 1997 in Jonesboro, Arkansas, is a retail chain that sells
     outdoor gear for men, women, and children. The company's inventory includes clothing, footwear for
     hiking and running, camping gear, backpacks, and accessories. Herget fell in love with the outdoor
     lifestyle while working as a ski instructor in Colorado and wanted to bring that feeling back home to
     Arkansas. And so, Gearhead was born in a small downtown location in Jonesboro. The company has had

4 Ashley Carman. "The FTC Is Investigating a Crowdfunding Campaign That Disappeared with More than $700K." The Verge. August 29, 2018.
https://www.theverge.com/circuitbreaker/2018/8/29/17793720/ftc-ibackpack-investigation-indiegogo-kickstarter

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                        357

great success over the years, expanding to numerous locations in Herget's home state, as well as to
locations in Louisiana, Oklahoma, and Missouri.

While Herget knew his industry when starting Gearhead, like many entrepreneurs he faced regulatory
and financial issues that were new to him. Several of these issues were related to accounting and the
wealth of decision-making information that accounting systems provide. For example, measuring
revenue and expenses, providing information about cash flow to potential lenders, analyzing whether
profit and positive cash flow is sustainable to allow for expansion, and managing inventory levels.
Accounting, or the preparation of financial statements (balance sheet, income statement, and statement
of cash flows), provides the mechanism for business owners such as Herget to make fundamentally
sound business decisions.

Once a new business plan has been developed or a potential acquisition has been identified, it's time to start
thinking about financing, which is the process of raising money for an intended purpose. In this case, the
purpose is to launch a new business. Typically, those who can provide financing want to be assured that they
could, at least potentially, be repaid in a short period of time, which requires a way that investors and business
owners can communicate how that financing would happen. This brings us to accounting, which is the system
business owners use to summarize, manage, and communicate a business's financial operations and
performance. The output of accounting consists of financial statements, discussed in Accounting Basics for
Entrepreneurs. Accounting provides a common language that allows business owners to understand and
make decisions about their venture that are based on financial data, and enables investors looking at multiple
investment options to make easier comparisons and investment decisions.

Entrepreneurial Funding across the Company Lifecycle

An entrepreneur may pursue one or more different types of funding. Identifying the lifecycle stage of the
business venture can help entrepreneurs decide which funding opportunities are most appropriate for their
situation.

From inception through successful operations, a business's funding grows generally through three stages:
seed stage, early stage, and maturity (Figure 9.2). A seed-stage company is the earliest point in its lifecycle. It
is based on a founder's idea for a new product or service. Nurtured correctly, it will eventually grow into an
operational business, much as an acorn can grow into a mighty oak--hence the name "seed" stage. Typically,
ventures at this stage are not yet generating revenue, and the founders haven't yet converted their idea into a
saleable product. The personal savings of the founder, plus perhaps a few small investments from family
members, usually constitute the initial funding of companies at the seed stage. Before an outsider will invest
in a business, they will typically expect an entrepreneur to have exhausted what is referred to as F&F
financing--friends and family financing--to reduce risk and instill confidence in the business's potential
success.
358  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.2 Funding strategies can change across different phases of the company lifecycle.

After investments from close personal sources, the business idea may begin to build traction and attract the
attention of an angel investor. Angel investors are wealthy, private individuals seeking investment options
with a greater potential return than is traditionally expected on publicly traded stocks, albeit with much
greater risk. For that reason, they must be investors accredited by the federal Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) and they must meet a net worth or income test. Nonaccredited investors are allowed in
certain limited circumstances to invest in security-based crowdfunding for startup companies. Among the
investment opportunities angel investors look at are startup and early stage companies. Angel investors and
funds have grown rapidly in the past ten years, and angel groups exist in every state.
An early stage company has begun development of its product. It may be a technical proof of concept that
still requires adjustments before it is customer ready. It may also be a first-generation model of the product
that is securing some sales but requires modifications for large-scale production and manufacturing. At this
stage, the company's investors may now include a few outsider investors, including venture capitalists.
A venture capitalist is an individual or investment firm that specializes in funding early stage companies.
Venture capitalists differ from angel investors in two ways. First, a venture capital firm typically operates as a
full-time active investment business, whereas an angel investor may be a retired executive or business owner
with significant savings to invest. Additionally, venture capital firms operate at a higher level of sophistication,
often specializing in certain industries and with the ability to leverage industry expertise to invest with more
know-how. Typically, venture capitalists will invest higher amounts than angel investors, although this trend
may be shifting as larger angel groups and "super angels" begin to invest in venture rounds.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  359

Private equity investment is a rapidly growing sector and generally invests later than venture capitalists.
Private equity investors either take a public company private or invest in private companies (hence the term
"private equity"). The ultimate goals of private equity investors are generally taking a private company public
through an initial public offering (IPO) or by adding debt or equity to the company's balance sheet, and
helping it improve sales and/or profits in order to sell it to a larger company in its sector.

Companies in the mature stage have reached commercial viability. They are operating in the manner
described in the business plan: providing value to customers, generating sales, and collecting customer
payments in a timely manner. Companies at this stage should be self-sufficient, requiring little to no outside
investment to maintain current operations. For a product company, this means manufacturing a product at
scale, that is, in very large volumes. For a software company or app provider, this means generating sales of
the software or subscriptions under an SaaS model (Software as a Service) and possibly securing advertising
revenue from access to the user base.

Companies at the mature stage have different financing needs from those in the previous two stages, where
the focus was on building the product and creating a sales/manufacturing infrastructure. Mature companies
have reached a consistent level of sales but may seek to expand into new markets or regions. Typically, this
requires significant investment because the proposed expansion can often mirror the present level of
operations. That is to say, an expansion at this level may result in doubling the size of the business. To access
this amount of capital, mature companies may consider selling a portion of the company, either to a private
equity group or through an IPO.

An initial public offering (IPO) occurs the first time a company offers ownership shares for sale on a public
stock exchange, such as the New York Stock Exchange. Before a company executes an IPO, it is considered to
be privately held, usually by its founders and other private investors. Once the shares are available to the
general public through a stock exchange, the company is considered to be publicly held. This process typically
involves an investment banking firm that will guide the company. Investment bankers will solicit institutional
investors, such as State Street or Goldman Sachs, which will in turn sell those shares to individual investors.
The investment banking firm typically takes a percentage of the funds raised as its fee. The benefit of an IPO is
that the company gains access to a massive audience of potential investors. The downside is that the owners
give up more ownership in the business and are also subject to many costly regulatory requirements. The IPO
process is highly regulated by the SEC, which requires companies to provide comprehensive information up
front to potential investors before completing the IPO. These publicly traded companies must also publish
quarterly financial statements, which are required to be audited by an independent accounting firm. Although
there are benefits to an IPO for later-stage companies, it can be very costly both at the start and on an
ongoing basis. Another risk is that if the company does not meet investors' expectations, the value of the
company can decline, which can hinder its future growth options.

Thus, a business's lifecycle stage greatly influences its funding strategies and so does its industry. Different
types of industries have different financing needs and opportunities. For example, if you were interested in
opening a pizzeria, you would need a physical location, pizza ovens, and furniture so customers could dine
there. These requirements translate into monthly rent on a restaurant location and the purchase of physical
assets: ovens and furniture. This type of business requires a significantly higher investment in physical
equipment than would a service business, such as a website development firm. A website developer could
work from home and potentially begin a business with very little investment in physical resources but with a
significant investment of their own time. Essentially, the web developer's initial funding requirement would
simply be several months' worth of living expenses until the business is self-sufficient.
360                                                 Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Once we understand where a business is in its lifecycle and which industry it operates in, we can get a sense of
its funding requirements. Business owners can acquire funding through different avenues, each with its own
advantages and disadvantages, which we will explore in Special Funding Strategies.

   WORK IT OUT

   Venture Capitalists

   Consider this statement from John Mackey, the CEO of Whole Foods Market: "Venture capitalists are like
   hitchhikers--hitchhikers with credit cards--and as long as you take them where they want to go, they'll
   pay for the gas. But, if you don't . . . they will try to hijack the car and they will hire a new driver and
   throw you out on the road." He spoke on the NPR podcast How I Built This.[5]
   How would you feel if the investors in the company you founded started trying to wrest control of the
   organization from you? What steps would you take to prepare for this situation?

Types of Financing

Although many types of individuals and organizations can provide funds to a business, these funds typically
fall into two main categories: debt and equity financing (Table 9.1). Entrepreneurs should consider the
advantages and disadvantages of each type as they determine which sources to pursue in support of their
venture's immediate and long-term goals.

           Debt vs. Equity Financing

           Debt Financing                           Equity Financing

Ownership  Lender does not own stake in company     Lender owns stake in company
Cash
           Requires early and regular cash outflow  No immediate cash outflow

Table 9.1

Debt Financing

Debt financing is the process of borrowing funds from another party. Ultimately, this money must be repaid
to the lender, usually with interest (the fee for borrowing someone else's money). Debt financing may be
secured from many sources: banks, credit cards, or family and friends, to name a few. The maturity date of the
debt (when it must be repaid in full), the payment amounts and schedule over the period from securement to
maturity, and the interest rate can vary widely among loans and sources. You should weigh all of these
elements when considering financing.

5 "Whole Foods Market: John Mackey." How I Built This (NPR Podcast). May 15, 2017. https://www.npr.org/2017/06/30/527979061/whole-
foods-market-john-mackey

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                           361

The advantage of debt financing is that the debtor pays back a specific amount. When repaid, the creditor
releases all claims to its ownership in the business. The disadvantage is that repayment of the loan typically
begins immediately or after a short grace period, so the startup is faced with a fairly quick cash outflow
requirement, which can be challenging.

One source of debt financing for entrepreneurs is the Small Business Administration (SBA), a government
agency founded as part of the Small Business Act of 1963, whose mission is to "aid, counsel, assist and protect,
insofar as is possible, the interests of small business concerns."[6] The SBA partners with lending institutions
such as banks and credit unions to guarantee loans for small businesses. The SBA typically guarantees up to
85 percent of the amount loaned. Whereas banks are traditionally wary of lending to new businesses because
they are unproven, the SBA guarantee takes on some of the risk that the bank would normally be exposed to,
providing more incentive to the lending institution to finance an entrepreneurial venture.

To illustrate an SBA loan, let's consider the 7(a) Small Loan program. Loans backed by the SBA typically fall into
one of two categories: working capital and fixed assets. Working capital is simply the funds a business has
available for day-to-day operations. If a business has only enough money to pay bills that are currently due,
that means it has no working capital--a precarious position for a business to be in. Thus, a business in this
position may want to secure a loan to help see it through leaner times. Fixed assets are major
purchases--land, buildings, equipment, and so on. The amounts required for fixed assets would be
significantly higher than a working capital loan, which might cover just a few months' expenses. As we will see,
loan requirements made under the 7(a) Small Loan program are based on loan amounts.

For loans over $25,000, the SBA requires lenders to demand collateral. Collateral is something of value that a
business owner pledges to secure a loan, meaning that the bank has something to take if the owner cannot
repay the loan. Thus, in approving a larger loan, a bank might ask you to offer your home or other investments
to secure the loan. In a real estate loan, the property you are buying is the collateral. In a way, loans for larger
purchases can be less risky for a bank, but this can vary widely from property to property. A loan that does not
require collateral is referred to as unsecured.

To see how a business owner might use an SBA loan, let's return to the example of a pizzeria. Not all
businesses own the buildings where they operate; in fact, a great many businesses simply rent their space
from a landlord. In this case, a smaller loan would be needed than if the business owner were buying a
building. If the prospective pizzeria owner could identify a location available for rent that had previously been
a restaurant, they might need only to make superficial improvements before opening to customers. This is a
case where the smaller, collateral-free type of SBA loan would make sense. Some of the funds would be
allocated for improvements, such as fresh paint, furniture, and signage. The rest could be used to pay
employees or rent until the pizzeria has sufficient customer sales to cover costs.

In addition to smaller loans, this SBA program also allows for loans up to $350,000. Above the $25,000
threshold, the lending bank must follow its own established collateral procedures. It can be difficult for a new
business to provide collateral for a larger loan if it does not have significant assets to secure the loan. For this
reason, many SBA loans include the purchase of real estate. Real estate tends to be readily accepted as
collateral because it cannot be moved and holds it value from year to year. For the pizzeria, an aspiring
business owner could take advantage of this higher level of lending in a situation where the business is buying
the property where the pizzeria will be. In this case, the majority of loan proceeds will likely go toward the
purchase price of the property. Both the high and low tiers of the SBA loan program are examples of debt
financing. In Special Funding Strategies, we will look at how debt financing differs from equity financing.

6 Small Business Administration (SBA). "Mission." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/what-we-do/authority
362  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Equity Financing

In terms of investment opportunities, equity investments are those that involve purchasing an ownership
stake in a company, usually through shares of stock in a corporation. Unlike debts that will be repaid and thus
provide closure to the investment, equity financing is financing provided in exchange for part ownership in
the business. Like debt financing, equity financing can come from many different sources, including friends
and family, or more sophisticated investors. You may have seen this type of financing on the TV show Shark
Tank. Contestants on the series pitch a new business idea in order to raise money to start or expand their
business. If the "sharks" (investors) want to invest in the idea, they will make an offer in exchange for an
ownership stake. For example, they might offer to give the entrepreneur $200,000 for a return of 40 percent
ownership of the business.

The advantage of equity financing is that there is no immediate cash flow requirement to repay the funds, as
there is with debt financing. The drawback of equity financing is that the investor in our example is entitled to
40 percent of the profits for all future years unless the business owner repurchases the ownership interest,
typically at a much higher valuation--an estimate of worth, usually described in relation to the price an
investor would pay to acquire the entire company.

This is illustrated in the real-life example of the ride-sharing company Uber. One of the early investors in the
company was Benchmark Capital. In the initial round of (venture capital) financing, Benchmark invested $12
million in Uber in exchange for stock. That stock, as of its IPO date in May 2019, was valued at over $6 billion,
which is the price that the founders would have to pay to get Benchmark's share back.

Some financing sources are neither debt nor equity, such as gifts from family members, funds from
crowdfunding websites such as Kickstarter, and grants from governments, trusts, or individuals. The
advantages and disadvantages of these sources are discussed in Special Funding Strategies.

     ARE YOU READY?

     Researching Venture Capital Sources

     Perform an internet search for venture capital firms. Review their websites to determine what specific
     industries each firm invests in. Would your idea for a business fit with any of these firms? What are some
     aspects that would indicate a good fit?

 9.2 Special Funding Strategies

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify funding strategies used by charitable organizations
  · Describe financing opportunities available to startups
  · Define bootstrapping
  · Describe the advantages and disadvantages of bootstrapping

It's important to recognize that not all startups are Silicon Valley tech companies. These companies create

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                                363

high-profile products, such as applications and websites, which can take years to become profitable or even
generate revenue. Much more common are the small businesses founded every day by entrepreneurs seeking
to create value in their local communities. Moreover, not all startups are founded with a profit motive in mind.

Charitable organizations, or certain nonprofit companies, are often founded for altruistic purposes, such as
advancing the arts, education, and science; protecting the natural environment; providing disaster relief; and
defending human rights (Table 9.2).

                         Charitable Missions and Example Organizations

Mission                                                               Examples

Advance education                                 Teach for America, Khan Academy

Protect the natural environment                   Sierra Club, Wildlife Conservation Society

Defend human rights                               Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch

Provide disaster relief                           American Red Cross

Support the arts                                  Metropolitan Museum of Art, Americans for the Arts

Table 9.2

These goals supersede the profit motive that a traditional company would have. As a result, the funding
strategies of these enterprises often differ quite dramatically from those of standard for-profit businesses.
Without the emphasis on profit, it can be difficult to provide for the cost of ongoing operations. Thus, these
organizations must develop a sustainable strategy--one that can maintain the organization's financial
stability.

In the United States, such organizations can qualify for tax-exempt status, meaning that if there is a profit
from operations, it is not typically subject to taxes. Organizations seeking this exemption must apply to the
Internal Revenue Service for tax-exempt status and provide information about what kind of mission the
organization carries out--charitable, scientific, educational, and so on.

Consider a museum. What is its purpose? Traditional companies provide a product or service to their
customers in exchange for payment, and typically fill a need their customers have. A grocery store sells food
because human beings need to eat food to survive. Although viewing paintings and sculptures is not a
physical requirement for life, this experience arguably enriches our lives and helps educate and shape our
society. That is why museums are founded. Consider the original mission statement of the Metropolitan
Museum of Art (commonly known as the "Met") in New York City (Figure 9.3).[7]

7 Charter of The Metropolitan Museum of Art, State of New York, Laws of 1870, Chapter 197, passed April 13, 1870, and amended L.1898, Ch.
34; L. 1908, Ch. 219. https://www.metmuseum.org/about-the-met
364  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.3 The mission statement of New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art summarizes the purpose of
this entity. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This is a different goal than that of most small businesses (providing a product or service in exchange for a
profit) and, as a result, requires different financing strategies, such as a combination of program services,
donations, and grants.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Go to the Internal Revenue Service's website and look at the most recently updated Pub 334 Tax Guide
   for Small Business (https://openstax.org/l/52IRSPub334) to learn more about the rules for income tax
   preparation for a small business.

Program Services

Program services are the basic offerings that a nonprofit organization provides that result in revenue,
although not typically enough to cover the overall cost of running the organization. These services most
closely resemble the customer interactions of a traditional business. The organization provides a product or
service in exchange for a customer's money.
In our museum example, program services could take a few different forms. First, the museum likely charges a
fee for admission to view the artwork and artifacts. The individual ticket price multiplied by the number of
museum visitors equals the museum's ticket revenue. An established museum will have a good sense of how
many visitors it has on average and can use these data to create a budget.
Another source of program service revenue for a museum could take the form of hands-on educational
activities or events with guest speakers or presenters. Often museums will host local artists, or their own
employees might conduct art classes or special-topic tours. These events and activities typically have a charge
(revenue) beyond the regular admission cost.
Despite these revenue-generating activities, nonprofit organizations still face many funding challenges in
covering all the operating costs of a normal business, such as employee wages, facility costs, and advertising.
Thus, they need many different sources of income. To illustrate, the Met's 2018 program service income only
made up 2.3 percent of its total revenue for the year.[8]

8 Calculated from the 2018 IRS Form 990 available on the Met's website. https://www.metmuseum.org/-/media/files/about-the-met/
990-forms/2017-irs-form-990-for-fy2018.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                                                       365

Donations

One benefit to a business with a charitable mission is inherent public support, which can foster community
involvement above and beyond patronage. For nonprofits, this can translate into a willingness to donate
money to the organization. A donation is a financial gift with no expectation of repayment or receiving
anything in return. A traditional business must provide something valuable to create a customer exchange:
Their customers demand value in exchange for their hard-earned money.

The benefactors of a charitable organization want to help further the mission of the organization. This type of
entity--whether it's a museum, a hospital, or the Red Cross--relies on the goodwill of community supporters.
For the Met, with such a low percentage of revenue generated by program services, it's clear that donations
and charitable gifts are vital to the organization's financial viability.

Grants

Another source of funding for nonprofit organizations is grants. A grant is a financial gift given for a specific
purpose by a government agency or a charitable organization such as the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.
Like a donation, a grant does not have to be repaid. Unlike with donations, both nonprofit and for-profit
organizations can compete for grants. Whereas donations are typically given without restriction to offset the
general operating expenses of the organization, grants often specify how the funds are to be used. Most
grant-providing entities have an agenda or purpose behind their funding. For example, the National Institutes
of Health (NIH) provides grants "to support the advancement of the NIH mission to enhance health, extend
healthy lives, and reduce the burdens of illness and disability."[9] This federal organization invests over $32
billion annually for medical research.

Grants can be very competitive, requiring a rigorous application process. Usually, multiple organizations apply
for the same grant; the organization issuing the grant reviews the many competing applications to make its
selection. Grantees generally must submit audited financial statements and are required to update the grantor
subsequent to the grant award to ensure proper intended use. The NIH awards almost 50,000 grants annually,
most of which are competitive. Although that is an enormous number of projects to fund, only 20 percent of
applications submitted to the NIH in 2018 actually were accepted.[10] In other words, the NIH rejected four out
of every five applications. For entrepreneurs, this means that when you identify a grant that is specific to your
organization's mission, you should weigh your chances of being awarded the grant when considering it as
part of your funding strategy.

To understand grants in practice, let's further examine the NIH. The NIH Small Grant Program provides funds
for activities such as the development of new research technology. This specific grant can be awarded for up
to a two-year period, with funds of up to $50,000 in direct costs per year. A grant like this could provide vital
support to a nonprofit startup.

Some business ventures fall somewhere between organizations completely committed to charitable work and
traditional small businesses with entrepreneurs focused on social entrepreneurship. Social entrepreneurs
develop products and services as solutions to societal problems. For example, the TOMS shoe company was
able to create a business model through which the company gives one pair of shoes to children in need in
foreign countries for every pair of shoes that a customer purchases. This practice pioneered what they refer to
as "One for One."[11]

9 National Institutes of Health. "Grant Basics." February 21, 2017. https://grants.nih.gov/grants/grant_basics.htm
10 National Institutes of Health. "Annual Snapshot." n.d. https://nexus.od.nih.gov/all/2019/03/13/nih-annual-snapshot-fy-2018-by-the-
numbers/
366  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

The company's website describes the origins of both the company and this model, which are based on the
experiences of its founder, Blake Mycoskie (Figure 9.4).[12]

Figure 9.4 The TOMS origin story provides an example of social entrepreneurship. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Social entrepreneurship offers the ability to effect positive change in the world without simply relying on
donations. It pairs a profitable, sustainable business model with a good cause. This combination often creates
positive word of mouth. It gives potential customers a good feeling about the product beyond just its style or
function.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Social Entrepreneurship

   Like the founder of TOMS, sometimes in our everyday life, we are presented with an opportunity to help
   people. We may even find out that we're not alone in this desire to help. What opportunities to
   help--individuals, society, or environment--do you see in your own community? What are some ways
   that you could raise awareness around this issue?

No-Loan Finance Strategies

As you've learned, many startups come into being through the extensive use of debt. Although borrowing is a
legitimate source of funding, it can be risky, especially if the entrepreneur is personally responsible for
repayment. In practice, some entrepreneurs max out credit cards, take out home-equity loans against their
primary residences, or secure other high-interest personal loans. If the entrepreneur fails to repay the loans,
the result can be repossession of equipment, home foreclosure, and other legal action.
We now examine funding strategies attractive to many startups that do not require going into debt or
exchanging ownership of the business for financial support (debt and equity financing). The financing
methods described here are more creative funding strategies, including crowdfunding, bartering, and other
methods.

11 TOMS. "One for One." n.d. https://www.toms.com/improving-lives
12 TOMS. "Blake Mycoskie." n.d. http://www.toms.com/blakes-bio

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                                                    367

Crowdfunding

Recall the story of iBackPack. This venture was originally funded by contributions through Indiegogo and
Kickstarter. These websites are a form of crowdfunding, which involves collecting small sums of money from
a large number of people. The people who contribute money are typically referred to as backers because they
are backing the project or supporting the business idea.

Browsing these crowdfunding websites, you will see many different kinds of ventures seeking financial
backing--from creating new board games to opening donut cafes. Each project identifies an overall specific
funding goal in terms of a dollar amount. Some crowdfunding websites, such as Kickstarter, implement an "all
or nothing" model in which projects do not receive any funds unless their overall funding goal is met. The
amount can be exceeded, but if it is not met, the project receives nothing. For an entrepreneur utilizing this
resource, selecting an attainable funding goal must be a core part of their strategy. The funding goal must
also be appropriate to the scale of the project. For example, setting a goal of $50,000 may be reasonable for
launching a food truck (which could be a prototype for a full restaurant), but it is a mere fraction of the cost of
constructing an entire table-service restaurant, which would come closer to $750,000. An entrepreneur seeking
to enter the culinary world should consider which target would be most achievable as well as most beneficial
in meeting both short- and long-term goals. Also, remember that meeting the funding goal does not ensure
success of the business, as was the case with iBackPack.

Entrepreneurs vying for crowdfunding usually employ some common tactics. First, they often post an
introductory video that explains the project goal and the specific value proposition. (For example, a chef might
seek $75,000 to open a food truck specializing in a relatively unknown cuisine.) Second, the entrepreneur
provides a more detailed written summary of the project, often including specific items that the funding will
pay for, such as $50,000 for a vehicle, $10,000 for graphic design and vehicle decals, and $15,000 for kitchen
equipment for the truck. Last is the reward structure, which is what entices visitors to the site to fund the
project, offering a return beyond their own passion for the venture. The reward structure establishes different
levels of funding and ties a specific reward to each level. For example, for a contribution of $5, the chef might
thank the backer on social media; for $25, the backer would get a t-shirt and a hat featuring the food truck's
logo; for $100, the backer would get five free meals when the food truck opens. Fees for these crowdfunding
sites vary from 5 to 8 percent. Kickstarter now requires physical products or prototypes for some startups, as
well as a short video to help represent and "sell" the product.

Although this financing source offers a lot of flexibility, businesses utilizing crowdfunding can run into trouble.
Certain funding levels and rewards may have limits. For example, a reward structure might offer backers
contributing $1,000 a trip to the grand opening of the food truck, including airfare and hotel. These top-tier
rewards can generate a lot of excitement, but the expense of flying people around the country and providing
accommodations could become unmanageable. One research study stated that 84 percent of Kickstarter's top
projects delivered their rewards late.[13]

The advantage of crowdfunding is that the business receives cash up front to launch. The down side is that the
reward requires a future payment to the backers. This payment may be in the form of branded merchandise,
meals, or even events or travel, so it is important for entrepreneurs to set aside part of the investment money
to fund the rewards. Depending solely on generating the reward funds out of future sales is a risk that might
result in upsetting the very fans who made the business possible. Since crowdfunding is managed online,
another risk is upsetting the project's vocal supporters. Crowdfunding usually provides only a "kick start" for a

13 Francesco Schiavone. "Incompetence and Managerial Problems Delaying Reward Delivery in Crowdfunding." Journal of Innovation and
Economics Management. February 2017. https://www.cairn.info/revue-journal-of-innovation-economics-2017-2-page-185.htm
368  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

startup, so most seed-stage companies will need additional funding from other sources to get to their first
commercial launch.
Although social media can backfire, entrepreneurs can take advantage of benefits too. Crowdfunding can
allow an entrepreneur to build a community around a product before it is even sold. Like-minded fans of a
product can connect with each other over the internet, in the feedback section of a website, or in shared social
media posts. Additionally, backers of a project can become cheerleaders for it by sharing the idea--and their
enthusiasm for it--with friends, family, and coworkers. Word-of-mouth marketing can lead to more backers or
future customers after launch.
Dozens of crowdfunding portals exist, including WeFunder, SeedInvest, Kickstarter, and Crowdcube. Current
SEC guidelines[14] for issuing and investing limits granted for Title III Crowdfunding include:

  · A company can raise up to $1 million in aggregate through crowdfunding offerings over a twelve-month
      period

  · Over a twelve-month period, individual investors can invest in the aggregate across all crowdfunding
      offerings up to:
          $2,000 or 5 percent of the unaccredited investors net worth or yearly income if they make less than
             $100,000/year
          10 percent of the lesser of their annual income or net worth, if both their annual income and net
             worth are equal to or more than $100,000

   ARE YOU READY?

   Kickstarter

   Visit the Kickstarter website at https://www.kickstarter.com/ and review a few projects. What did they do
   well in the video pitch? What unique rewards did they offer? How would you implement a Kickstarter
   page for your own business idea?

Bartering

Startup companies often don't have a lot of cash assets on hand to spend, but they often have offerings that
can provide value to other businesses. Bartering is a system of exchanging goods or services for other goods
or services instead of for money. Let's consider the case of Shanti, a website designer who wants to start a
business. She may want to have her business formally incorporated or may require other legal help, such as
review of standard contracts. Hiring a lawyer outright for these services can be costly, but what if the lawyer
needed something that a website designer could provide?
Whether the lawyer has just started his own business or has been established for several years, he may need a
website created or have an old website redesigned and updated. This website overhaul could prove costly for
the lawyer. But what if there were a way that both the lawyer and the web designer could get what they
wanted with a resulting net cost of zero dollars? Bartering can achieve this. It should be noted that there are
accounting and tax implications involved with bartering that can prevent a net zero offset of costs.

14 Securities and Exchange Commission. "Crowdfunding." n.d. https://www.sec.gov/rules/final/2015/33-9974.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting                                                                                 369

In a barter scenario, Shanti could create a website for the lawyer at the expense only of her time, which in the
startup phase is often more abundant than actual cash. The lawyer could provide incorporation services or
contract review in exchange, requiring no cash outlay. For many entrepreneurs, this type of exchange is
appealing and enables them to meet business needs at a lower perceived cost. Although more mature firms
can also use bartering, the opportunity cost is much higher. If a mature company is unable to take on a new
paying client because it is doing too much free (barter) work, it may lose out on future revenue, which could
potentially be a big loss. Startups, in contrast, often have excess capacity while they develop a customer base,
so taking on barter work is often a low-risk, beneficial funding strategy.

Other No-Loan Funding Options

Beyond crowdfunding and bartering, startups have other options to help them get off the ground, such as
funding competitions and pre-orders (Figure 9.5). Many organizations hold entrepreneurial finance contests
provide financial awards to the winners. These prize funds can be used as seed money to start a new venture.
For example, the New York City Public Library holds an annual business plan competition called the New York
StartUP! Business Plan Competition.[15] Applicants must complete an orientation session, attend workshops
that develop skills related to the creation of a business plan, and submit a complete business plan. The first-
place award yields $15,000 in prize money, which can be a great start toward turning an entrepreneurial idea
into a business reality.

Another way for startups to gain financial traction is to solicit pre-orders. Consider the launch of a new book or
video game. Retail stores will often solicit pre-orders, which are advance purchases of the product. Customers
pay for the desired item before they even have access. For example, the entrepreneur Mitchell Harper raised
$248,000 in funds before his product launched.[16] This approach is not limited to existing, well-known
franchises--startups can use it as well. Although established novel and video game franchises have big fan
bases and often large advertising budgets, startups can still find effective strategies in this space.

15 New York Public Library. "New York Startup! 2019 Business Plan Competition." n.d. https://www.nypl.org/help/services/startup
16 Mitchell Harper. "How I Got $248,000 in Pre-Orders before I Even Had a Product." Medium. November 25, 2015.
https://blog.markgrowth.com/how-i-got-248-000-in-pre-orders-before-i-even-had-a-product-b4080a3eb8ae
370  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.5 Entrepreneurs can explore a variety of no-loan funding options. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Companies with a prototype model of their product or a first manufacturing run can showcase the new
product to potential customers, who may be interested enough to place an order. The company can use the
funds received from these pre-orders to pay for the inventory. In addition to having sales staff make sales
calls, new companies can attend trade shows and exhibitions to garner interest in the product. Many new
products are launched in this fashion because it allows access to many potential customers in one place.

Why Bootstrapping Hurts, Then Helps

The process of self-funding a company is typically referred to as bootstrapping, based on the old adage that
urges us to "pull ourselves up by our bootstraps." It describes a funding strategy that seeks to optimize use of
personal funds and other creative strategies (such as bartering) to minimize cash outflows. In recent years,
this strategy has been the fodder for shows like Shark Tank. These shows may make entrepreneurs think that
being on TV is glamorous, or the shows may glorify the financial backing of millionaires and billionaires. We
have seen that for many entrepreneurs, the reality is that there are drawbacks to bringing in outside investors
to launch your venture. These drawbacks include loss of future profits and possible loss of control of the

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  371

company, among others. Potential business owners must weigh the advantages and disadvantages--both
short and long term--for funding their specific dream.

You've learned about financing strategies predicated on finding a willing investor or lender, but many small
businesses simply don't have access to large amounts, or any amount, of capital. In these cases, aspiring
business owners need lean business strategies that will yield the greatest benefit.

Bootstrapping requires entrepreneurs to shed any preconceived notions of the popular-culture image of
startups. Most startups don't have trendy downtown offices, foosball tables, or personal chefs. Bootstrapping
reality looks more like late nights spent clipping coupons. It involves scrutinizing potential expenses and
whether each cost is really worth the investment. It can be a difficult and trying process, but without any angel
investors or wealthy family backers, bootstrapping is often an entrepreneur's only option. The good news is
that this approach can pay substantial dividends in the long run.

The Basics of Bootstrapping

When entrepreneurs risk their life savings, they must stretch every dollar as far as possible. Having a limited
amount of capital to work with requires optimizing creative strategies to get the business launched and keep it
afloat. This creativity applies to bringing customers and sales in the door as well as to managing expenses.

Understanding the ongoing costs of the business is key. In an interview on NPR's show How I Built This,
Barbara Corcoran, one of the investors on Shark Tank, shares her humble beginnings in real estate
brokerage.[17] One of things she touches on is being constantly aware of how long her money would last, given
her monthly expenses. If she had $10,000 in the bank and the cost of her rent and employees was $2,500 per
month, she knew that the money would last her four months. Such constant information and vigilance are
required when bootstrapping a business for success.

Employee costs are typically one of the largest expenses facing a business. Hiring traditional full-time
employees can be costly; onboarding them too early can be fatal to a business's bottom line. Creative
approaches to minimizing labor costs can be enormously helpful. One strategy for controlling these costs is
utilizing independent contractors (freelancers) and other part-time employees. They do not work full time for
the business and may serve other companies as well. Their compensation is generally lower than that of a full-
time, salaried employee, often in part because these positions do not usually come with any benefits, such as
health insurance or paid time off. Using these workers to fill resource needs can help minimize costs. Once
operations have begun to stabilize, it may be possible and ideal to offer full-time employment to these
individuals.

Marketing is another key area for new business investment, but billboards, web ads, TV ads, and radio spots
can be expensive. TV and radio ads can also be ineffective if they are aired during low-volume times, which is
typically all that startups with lower budgets can afford. Fortunately, there are many low- or no-cost marking
opportunities, such as word-of-mouth marketing. Doing a good job for one customer can easily lead to
referrals for more business. Some social media efforts can also provide a strong return for minimal
investment, although typically it is nearly impossible to gauge an effort's potential impact or success.

A new enterprise that is bootstrapping must also carefully manage operational expenses. At the beginning of
operations, an entrepreneur can often minimize unnecessary expenses--even if that means forgoing an actual
business location. Working out of a home office or a co-working space (such as WeWork or Impact Hub) can
lead to significant savings. Renting office space can cost hundreds or thousands of dollars a month, whereas a

17 National Public Radio. "Real Estate Mogul: Barbara Corcoran." How I Built This. May 14, 2018. https://www.npr.org/templates/transcript/
transcript.php?storyId=610491305
372                                    Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

home office typically requires no additional investment. Depending on the location, co-working spaces can
provide a single workspace and technology access for as little as $50 to $100 per month, yielding substantial
savings over a dedicated office suite. In larger cities, or in locations with more amenities, the monthly costs
can run between $100 and $500 per month.

The Boston Beer Company, which today produces the Samuel Adams line of beers, provides a classic example
of minimizing these costs in its early days. When this company first started, it owned no office space--or even
a brewery. It employed other breweries as contract brewers to manufacture its beer. Its founder, Jim Koch,
invested most of his time in selling to bars and restaurants, working from his car and phone booths. (This was
during the 1980s.) His lean strategy was a successful application of the bootstrapping mindset. From its
humble beginnings, the Boston Beer Company has become one of the largest American-owned
breweries--ranked second based on 2018 sales volume by the Brewers Association.[18] Whereas traditional
thinking may dictate that a company must have an official office or headquarters, a bootstrapping mindset
evaluates what the space would be used for and the trade-offs for its cost.

How Bootstrapping Hurts

The process of bootstrapping is not an easy one. It is fraught with tight budgeting and sacrifice, which can
take its toll on an entrepreneur. One of the simplest bootstrapping strategies is to start a business by
moonlighting, or treating your business venture as a second job. Employing this strategy, the entrepreneur
continues to work at their regular job, say from 9:00-5:00, and then dedicates the rest of the evening and
weekends to working on the business. Whereas this strategy has the obvious benefit of maintaining a
comfortable level of income, this approach has a few drawbacks (Table 9.3). Moonlighting entrepreneurs
cannot dedicate 100 percent of their time and energy to their new business. The time they can dedicate to it
may be less efficient. After working all day at another job, a person may feel tired or burned out, so it can be
difficult to change gears and press forward with full productivity.

In addition to the exhausting time investment, moonlighting can exact tolls on personal relationships. This
strategy is easiest when an entrepreneur is in a life stage with few commitments. It may have an adverse
effect on friendships, but in other life stages, this impact can be more significant. For example, it can detract
from relationships with a partner/spouse or children, in both a decrease in focus/investment in these
relationships and day-to-day challenges in work-life balance and household management for all affected.
Additionally, at some point, to attract serious investors, a founder will have commit to the project full time.

           Bootstrapping Advantages and Disadvantages

           Advantages                  Disadvantages

     · No ownership given up           · Slow to start
     · Forces creative solutions       · Less glamorous
     · Keeping costs low fuels growth  · Owner must make personal sacrifices

Table 9.3

18 Brewers Association. "Brewers Association Unveils 2018 Rankings of Top US Brewing Companies." 2019. https://www.brewbound.com/
news/brewers-association-unveils-2018-rankings-of-top-us-brewing-companies

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  373

Other bootstrapping strategies include negotiating the terms for payments on expenses. Often when
businesses sell to other businesses, the vendor allows the customer to buy on credit. This means that the
buyer does not have to pay at the time of purchase. Although retail customers are required to pay at the
register during checkout, purchases between businesses can work on different terms, sometimes extended up
to thirty, sixty, or ninety days. This extra time to pay for purchases can be a real advantage for businesses.
When a business buys inventory on credit, it has the opportunity to begin selling it before it has even paid for
it. For example, a clothing retailer could sell its product in stores or online, and receive cash before it had to
pay its vendors. Unfortunately, when a business's cash becomes tight, an ethical dilemma can arise. When a
business has more bills to pay than money to pay them with, the owner will need to make tough decisions. It
can be easy to forget about or ignore amounts due to vendors, but this problem is compounded when it
occurs with more and more vendors. Ultimately, it can get to the point where vendors will no longer sell to you
on credit, or even at all. When a company can no longer buy inventory to sell to customers, it won't be long
until it's out of business. An ethical entrepreneur will be alert to this concern and resolve it with aboveboard
business decisions.

How Bootstrapping Helps

Although bootstrapping can be painful in the early years of a business, it yields significant benefits for the
business owner in the long term. One of the most valued benefits of bootstrapping a business is the fact that
the founder can maintain control of the company and typically retain 100 percent ownership. Although it can
be easy to give up ownership in an idea because ideas come freely and don't require financial sacrifice,
entrepreneurs who accept an equity financing opportunity and give up a significant portion of ownership of
the business may not realize the potential detrimental outcomes. What seems glamorous on Shark Tank may
cost a business owner more control than desired. Once you give up any amount of equity in a business, it can
be difficult or expensive to get it back. Once the deal is accepted, the investor is entitled to that percentage of
the profit every year the company is in business, even if that person never lifts a finger to support the
enterprise. Entrepreneurs usually make those financing deals because of the benefits of the money and access
to the investor's contacts. It's unlikely that Mark Cuban is going to roll up his sleeves in your food truck when
things get tough. If you can avoid outside financing, you will maintain complete control and full ownership of
the business, and you should weigh this benefit in your financing decisions.

Another benefit of bootstrapping is avoiding taking on debt. Whether it's in the form of credit cards or
personal loans, repayment of debt can take a serious toll on any business and can be especially burdensome
for new businesses. Considering that some of the debt financing sources available to entrepreneurs can bear
higher-than-average interest rates, digging yourself out from underneath this financial burden is no easy task.
Also, delaying outside investments allows your business to grow not only in revenue and profit, but also in
market value. When potential investors come along, they will consider a higher contribution for a smaller
percentage in the business.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   One of the most common forms of debt financing is simply a credit card. Although it may seem wise to
   charge many of the upfront expenses and simply pay the card's minimum monthly payment, this can be
374  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

     a treacherous road to go down. Try the credit card calculator (https://openstax.org/l/52CreditCalc) to
     calculate how long it takes to pay off a credit using only the minimum payment. It may shock you. Try a
     few different amounts: $1,000; $5,000; and $10,000.

 9.3 Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the accounting equation and define its parts (assets, liabilities, and equity)
  · Define revenue, expenses, and income

Although financing and accounting complement and rely on each other, they are distinct. As we have seen,
financing is the process of raising money. Accounting is the system of recording and classifying financial
transactions related to a business, and summarizing and communicating those transactions in the form of
financial statements. Accounting is essentially documenting what happens to money once a company receives
it and thereby makes that information available for reporting to stakeholders and regulatory agencies, and
informing business decisions.
At the most fundamental level, an accounting system accomplishes two goals:

 1. It summarizes a business's financial performance
 2. It communicates that performance to owners, managers, and outside parties
The most common approach to accounting used in the United States, and around the world, follows the basic
formula shown in Figure 9.6.

Figure 9.6 The accounting equation provides the foundation of a company's financial status and outlook.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This formula is referred to as the basic accounting equation. First, we'll define each of these terms, and then
we'll look at an example of a simple transaction recorded using the equation.
Assets are items--such as equipment, cash, supplies, inventory, receivables, buildings, and vehicles--that a
business owns and derives future use from. Potential investors want to know what resources a company has
at its disposal. Business owners want to see where their money has gone. Let's return to the case of Shanti,
the website designer who starts her business by purchasing a new laptop computer. The computer is an asset
that Shanti has acquired for her business.
A liability is a debt that a company has incurred with another party, as when it borrows money from a bank or
purchases materials from other suppliers. The business is required to make a future payment to satisfy that
debt. For accounting purposes, we want to be able to see what the business owns (assets) compared with
what it owes (liabilities). For example, if Shanti does not have sufficient cash to pay for the laptop, she may
have the electronics store charge her credit card for the purchase. In that case, the credit card company pays
the store, and Shanti's business now owes the credit card company for the amount of purchase (a liability).

Equity is the owner's claim on the assets of the business, that is, the difference between what they own and

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  375

what they owe. Essentially, equity tells a business owner or investor how much the firm is worth after all the
debt is repaid. Returning to the example of Shanti's website design business, let's compare two scenarios of
startup purchases to see the effects on the accounting equation. In both cases, Shanti contributes some of her
own money to the initial purchase of a laptop.

In the first scenario, shown in Figure 9.7, she contributes $1,000 to the new business.

Figure 9.7 An initial $1,000 contribution by the owner is recorded in the accounting equation. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Each element of the accounting equation has its own account in an accounting system or software package,
and all changes are tracked within its account. The accounting equation must stay in balance after every
transaction with assets equaling liabilities. In this case, Cash is an assets account, and Owner's Capital is an
equity account. The $1,000 cash contributed is a cash asset and becomes equity that is recorded as owner's
capital. At this point, Shanti can claim 100 percent of the assets of the business, which right now consist only of
the cash.

If she uses all of her cash assets to purchase the laptop, the accounting equation will record this as shown in
Figure 9.8.

Figure 9.8 The purchase of a laptop computer using existing cash is recorded in the accounting equation.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

When the cash is spent, reducing the assets column to zero, a new asset account for the computer is created
to record the dollar amount paid for the laptop. Again, because Shanti doesn't owe another party at the end of
the transaction (because she didn't make any additional contribution), the balance of the owner's equity
account remains the same. The equation shows that Shanti still owns 100 percent of the assets.

Now consider how to account for a situation in which Shanti does not have a significant amount of cash to
contribute to the business. She can afford to contribute only $100 and deposits the money into the business's
bank account. Fortunately, she also has access to a credit card that can be charged for business purchases,
increasing her investment options.

The initial contribution to the business is recorded in the same way but with the new amount, as shown in
Figure 9.9.
376                                                                               Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.9 An owner contribution of $100 is recorded in the accounting equation. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The laptop still costs $1,000, but the business has only $100 in cash assets. Shanti purchases the laptop with a
credit card, and the clerk finalizes the sale. Figure 9.10 shows the impact of the sale on the accounting
equation.

Figure 9.10 The purchase of the computer asset using cash and a credit card is recorded in the accounting
equation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

In both examples, Shanti reports the computer as an asset of the business that is valued at its $1,000 cost. In
the first scenario, she exchanged the cash for the computer. In the second, she exchanged a smaller amount
of cash for the laptop and charged the remaining amount of the purchase on a credit card. This creates a
liability for the business that Shanti will need to repay in the future. Since this is an equation, both sides must
be equal to each other, and this proves to be the case in both scenarios. The total assets are $1,000, and the
total liabilities plus equity are also $1,000.

   ARE YOU READY?

   The Accounting Equation

   On a sheet of paper, use three columns to create your own accounting equation for your personal assets,
   liabilities, and expenses. In the first column, list all of the things you own (assets). In the second column,
   list any amounts owed (liabilities). In the third column, using the accounting equation, calculate the net
   amount of the asset (equity). When finished, total the columns to determine your net worth.
   Here is something else to consider: is it possible to have negative equity? It sure is . . . ask any college
   student who has taken out loans. At first glance there is no asset directly associated with the amount of
   the loan. But is that, in fact, the case? You might ask yourself why make an investment in a college
   education--what is the benefit (asset) to going to college? The answer lies in the difference in lifetime
   earnings with a college degree versus without a college degree. This is influenced by many things,
   including the supply and demand of jobs and employees, and the field in which you plan to work.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  377

 9.4 Developing Startup Financial Statements and Projections

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand the three primary financial statements: balance sheet, income statement, and statement of
      cash flows

  · Understand how financial projections are made and how to use the run rate and the burn rate
  · Understand how to create a break-even analysis

You have learned how an accounting system classifies transactions in terms of assets, liabilities, and equity;
what those transactions mean in terms of the accounting equation; and what that information says about an
entity's overall financial health. Now we'll examine how to summarize those transactions in financial
statements that can be shared with stakeholders. Internally, these statements are used to make decisions
about the management of the company and its operations. Externally, they provide existing and potential
investors with data to inform their financial support of the venture.
The information entered into the accounting system is summarized in financial statements, which are the
output of an accounting system. We will examine three basic types of financial statements:

  · The balance sheet
  · The income statement
  · The statement of cash flows
Each type of statement communicates specific information to its audience. Investors around the world use
financial statements every day to make investment decisions.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   If you like quizzes, crossword puzzles, fill-in-the-blanks, matching exercises, or word scrambles, go to My
   Accounting Course (https://openstax.org/l/52MyAcctCourse) for some fun ways to reinforce the
   accounting information you are learning. This website covers a variety of accounting topics including
   financial accounting basics and financial statements.

The Balance Sheet

The first financial statement is the balance sheet. The balance sheet summarizes the accounting equation and
organizes the different individual accounts into logical groupings. As you previously learned, the components
of the accounting equation are:

  · assets--items the company owns or will benefit from; examples include cash, inventory, and equipment
  · liabilities--debt or amounts the company must repay in the future; examples include credit card balances,

      loans payable, and so on
  · equity--the share of the assets due to the owners after debt is repaid

The accounting equation itself (assets = liabilities + equity) is spelled out on the balance sheet. It is shown in
two portions. On one side, all of the assets are spelled out and their amounts totaled. This total is compared to
378  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

the totals in the second and third portions, which show liabilities and equity. Just as the accounting equation
itself must balance, so must the balance sheet.

Figure 9.11 shows the 2020 balance sheet for Hometown Pizzeria. This is the same kind of financial statement
that real-life investors use to learn about a business. You can see the main aspects of the accounting equation
in each half of the statement, as well as many detailed individual accounts. This financial statement gives the
reader a quick summary of what the company owns and what it owes. A potential investor will be interested in
both items. The amount of liabilities is an indicator of how much the business needs to pay off before the
investors will see a return on their investment.

Unlike the accounting equation shown in Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs, most balance sheets display
data vertically rather than horizontally. But the vertical format still presents the two sides of the
equation--except that liabilities and equity are on the bottom half of the statement. Note that the two sides
still must equal each other, or balance--hence the name "balance sheet."

Figure 9.11 This is Hometown Pizzeria's balance sheet. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

A review of the Hometown Pizzeria balance sheet lets us see what kind of assets the company has. We see
cash, ingredients, and restaurant equipment--all things that would be necessary to make pizzas and sell them.
We also see some liabilities. Accounts payable is an account that covers many different vendors that the
company buys from on credit, which means the vendors let the pizzeria pay them after they have delivered
their goods. These vendors could be companies that sell flour, produce, or pizza boxes. "Credit card payable"
is the balance due on the credit card, which could have also been used to stock up on supplies or pay other
bills.
One of the first things an investor will do is compare the total assets of a company with the total liabilities. In
this case, the pizzeria reports total assets of $27,182 and total liabilities of $5,649. This means that the pizzeria
owns more than it owes, which is a good sign. It actually has several times more assets than liabilities.
Although it does not have enough cash to pay off all the liabilities right now, other assets have value and could

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  379

be sold to generate cash.

To recap, the balance sheet summarizes the accounting equation. It tells the business owner what the
company has and how it was paid for. Investors also want to understand where the company has spent its
money and where that money came from. If a company is laden with debt, any investment may be
immediately spent trying to get caught up with creditors, with no real impact on helping operations.
Ultimately, investors want to read these financial statements to know how their money will be used.

The Income Statement

The second basic financial statement is the income statement, which provides the results of a company's
operations. At the most basic level, the income statement--also called the profit-and-loss
statement--describes how much money the company earned while operating the business and what costs it
incurred while generating those revenues. An investor wants to know how much money the company brought
in from customers and how much it had to spend to get those customers. Revenue minus expenses results in
net income, or profit if there are funds left over.

After identifying total revenue and expenses, a business can calculate its profit margin. The profit margin is
the profit divided into the total revenue, described as a percent. For example, if we opened a pizzeria and
generated $100,000 in sales our first year and incurred $90,000 in expenses, that would result in $10,000 of net
income. If we divide that net income by our $100,000 in sales, the profit margin is 10 percent. So for every
dollar of sales that was generated, ten cents remained as a profit. We could save this resulting profit for future
renovations, an expansion, or payment to the owners as a distribution.

A pizzeria--or any business that sells a physical product--has costs that are specific to the product sold. For
example, pizza requires flour and yeast to make the dough, tomato sauce, and cheese and other toppings. We
refer to these expenses as the cost of goods sold. These costs are the primary driver that determines whether
the company can be profitable. If the selling price of a pizza is $12 and our cost of ingredients is $12, the
transaction nets to zero. The company wouldn't make any money on a sale and is simply recouping the money
paid for the ingredients. This is not a feasible business model because there are many costs in addition to
ingredients, such as rent on the building, employee wages, and other items.

The selling price of an item minus its direct costs--or cost of goods sold--is the gross profit. In a product
business, this is the most important operational figure. A business needs to know how much money it makes
on each sale because that gross profit pays for all other expenses. If the pizzeria sells a pizza for $12, the cost
of its ingredients might be $4, so the gross profit of selling one pizza is $8. Every time the company sells
another pizza, the gross profit increases. If the business sells 1,000 pizzas in a month, its sales would be
$12,000, the cost of goods sold would be $4,000, and $8,000 would be left for profit (Figure 9.12).
380  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

Figure 9.12 This is Hometown Pizzeria's income statement. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Results from Operations

As you learned earlier in this chapter, a business can create assets through debt or equity financing. After the
initial investment, those assets can be employed to operate the business. For example, when Hometown
Pizzeria opens, after the initial build out of the kitchen and dining area, the business can make and serve food
to customers in exchange for money. This process creates new assets in the form of cash collected from
customers and becomes a third way to generate assets in a business--from operations, which we call revenue.
In an ideal situation, the business would require little outside investment once operations have begun.
The amount a business earns from selling a product or providing a service is referred to as revenue, or sales.
The costs incurred in the normal course of operations are referred to as expenses. For the newly opened
pizzeria, payments from customers for their meals are the business revenue, whereas the cost of food
ingredients, beverages, dinnerware, and paper goods--such as napkins--are the operating expenses. The
balance of business revenue minus operating expenses is the profit of the business, or net income.
Before moving on to visualizing operational income, let's pause here to review some of the basic distinctions
between these key terms. When a company gains new assets, those assets have to come from somewhere,
usually from one of three sources. We will see these options on the right side of the equation, as we move
from left to right. First, if we gain a new asset, but we have not paid for it, we have created a
liability--something the business owes. This was the case when Shanti paid for her computer with a credit
card. In the future, she will have to pay the credit card company, but this is different process from an expense,
as we will see later. For right now, we are gaining something new and must repay someone later.
The second source of new assets is owner investments. This was the first example we saw when Shanti
deposited money in the business's bank account from her personal savings. In terms of the business, assets
increased because she now had more cash than before, and on the right side of the accounting equation, we
record the source of those assets--Shanti herself. So investments by the owner are another source of new
assets.
The third way that the business gains new assets is from operations. When Shanti uses the assets of her
business (a computer) to perform work for a customer (creating a website), this results in a sale, or revenue.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  381

Assets of the business increase because the customer pays for the work; thus, Shanti's cash increases. Again,
on the right side of the equation, we record the source of that asset: revenue. Revenue is an increase in assets
from customers paying for goods and services.

To illustrate, let's continue with Shanti's website design business. She purchased a computer with her personal
savings and has been hired to create a website for a local business. This client agrees to pay $5,000 for the
website, due on completion of the site. Once the work on the website is complete, Shanti records the receipt of
$5,000 cash as an increase to the cash account. On the right side of the equation, this is added in an account
under equity for revenue (Figure 9.13).

Figure 9.13 This shows recording a customer sale of $5,000. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The total company assets have grown to $6,000 with the addition of the $5,000 earned and collected from this
client. On the right side of the equation, equity has increased in a new column representing revenue and
expenses, where revenues are positive amounts and expenses are negative amounts.
The accounting equation describes how transactions are classified within the context of balancing what a
business has (assets) with how it paid for those assets (liabilities and equity). In the next section of this
chapter, we will explore how this information is summarized in financial statements and how entrepreneurs
and potential investors use that information.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Accounting is the system of communication that allows for decision making by individuals both inside
   and outside the company. For an overview (https://openstax.org/l/52Accounting) of accounting, please
   see the video at the Investopedia website.

The Statement of Cash Flows

The third basic financial statement we will discuss is the statement of cash flows, which explains the sources
of and uses of a company's cash.
You may wonder how the statement of cash flows differs from an income statement. The short answer is that
the income statement captures events as they happen, not necessarily when the company gets paid. It records
382  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

certain items, such as sales, when the work is completed. Let's return to Shanti, the website designer. As soon
as she completes the client's website, the accounting system will record the revenue, the amount that is due
from that client; this second item is referred to as accounts receivable. If Shanti's client is struggling
financially or even goes out of business, she may never get paid for that work, but the income statement
would show sales, and therefore possibly a profit. If the customer goes out of business, the business bank
account will not have any evidence of a profit.

It is for this reason that the statement of cash flows was developed. It accounts for these differences, only
showing activities that result in cash received or cash paid. To better understand the purpose and use of the
statement of cash flows, let's first look at this statement again in the context of a pizzeria (Figure 9.14).

Figure 9.14 This is Hometown Pizzeria's statement of cash flows. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

As we can see in the statement of cash flows for Hometown Pizzeria, although the basic operations generate
positive cash flow, a major purchase was required. This is common at the inception of a business. Not every
location will come equipped with a commercial kitchen and dining area, so the business may need to purchase
items such as a pizza oven and dining chairs and tables. Note that although the income statement
approximates the cash flow from operations, it would not show the large outflow resulting from the initial
purchase of equipment. That purchase would have been treated as an asset within the context of the
accounting equation and would have been recorded on the balance sheet. So from that large difference alone,
we can see why some people say that the statement of cash flows is the most important of the financial
statements. It bridges the gap between the income statement and the balance sheet.
As you can see in the figure, the statement of cash flows is broken into three sections. The first is operating
activities, the day-to-day activities of the business, including purchasing supplies, paying rent, and receiving
cash from customers. This section tells a reader how effective the company's business model is at generating
cash flow.
Investing activities include major purchases of equipment or facilities. For example, when Amazon develops
its second headquarters, those billions of dollars spent will be recorded as investing activities. Additionally, if
 the company has an excess of cash, it may purchase securities such as stocks and bonds, which have a higher

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  383

return on investment than a traditional bank savings account. This section tells a reader where the company
spends money in terms of large acquisitions.

The third section of the statement of cash flows is financing activities. This section tells a reader where new
infusions of cash come from. The owners of Hometown Pizzeria need to find a way to pay for the kitchen
equipment and furniture. If they have such an amount in their personal savings, then they can simple
contribute it to the company themselves. If they don't have the money already, they will need to seek other
sources, such as loans or the types of investors discussed in Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and
Accounting Strategies. Generally, any financing activity is also booked in the balance sheet as well. This section
of the statement explains which sources the owners used to generate outside funds coming into the business.
It always indicates future requirements as well. For example, if a bank loaned the pizzeria the money, then we
know it will have to be repaid in the future. So the business will need to ensure it is setting aside money to
make monthly repayments. If new investors contribute money, what manner of return on investment will they
be seeking? If they decide to seek regular distributions of profit, they will have to factor that in.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   It is a good idea to familiarize yourself with the type of information companies report each year. Peruse
   Best Buy's 2017 annual report (https://openstax.org/l/52BestBuy2017) to learn more about Best Buy.
   Take note of the company's balance sheet on page 53 of the report and the income statement on page
   54. These reports have much more information than the financial statements you've seen, but as you
   read through them, you will notice some familiar items.

Projections

Among the most powerful tools business owners can use are projections. A projection is a forecast of the
future operations of the business. It is a landscape for the business: What do the next few months look like?
What about the next year? A projection would outline what level of payments are expected to come in and the
timing of costs incurred. This lets the business owner understand what potential financing needs to be
secured.

Two key concepts related to projections are the run rate and burn rate. The run rate helps extrapolate into the
future. For example, if the pizzeria is generating sales of $10,000 per month, that translates into an annual run
rate of $120,000 per year. Multiplying the monthly amount by twelve tells us the annual amount; if we wanted
quarterly projections, we would multiply the monthly amount by three. This is useful for explaining to
investors what the company will look like now that it has achieved traction in generating sales.

The burn rate is the rate at which cash outflow exceeds cash inflow, or essentially how much money the
company is expending overall each month. Before generating revenue, or generating enough to just break
even, startup companies will incur losses. Understanding the pace at which the expenses exceed revenue
helps business owners plan accordingly. For example, if it takes six months to renovate the pizzeria and the
monthly rent is $2,000, then the burn rate is $2,000 per month and forecasts that the business will need an
additional $12,000 ($2,000 × six months) available in financing on top of the cost of renovations. The location's
rent must be paid, even if the pizzeria isn't yet open for business.
384  Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

During the seed stage of a company, projections can also be used to show potential investors how quickly the
company will make money and hopefully inspire them to invest in the venture. Just as on Shark Tank,
projections are used during the "pitch." Investors and lenders want to see exactly how they can expect the
business to perform and how quickly the company generates positive financial results.

Break-Even Analysis

Another critical part of planning for new business owners is to understand the breakeven point, which is the
level of operations that results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs. It yields neither a profit nor a loss. To
calculate the break-even point, you must first understand the behavior of different types of costs: variable and
fixed.

Variable costs fluctuate with the level of revenue. Returning to Hometown Pizzeria, we see that the cost of
ingredients would be a variable cost. In a previous section, we also referred to these as the cost of goods sold.
Variable costs are based on the number of pizzas sold, with the goal being to buy just enough ingredients that
the business doesn't run out of supplies or incur spoilage. In this example, the cost of making a pizza is $4, so
the total variable costs in any given month equal $4 times the number of pizzas made. This differs from a fixed
cost such as rent, which remains the same every month regardless of whether the pizzeria sells any pizzas or
not.

The first step in understanding the break-even point is to calculate the contribution margin of each item sold.
The contribution margin is the gross profit from a single item sold. Therefore, selling price minus variable
costs is the contribution margin. Hometown Pizzeria's selling price of a pizza is $12. The variable cost is $4,
which results in a contribution margin of $8 per pizza. This $8 will go toward paying other expenses; when
those are covered, the remainder will be added to the profit. Once we understand how much each item sold
contributes to other expenses, we understand how those other costs behave (Figure 9.15).

Figure 9.15 This is Hometown Pizzeria's contribution margin. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The other main category of costs is fixed costs. Fixed costs are a set amount and do not change, regardless of
the amount of sales. Previously, we referred to rent as such a cost, but most of the business's other costs
operate in this manner as well. Although some costs vary from month to month, costs are described as
variable only if they will increase if the company sells even one more item. Costs such as insurance, wages, and
office supplies are typically considered fixed costs.
Once variable and fixed costs are determined, this information can be used to produce a break-even analysis.
Calculating the break-even point is simply a matter of dividing the total fixed costs by the contribution margin.
To illustrate, let's assume that Hometown Pizzeria still sells pizzas with a contribution margin of $8 each. Let's
also assume that the only fixed cost is the rent of $2,000 per month. If we wanted to know how many pizzas
the owner needs to sell each month to pay the rent, we divide $2,000 by $8. This results in a break-even point
of 250 pizzas. Now we know that if the pizzeria sells 250 pizzas a month, its rent is completely paid. Any
additional pizzas sold add to the company's profit. If the business sells fewer than 250 pizzas, it will not

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  385

generate enough income to cover the rent and will incur a loss. Whenever a business incurs a loss, the owners
will need to contribute more of their own personal savings or potentially go into debt (Figure 9.16).

Figure 9.16 This is Hometown Pizzeria's break-even point. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

Understanding the break-even point for a business provides a great deal of insight. At the most basic level, it
demonstrates how many units of a product must be sold to cover the expenses of the business and not incur a
loss. It may also help business owners understand when costs are too high and decide how many units need
to be sold to break even. Realizing this up front can help entrepreneurs avoid starting a business that will
result only in losses.

   WORK IT OUT

   Calculating Break-Even Analysis

   Consider the break-even analysis tool. Using the same contribution margin provided ($8/pizza), calculate
   the break-even point if we chose a more expensive city. How many pizzas would we need to see if our
   fixed costs were $5,000 a month? What if they were $10,000 a month?
386                                                                               Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

     Key Terms

accounting system of recording and classifying a company's financial transactions and summarizing and
     communicating those transactions in the form of financial statements

accounting equation assets = liabilities + equity
accounts payable account that includes vendors that the company owes money to
accounts receivable account that includes customers that owe the business money
angel investor wealthy, private individual seeking investment options with a greater potential return than is

     generally available with traditional publicly traded stocks
assets items a business owns and derives future use from
balance sheet financial statement that summarizes a company's financial condition according to the

     accounting equation
bartering exchanging goods or services for other goods or services instead of for cash
bootstrapping funding strategy that seeks to optimize use of personal funds and other creative strategies

     (such as bartering) to minimize cash outflows
breakeven point level of operations that results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs
burn rate rate at which cash outflow exceeds cash inflow
charitable organization nonprofit company founded for altruistic purposes
collateral something of value pledged to secure a loan
contribution margin gross profit from a single item sold
cost of goods sold cost required to produce the product or service
credit lending of funds in exchange for a promise to repay
crowdfunding financing with investments of small amounts of money from a large number of people
debt financing borrowing funds that must be repaid, usually with interest
donation financial gift intended to support an organization's general operations
early stage company lifecycle stage in which the product or service has begun development
equity owner's interest in the assets of the business
equity financing funds provided in exchange for a share of ownership in a business
expenses costs incurred in the normal course of business operations
financial statement output of an accounting system that is used to make financial decisions
financial viability long-term financial sustainability of an organization to fulfill its mission
financing raising money to fund the startup and operation of a business
financing activities section of the statement of cash flows that shows where new infusions of cash are

     coming from
fixed assets major purchases with a long life, such as buildings, land, and so on
fixed costs costs that do not change, regardless of the amount of sales
funds financial resources for acquiring assets
grant financial gift intended to fund a specific goal or project
gross profit selling price of a product or service minus its direct costs
income (profit-and-loss) statement financial statement that describes how much a company earned while

     the business was operating and what costs were incurred to generate those revenues
initial public offering (IPO) process by which a company lists its ownership shares on a public stock

     exchange
investing activities section of the statement of cash flows that shows major purchases of equipment or

     facilities

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  387

liability company's debt to another party
mature stage company lifecycle stage in which the business has reached commercial viability
moonlighting earning income from a source outside of one's primary employ
net income revenue minus expenses
operating activities section of the statement of cash flows that shows day-to-day activities of the business,

     such as purchasing supplies, paying rent, and receiving cash from customers
profit margin amount by which revenue exceeds costs, typically described as a percent
program services basic offerings that a nonprofit provides to generate a portion of its revenue to sustain

     operations
projection forecast of the future operations of a business
revenue amount a business earns through product sales or providing a service
run rate cost of running a business over a specified period of time
seed stage company lifecycle stage in which the business is largely still an idea
statement of cash flows financial statement that explains the sources and uses of the company's cash
sustainable strategy strategy that can maintain an organization's financial stability
tax-exempt status treatment under U.S. tax law that removes the burden of taxes from nonprofit

     organizations
valuation estimate of a company's worth
variable costs costs that fluctuate with the level of revenue
venture capitalist individual or investment firm that specializes in funding startup companies
working capital funds available for day-to-day operations

     Summary

9.1 Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting Strategies
Entrepreneurial financing is concerned with understanding the funding requirements for a new business and
what sources of funds are available. Each source comes with different expectations and requirements. Equity
financing provides the entrepreneur with maximum flexibility: Dividends are not required and can be made
when cash flow is strong enough to meet all obligations of the firm. Debt financing restricts financial flexibility
but can be cheaper under some circumstances. For example, SBA loans can be subsidized by the federal
government. Financing is not a one-size-fits-all procedure.

9.2 Special Funding Strategies
For nonprofit organizations, achieving a sustainable funding strategy requires hard work, creativity, and a
delicate balance of financial resources. These types of organizations need to create programs that will interest
patrons who are willing to pay for activities. They also rely on the generosity of their benefactors beyond
simple patronage in the form of donations, and they vie for extremely competitive grant funding.

Although loans and liabilities such as credit card debt can fund a new business, the repayment and additional
interest charges are a real challenge to many entrepreneurs. Financing strategies that avoid loans, such as
crowdfunding websites and bartering, offer opportunities for funding that are often more manageable.

Bootstrapping is the process of self-funding a startup business. Sometimes entrepreneurs will have no
financial resources beyond their personal savings. This method of funding a business requires creative
approaches to problem solving, generating business, and managing expenses. It can be a slower, more
difficult process than a company with more funding might face, but in the long run, it can benefit the
company's strength and growth, and provide robust dividends to the founders.
388                                                                               Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

9.3 Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs
Accounting is concerned with how transactions are recorded in a way that helps entrepreneurs share
information with stakeholders, including potential investors, and helps business owners make decisions about
running their company.

9.4 Developing Startup Financial Statements and Projections
Entrepreneurs can use financial information for multiple purposes. These projections can help plan a new
business. By forecasting the income and expenses of the first year, an entrepreneur can have a reasonable
idea of the level of financing that may be required. Second, these projections can also show potential investors
what the business will look like in the future and how long it might take them to get a return on their
investment. Break-even points help illustrate a minimum amount of sales to cover expenses.

     Review Questions

1. What are the different stages in a company's lifecycle?
2. How do financing requirements change at different stages of a company's lifecycle?
3. What are the two most common categories of financing available to an entrepreneur?
4. What is the Small Business Administration?
5. What is an SBA loan?
6. What is a charitable organization?
7. What is a sustainable funding strategy?
8. What is social entrepreneurship?
9. What is crowdfunding?
10. What is bartering?
11. What does the term bootstrapping mean in terms of startups?
12. What purpose does an accounting system serve?
13. What key terms are used in the accounting equation?
14. How does accounting differ from finance?
15. What are the basic financial statements? What information do they provide?
16. What are projections used for?
17. What is a break-even point?

     Discussion Questions

1. How do funding requirements differ in each stage of a company's lifecycle? Why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting  389

2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of different sources of financing?
3. How does collateral factor into your financing options?
4. What challenges do nonprofits face in securing financing?
5. What are some potential benefits of a crowdfunding campaign aside from the funding itself? What are some
potential drawbacks?
6. What are some of the sacrifices you could see yourself having to make to bootstrap your potential
business?
7. How would you work around having limited access to capital in starting your own business? What difficulties
can you see in trying to do so?
8. Which external parties would be interested in obtaining a firm's financial statements?
9. Why would investors require access to financial statements?
10. How do companies use financial statements in communicating with potential investors?
11. How can an entrepreneur use preliminary financial information in planning a new business?

     Case Questions

1. Crowdfunding platforms, such as Kickstarter or GoFundMe, allow startups to access many different
investors who may be able to contribute only small amounts in return for relatively small rewards. In the case
of the iBackPack, those providing funds through Kickstarter were largely unaware of the company's
postfunding operations.

    A. How did the lack of oversight harm investors?
    B. How might this situation have been different if a single angel investor had been involved?

2. Put yourself in the shoes of the manager of a nonprofit organization, such as a homeless shelter. The
ultimate goal is to help people who have suffered misfortune get back on their feet. They likely cannot afford
to pay or otherwise contribute to the costs of running the shelter. Thus, you must look to other sources to help
pay the bills. Visit the website https://blog.hubspot.com/marketing/engage-major-donors-foundations-list.
What are some ways you might be able to attract donors for the shelter?

3. While thinking about or visiting the coffee shop in your area, look around (or visualize) and identify items or
activities that are the expenses of the coffee shop. Remember, expenses for the coffee shop are related to
resources consumed while generating revenue from selling coffee and related items. Do not forget about any
expenses that might not be so obvious--as a general rule, every activity in a business has an associated cost.

     Suggested Resources

9.1 Overview of Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting Strategies
Small Business Administration lending program: https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans
"The Top Twenty Venture Capitalists Worldwide," New York Times (March 27, 2017): https://www.nytimes.com/

  interactive/2017/03/27/technology/Top-20-Venture-Capitalists.html?_r=0
390                                                                               Chapter 9 Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting

National Public Radio "How I Built This" podcast series (example episodes: Instagram, Airbnb, Spanx):
  https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this

TED Radio Hour (example episodes: Big Data Revolution, Disruptive Leadership): https://www.npr.org/
  programs/ted-radio-hour/?showDate=2019-07-05

9.2 Special Funding Strategies
Tax information for charitable organizations from the Internal Revenue Service: https://www.irs.gov/charities-

  non-profits/charitable-organizations
Information from the National Institutes of Health on grants and the application process:

  https://grants.nih.gov/grants/about_grants.htm
Small Business Administration, "How to Start a Non-Profit": https://www.sba.gov/blogs/how-start-non-profit
Kickstarter: www.kickstarter.com
Indiegogo, "The Essential Guide to Crowdfunding": https://learn.indiegogo.com/the-essential-guide-to-

  crowdfunding
Startupfest, "The $100K Investment Prize": http://www.startupfestival.com/news/100k-investment-prize/
G-Startup Worldwide's global startup competition: https://www.f6s.com/g-startupworldwide/
Extending Credit to Your Customers: https://fitsmallbusiness.com/invoicing-extending-credit-to-customers/
7 Ways to Bootstrap Your Business to Success: https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/254217
4 Must-Follow Tips for Moonlighting as an Entrepreneur: https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/298310
5 Ways Nonprofits Can Engage Donors: https://www.ama.org/publications/MarketingNews/Pages/5-ways-

  nonprofits-engage-donors.aspx

9.3 Accounting Basics for Entrepreneurs
Small Business Administration Introduction to Accounting Course: https://www.sba.gov/tools/learning-center-

  view-course/364071
Accounting Coach free Accounting Basics Explanation: https://www.accountingcoach.com/accounting-basics/

  explanation
Khan Academy Accounting and Financial Statements Course: https://www.khanacademy.org/economics-

  finance-domain/core-finance/accounting-and-financial-stateme

9.4 Developing Startup Financial Statements and Projections
U.S. Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov/blogs/3-essential-financial-statements-your-small-

  business
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission: https://www.sec.gov/reportspubs/investor-publications/

  investorpubsbegfinstmtguidehtm.html
Forbes, 5 Financial Reports You Should Be Running: https://www.forbes.com/sites/sageworks/2018/03/26/

  here-are-5-financial-reports-you-should-be-running/#183ae98d6548
Medium, 3 Phases of Financial Indicators for Startups: https://medium.com/@DanielleMorrill/3-phases-of-

  financial-indicators-in-startups-b18ddb97f5f0

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    10

              Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.1 Dropbox, founded by Drew Houston and Arash Ferdowsi, has realized unprecedented growth, as
the company is valued in the billions of dollars. (credit: modification of "Dropbox" by Ian Lamont/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        10.1 Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup
        10.2 Why Early Failure Can Lead to Success Later
        10.3 The Challenging Truth about Business Ownership
        10.4 Managing, Following, and Adjusting the Initial Plan
        10.5 Growth: Signs, Pains, and Cautions

      Introduction

   Dropbox, a company founded in 2007 by Drew Houston and Arash Ferdowsi, has revolutionized the way
   consumers and businesses store and share electronic files. The idea came one day when Houston--on a
   commuter train--realized he left his thumb drive at home. This was not the first time he had forgotten that
   tiny electronic filing cabinet, and he was sure others forgot often as well. So he hit on an idea: storing his files
   on a "cloud" on the Internet that anyone could access from anywhere with any device.[1] He wanted to manage
   file storage at faster speeds and in larger quantities than the few existing online storage systems, through an
   easy-to-use interface. Although Houston came up with the idea of cloud storage during his commute, cloud
   computing had been talked about in industry circles a few years prior.[2]
   Hopeful, he introduced his idea to Y Combinator, a venture capital firm in California that helps fund startups by
   hosting, training, and helping them define their pitches to investors. Even though they had rejected a business

   1 Sarah Buhr and Katie Roof. "A Brief History of Dropbox." TechCrunch. March 6, 2018. https://techcrunch.com/gallery/a-brief-history-of-
   dropbox/slide/1/
   2 Johnson Hur. "History of Online Storage." BeBusinessEd.com. n.d. https://bebusinessed.com/history/history-of-online-storage/
392  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

idea he'd presented earlier, they told him the new idea was promising and asked him to secure a co-founder
before pitching. A co-founder would help to secure funding because it showed the idea had legitimacy,
support, and the expertise of another person. Houston quickly found Ferdowsi, a fellow MIT student studying
engineering and computer science.[3] Together, they raised $1.2 million from investors, even though their
prototype wasn't fully functional. They then hired developers and engineers who created a more functional
version that worked across most computer operating systems.

Dropbox was soon using lean startup principles, which meant releasing an early version to early adopters.
Houston had a difficult time explaining the product to initial users, so he developed a video with a quirky
narration to entice them. The early product release was a hit: In one day, their customer base increased from
5,000 to 75,000 users, who could also provide them with feedback for subsequent versions.
Thanks to its massive success, Dropbox was valued at $10 billion in 2014.[4] However, some analysts believed
the number was inflated as Dropbox's competitors started gaining market share. The company continues to
receive customer feedback to make the iterations necessary for better versions.

 10.1 Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe how businesses use lean startup principles to develop products and test markets
  · Identify how the build-measure-learn method helps companies understand what potential customers want

      in a product
  · Determine what a minimum viable product (MVP) is and explain why companies don't need to have a

      perfect product to launch
  · Explain why companies need to learn to construct a lean pitch to investors and potential customers
  · Explain what pivoting is and when it is necessary for companies to undertake

As you can see from the Dropbox example, businesses can function without being perfect. The company
initially provided a short video description of the Dropbox product (https://openstax.org/l/52Dropbox) without
even having it coded to the actual program first.[5] This way, they could test the idea and receive customer
feedback without losing time or money on products that wouldn't work. If any changes were needed, they had
the flexibility to make them because it was just an early prototype and no big investment on the product had
been made yet. Many of the early changes were to the interface design that involved buttons and actions that
could be taken, and storage capabilities that customers consistently gave feedback on.

New businesses need time to develop their identities, engage their target market, create and develop the right
products, and sharpen their strategies. Startups don't have fully developed and proven business models like
established companies do. A business's starting focus or idea may evolve into something else because the
initial feedback from the prototype points in a different direction.

Houston (pictured in Figure 10.2) and Ferdowsi knew they did not have the perfect product, so they employed
a system called lean startup, a methodology entrepreneurs use to help them innovate by continuously testing
their products and getting feedback from customers in real time. This methodology calls for a product to be

3 "How I Met My Co-Founder: Drew Houston, Dropbox." From Finding Your Way as an Entrepreneur. May 30, 2012.
https://ecorner.stanford.edu/in-brief/how-i-met-my-co-founder/
4 Eliot Brown and Jay Greene. "Dropbox Files for IPO Three Years after $10 Billion Private Valuation." The Wall Street Journal. January 11, 2018.
https://www.wsj.com/articles/dropbox-files-for-ipo-three-years-after-10-billion-private-valuation-1515708036
5 "The Original Dropbox MVP Explainer Video." Allen Cheng. n.d. https://www.allencheng.com/dropbox-mvp-explainer-video/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  393

shared with early adopters in its beginning stages of development and gain immediate feedback. It ensures
that people actually like a product and are willing to buy it. Tech companies primarily use this method because
they have learned that too many years working on a product without measuring is highly risky, especially in a
rapidly changing technological environment. Lean strategy, though, is applicable to almost every business and
industry.

Even with Dropbox's reported $1 billion in revenue and 500-plus million users, Houston's journey still has its
ups and downs. He learned that the CEO's job changes as the venture progresses because the company's
needs vary across its lifecycle. The CEO has to shift focus, such as on building prototypes, testing users,
exploring the best distribution channels, and managing cash flow. These hurdles need to be tackled when they
arise.[6] Let's take a closer look at lean startup, and how it got its own start.

Figure 10.2 Andrew Houston believes that, as a CEO, you must shift your focus as your business needs
change. (credit: "Drew Houston (Dropbox) by Financial Times/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

Lean Startup

Author and entrepreneur Eric Ries developed the lean startup methodology after spending much time, effort,
and money when his first tech company had to close down. Fortunately, Ries' frustration led him to study
other successful companies and lean manufacturing programs, including the highly successful Toyota lean
manufacturing process, which taught him how to be flexible and quick while building products. He learned
that he didn't need to have a fully designed product resulting from years of development; instead, he could
have something imperfect that worked without the bells and whistles, something that people could test and
provide feedback on over time.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Dr. Jeffrey Liker is an industrial operations management scholar, specializing in lean principles. Watch his
   presentation describing the basic components of lean manufacturing leadership (https://openstax.org/l/

6 Scott Rosenberg. "Inside Dropbox's Identity Overhaul." Wired. January 30, 2017. https://www.wired.com/2017/01/inside-dropboxs-identity-
overhaul/
394  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

     52LikerLean) to learn more. These components are the heart of Toyota's 14 management principles
     (https://openstax.org/l/52ToyotaWay) known as the Toyota Way.

He advocated a step-by-step approach on how to maneuver a startup, how to change course if necessary,
persevere, and accelerate its expansion. This is also called the build-measure-learn loop, which means that a
prototype is built, or at least the idea is written down, it is then pitched to customers who provide feedback so
the company learns what to keep and what to change, then it makes the changes to the prototype, and starts
all over again, repeating the process until the prototype is good enough to go to market. Figure 10.3 illustrates
this loop. Even after it hits the mass market, this loop can continue to be used to enhance the product.

Figure 10.3 The build-measure-learn loop is a framework that helps entrepreneurs develop their idea into a
minimum viable product (MVP), measure its impact on people, and learn if there is a need to pivot (change) or
persevere. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

After his first startup proved unsuccessful, Ries created a second company called IMVU.[7] IMVU is an avatar
platform, or "metaverse," for people who want to shop for clothing, furniture, and accessories in an online
community and keep their identity safe. Essentially, IMVU is a virtual reality world with an e-commerce engine,
user-generated content, and 3-D characters. While Ries was building IMVU, he and his co-founders worked
endless hours for six months to create a prototype of 3-D avatars that they later learned no one wanted.
During their first month, they made a total of $300. The next month they made $400 after begging friends and
family to try it.
After Ries saw their faithful first customers disappear, he and his co-founders decided to shift from feeling
frustrated to talking to potential customers. They tested their product with teenagers and heavy users of
technology, as well as with mainstream customers. The mainstream customers never knew what to do with
the product. They thought it was too strange. But those that were more tech savvy and younger were happy to
try it. They gave a lot of feedback that resulted in creating a better version of the avatar community.[8]
The initial platform was designed as a minimum viable product (MVP), which is a very early prototype of a
product.[9] According to Ries, an MVP can be the bare minimum to help people understand what the product is
about. A product doesn't even have to be built to be an MVP; instead, it can be represented in sketches, videos,

7 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 1-8.
8 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 43.
9 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 43.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  395

and explanations of how it might look. MVPs also can include a basic version of the product, just like IMVU's
website, which was not very good at first. The point is to have a basic product to show to potential users, with
enough substance to elicit feedback on what people find useful and what attributes are important without
having to invest a lot of money and time. There is no right or wrong type of MVP. It is up to the owner to
decide how to showcase the idea and test it to find out what people like and don't like, and how to take the
idea to the next level.

Through this MVP experience, Ries (shown in Figure 10.4) realized that his first platform had bugs and issues
that could crash users' computers; however, in spite of the bugs, he was determined to get customer feedback
without spending lots of cash or time. Once he and his co-founders had the low-quality platform running, they
decided to charge a fee for the service. They would send dozens of changes to their loyal followers until they
developed a product that would work for a larger customer base. These changes included adjustments such as
adding new avatars, new avatar movements, choices of clothing, and new worlds for avatars to explore. IMVU
pioneered this lean startup approach, which new ventures all over the world now use. Today, IMVU is a
successful enterprise with over $55 million in revenue and 50 million users.[10]

Figure 10.4 Eric Ries, third from left, speaks at a conference about the lean startup process he developed
while creating his second business. (credit: modification of "Eric Ries TechCrunch Disrupt" by
"kawanet"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

A lean startup begins with the first stage of building a basic product (MVP) that has only its core benefits and
no extra features. Houston and his developers created a basic platform for early adopters to test. Early
adopters are people who like to try new products as soon as they come out. They don't mind, for example,
buggy software or cumbersome designs because they are innovators and like to test new things. Dropbox did
not create a perfect product initially because the developers did not know what it would be until they got user

10 IMVU Inc. "IMVU Inc. Celebrates Nine Years of Connecting People around the World, Expands Profitable Business to Mobile." PR Newswire.
April 8, 2013. https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/imvu-inc-celebrates-nine-years-of-connecting-people-around-the-world-expands-
profitable-business-to-mobile-201920201.html
396  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

feedback. After early signups and feedback on the first prototype, they were able to create the first version of
the product. Later, they conducted iterations, or additions or changes to the version of the product, using
customers' ideas and suggestions.
Zappos is another example of an MVP development project. Nick Swinmurn, creator of the online shoe
company, launched the idea in 1998 by creating a bare bones website to sell shoes and measuring traffic to
the site.[11] The idea started after he took a trip to the mall and could not find shoes in the styles or colors he
wanted. He figured other people had equally frustrating experiences. His first hypothesis was that people were
interested in buying shoes online, so he asked Tony Hsieh, current CEO of Zappos, to invest in this new project.
Hsieh provided half a million dollars to get the company started. Swinmurn then created a plain webpage that
started with basic photos of shoes and their prices. Swinmurn also ran ad campaigns, measured web traffic,
and adjusted the webpage. Instead of spending so much time in building a detailed plan about his business,
this method helped him make quick adjustments to the product, the target market, and strategies using the
build-measure-learn loop and starting with an MVP, just as Houston did.[12]

   WORK IT OUT

   Five Lean Principles

   Go to the website http://theleanstartup.com/#principles and click on the link "Lean Startup Process In
   Detail."

      · Pick one topic that interests you and write a one-page summary of the concept.
      · Add an example to illustrate the topic.

Going deeper into this build stage, we can see that the steps take an entrepreneur through a cycle or loop that
begins with defining the problem at hand and building the MVP to show potential consumers a sample of the
product and see how they react. In many cases, selling this low-quality product can also help measure user
reactions. Metrics, or measurements, are developed to test the product assumptions of the engineers who
created it. The goal is to test the MVP with its target market by asking questions about the design, usability,
core or bundle of benefits, and other attributes that enhance the customer experience.

For example, different design attributes can be measured by asking customers if they like a feature or set of
features of the product they are testing. The number of likes or dislikes can be tallied, and comments can be
collected on what additional features should be added or deleted. Once the feedback comes in, entrepreneurs
can make changes. Then, they can move into the next stage, which is to measure whether the changes to the
product based on the feedback are actually helping make progress.

Along with a minimal product offering, Ries advocates using a minimal financial evaluation concept called
innovation accounting to assess whether the changes made to the product are creating the desired results.
This means that entrepreneurs should not look first to the basic financial measurements traditional to
businesses--such as sales, profits, and return on investment--because these traditional measurements aren't
the most relevant metrics at this stage. Instead, they should measure progress in a different way.
Measurements may include testing assumptions about the business, attributes that customers like, sign-ups,

11 "Lean Startup Zappos: The Basics." Bullet. n.d. https://www.bullethq.com/lean-startup-zappos-how-zappos-validated-their-business-
model-with-lean/
12 "The Lean Startup Methodology." The Lean Startup. n.d. http://theleanstartup.com/principles

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                                                   397

and retention rates that can be separated into cohorts and tested, say weekly, as changes to the products are
made.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this article on innovation accounting (https://openstax.org/l/52InnovAccount) and notice the
   available metrics that measure progress and the instances in which they are effective.

During the learn stage, the entrepreneur uses the feedback obtained to assess the progress of the product in
an objective manner. The entrepreneur makes changes to the MVP and starts the cycle over again until the
process has reached a point where it either accelerates or needs to pivot.[13]

As a learning component for the company, feedback is very important in the lean process. Feedback helps
companies design better products and make iterations, or newer versions, which better serve the customer
base. Companies will work with early adopters for a while before they expand their reach with a better product
and entice more people to use it.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   General Electric Is Big and Lean

   General Electric (GE) is a company that has been around for many years and boasts a tremendous
   portfolio of businesses under its parent company. Eric Ries managed to encourage this giant to take
   advantage of the lean startup movement by collaborating with him in a new program called Fast Works.
   This program was essentially created to imbue its product development method with the principles of
   lean innovation by training thousands of employees in the methodology and helping them develop
   desirable products at a faster pace.

   For example, GE improved a turbine using the lean approach by asking for customer feedback. Many
   customers needed different features, such as improved reliability, better fuel efficiency, and faster
   operation. The team working on this project decided to use Fast Works to fulfill all of the customers'
   requests. This approach would allow them to shorten the development process and save the customers
   money. Three hundred members of the GE turbine team knew that this would be a difficult task given
   their locations around the world and the processes involved in approvals, so they got to work. Some
   focused on streamlining the approval process, while some worked on bottlenecks and encouraged low-
   level engineers to make difficult decisions without asking upper management. These two changes
   allowed them to pivot quickly, while gathering feedback and making changes to the turbine effectively.
   After using FastWorks, the team reduced development time by a quarter--from four to three years. They
   saved $5 million dollars in fuel per year for their customers, while increasing their revenues by $6 million
   per year.[14]

13 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 76-183.
14 Bruce Watson. "The Startup Power Plant: These Engineers Are Building Turbines the Silicon Valley Way." General Electric. May 3, 2017.
https://www.ge.com/reports/startup-power-plant-adapting-silicon-valley-methods-building-turbines/
398                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Iterating, Pitching, and Pivoting

Many companies invest significant time and effort on projects that seem like great ideas in theory but flop
when taken to market. The lean startup method is a new way to develop and manage products that people
want in a shorter period of time. Companies are able to learn from customer discovery and validation that the
offer or value of the product is not working and needs to be enhanced or changed.

After Ries experienced his first business loss, he recognized the problem of companies devoting time and
money on projects rejected by consumers, and he wanted to identify a solution. As he started his new
company's avatar community, he enabled his teams to put the product through iterations--those small
changes to the current version of a product to make it better fit consumer needs. At this phase, and using
lessons from his first failure, he strove to create a bare-bones version of a product that worked well enough to
provide core value to the customer, garner customer feedback, and make small adaptations around what
users considered most essential. This allowed IMVU to enhance the product in a way that brought the
company, step by step, closer to providing the best value.

One iteration that proved enormously successful was adjusting how the avatar moved through its virtual
reality world. The original avatars didn't have the ability to walk around like they do in, say, popular
multiplayer video games. Even though he knew this was a disadvantage, he sent the version to early adopters
and asked for feedback. Customers responded that the lack of movement suggested the software was low
quality. Reluctant to make the major tech investment for this movement, Ries and his team decided to try a
very small iteration as an alternative: They made the avatar disappear from its starting point and reappear in
its new location. Customers responded positively, seeing this as superior to what existed and as a high- quality
variation. The quick and low-cost iteration turned out to be the best path to success.[15]

In addition, while this process is ongoing, the entrepreneur is constantly pitching the idea to potential
consumers and investors. Pitching can be intimidating for entrepreneurs, as they can get nervous speaking in
front of people. However, pitching can be as important as building the right product for the right target: It
needs to be practiced and mastered.

Pitching is the verbal delivery of an idea or business plan, and a request to a group of investors, customers, or
potential business partners by an entrepreneur (Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea). As
an entrepreneur, knowing how to pitch your business concept to investors is one of the keys to success.
However, if you're using the learn startup approach, your pitch likely needs to be quite different from a regular
pitch.

The lean pitch requires the presenter to craft an exciting and well-developed story about the company, its
product, and what makes the product unique, with enough detail to show that the company is more than a
story in the presenter's mind. The lean approach is customer centric and tries to solve customers' problems
and resolve issues, and it measures its product over and over again until it is right. The story must show the
process of understanding their customers as well as their problems and issues. Then, there must be an
explanation of iterations, design tests, and learning from customer feedback that demonstrates the customer-
centric approach. Experiments, data, and insights are shared to show the company's progress. As you recall
from Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea, using a regular pitch approach, the presenter
gives all of the details of the product and the future launch. This traditional pitch asks for an investment
without having tested assumptions or having much data or experiments to show that the idea will work.[16]
Increasingly, successful lean pitching requires the presenters to have some sort of validation of their business

15 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 108.
16 Andy Cars. "How to Pitch to Investors Using a Lean Startup Approach." Medium. March 15, 2017. https://medium.com/lean-startup-circle/
how-to-pitch-to-investors-using-a-lean-startup-approach-852f7a503d84

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                      399

model because this shows more truth to the vision. Many investors look for companies that have some time
invested and a seed customer base under their belt. They are particularly interested in those who know their
sales numbers, their costs, their sales projections, and have a track record of increased sales, customers, and
profit. Table 10.1 shows a step-by-step approach to pitching to investors and potential partners.

          Step                                  Lean Startup Pitching
                                                                              Tips
1. Tell an exciting
story that quickly   Don't do a sales pitch; be yourself by being open and authentic. Craft an exciting
moves into           and well-designed story to capture your audience and introduce this as a business
tangible results     that is already up and running so investors know from the beginning that you are
                     using lean startup techniques.
2. Describe the
problem and          Clearly define the problem you are solving and how you are already solving the
solution at hand     problem with the best tested/measured solution.
and what makes
you unique.          Show that you understand your potential customer because you have gotten
                     customer feedback. Give examples of early product development and share key
3. Describe the      customer feedback that helped you enhance or incorporate new benefits.
target market and    Demonstrate the product, focusing on the benefits, not the features.
how it will benefit
from the product.    Show additional tests, experiments, customer feedback, and anything that can back
                     your claims. Show actual data and insights collected, emphasizing validated facts
4. State your        and assumptions you have made. Describe early challenges and how you adapted
position with facts  without giving up.
and achieved
results.             Don't use jargon. Speak as if you were explaining it to a stranger sitting next to you
                     in a coffee shop.
5. Be simple
                     Show what you have accomplished in sales/profit so far.
6. Show current
progress             Close up your pitch by identifying what you are seeking. If you are looking for an
                     investment, a partnership, a new member to join you, or an advisor, finish with the
7. Finish with the   ask.
ask

Table 10.1

After carefully going through the build-measure-learn loop, there comes a point where the company either
accelerates or realizes it's time to pivot. Pivoting is a crucial and often difficult change done to test a
hypothesis regarding the basic product, its growth potential, and business model. Once the product has been
tested and retested for changes in consumer behavior, or any metric that the company sets itself to attain, if
it's not attaining growth, then the next step is to pivot instead of continuing down the current path.

This is a time for tough decisions: Should you continue working on the business, product, or project--or
400  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

should you change? Is the company making progress toward its goals, or do the strategies need major
adjustments? While measurable data, such as attribute likes and dislikes, or number of sign ups, are gathered
during the measure stage, the lean startup process also has a component that is creative, intuitive, and
visionary. Knowing when to change cannot be determined solely through number crunching. It also requires
human judgment, which, when coupled with the build-measure-learn formula, can lift a company out of
mediocrity.

   WORK IT OUT

   Ten Ways to Pivot

   Read this article from Forbes.com to see more examples of the kinds of pivots entrepreneurs can make:
   https://www.forbes.com/sites/martinzwilling/2011/09/16/top-10-ways-entrepreneurs-pivot-a-lean-
   startup/#3286d2422d2b.

      · Which one(s) would be best for your current business project? Why?
      · What product features would you have in place to ensure future growth without investing too

          much?

If a business is not growing, it is shrinking or stagnating.[17] A pivot, just like in basketball, requires one foot
down on the ground, and the other moving. This means that you keep what you have learned from customers
as your grounding foot but test out a different direction in which to move. Here are examples of famous
pivots:

  · Twitter transformed into a social media giant from a company called Odeo, a broadcast platform that was
      initially created to transmit video, sound, and podcasts. However, Apple beat them by launching iTunes
      podcasting, and it didn't make sense for the founders of the company to pursue that path, so they
      decided to create Twitter instead.

  · PayPal (formerly Confinity) allowed people to send electronic payments or "beam" payments from their
      Palm Pilots (first personal digital assistants created by Palm Computing) as well as from other devices. At
      that time, PayPal users registered a card number, downloaded the beam application, and were able to
      make transfer payments from one device to another. As technology changed, it merged with X.com to
      become the preferred payment method on Ebay, helping the company go mainstream.

  · Avon was created by a traveling book salesman who would add perfumes to his sales as perks for his
      female customers. Eventually, he realized that women were more interested in the perfumes than the
      books, so he started a new business from a small office in New York.

  · Fab.com, a design e-commerce website, was initially called Fabulis, and it started as a social media site to
      connect gay men. After the social media site failed, the co-founders took it into a new direction by selling
      their design picks for the best home goods, accessories, and clothing for everyone.[18]

17 Eric Ries, The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 149-178
18 Jason Nazar. "14 Famous Business Pivots." Forbes. October 8, 2013. https://www.forbes.com/sites/jasonnazar/2013/10/08/14-famous-
business-pivots/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                     401

WORK IT OUT

The Market for Experiences

Since the 2009 recession, people have spent more on experiences like travel and dining, rather than
goods. Instead of owning many products, people, especially Millennials and Gen Zers, are transforming
many industries. They prefer to travel by Uber and have an Airbnb experience where places and people
are more important than things. They would rather freelance than work for a corporation and are more
likely to try new foods and entertainment instead of accumulating possessions. This market trend has led
many large retailers to downsize or close all together. Smaller retailers have been hurt as well. However,
online retailers, home stores, and grocery chains have remained largely immune to the changes in
buying habits.

  · If you were a specialty retailer that focused on selling sports clothing and gear, and had several
      regional stores around the country, how would you pivot your business to avoid slowing sales?

  · Create a step-by-step list of your main strategies and how each would help avoid closing down your
      business.

You may wonder, how many times can a company pivot? Ries likes to use a runway analogy: You must
measure how long you have until your company can achieve its goals, and whether you fail to lift (burn
through all your cash resources) or have a liftoff (generate sales, sign ups, add new customers). The runway
can be calculated by taking the amount of cash that is in the bank and dividing that by how much is being
spent or drained on that balance. So if your company has $550,000 in the bank, and it drains or burns $50,000
per month, then you have a projected time of 11 months (550,000/50,000). A way to slow down the cash
drain--and to extend the runway--is to cut some costs or ask investors for additional cash.[19]

There are also different types of pivots for different needs. Table 10.2 shows ten pivots an entrepreneur can
make according to feedback.

    Pivot                                            Types of Pivots[20]
  Strategy                                                          Description
Zoom-in
Zoom-out    A product's single feature becomes a whole product.
            This is the reverse of zoom-in. A single feature is not enough for a customer, so the product
Customer    needs added features.
segment     There is a need to change the customer segment, as the one studied is not representative
            of who will buy the product at a larger scale.

Table 10.2 Eric Ries outlines these ten pivot strategies in The Lean Startup.

19 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011), 160.
20 Eric Ries. The Lean Startup (New York: Crown Business, 2011).
402                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

    Pivot                                               Types of Pivots
  Strategy                                                            Description
Customer
need          Feedback from customers shows that the problem solved is not important. The product
Platform      needs to be repositioned, or a new product needs to be created to solve a real problem.
              A change from an application to a platform or the other way around is needed. Startups
Business      usually begin with what is called a "killer app" for their platform, which later becomes a
architecture  way for third parties to create their own products.
Value         This is a change from high margin, low volume to low margin, high volume. This happens in
capture       business-to-business (B2B) and business-to-customer (B2C), respectively.
Engine of     These are changes in monetization or capturing value (raising capital).
growth
Channel       A startup changes its engine of growth (sticky, paid, or viral paid growth models for
              revenue). Usually, the company requires a change in the way it collects revenue.
Technology    Distribution channels are changed when the product requires faster or broader alternatives
              to reach consumers. The Internet has become a great disruptor of channels.
              Sometimes achieving a solution that serves an existing customer through cheaper means
              occurs when other technology is used (new production equipment, new software, etc.). This
              is more common with established businesses.

Table 10.2 Eric Ries outlines these ten pivot strategies in The Lean Startup.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Nintendo

     Nintendo could have gone sour in the gaming world had it not made a fateful pivot at a stark time.
     Created in 1889 (surprising, right?) in Kyoto, Japan, Nintendo manufactured "hanafuda," or flower cards
     (pictured in Figure 10.5) (a) used to play card games. It was humming along until the card game industry
     started to decline in the 1960s. Fusajiro Yamauchi, founder of Nintendo, tried to move into other markets
     by also providing hotel and taxi services. These pivots proved unsuccessful choices, and Nintendo almost
     closed its doors. However, it continued to manufacture its cards, which now had a plastic coating, and,
     thanks to a deal with Disney, had moved into the character cards market.

     Still, the company hobbled along until, thankfully, one of the line assembly engineers created a device
     that would reboot sales. He designed a toy called the Ultra Hand, which children could manipulate to
     reach objects far and away. After successfully selling a million units, the company rebranded itself as
     Nintendo Games and entered the growing toy market.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                   403

Their foray into video games found its first success with the release of the Color TV Block Breaker game
in 1977 (pictured in Figure 10.5 (b)). In 1981, when technology was changing the gaming industry,
Nintendo created Donkey Kong, and later in the 1980s, Mario Brothers. Thanks to this great pivot,
Nintendo is now worth over $22 billion and continues to thrive as one of the top gaming companies in
the world.[21]

   Figure 10.5 Nintendo started as a small company that created (a) Hanafuda cards and (b) the Color TV
   Block Breaker. Today Nintendo is one of the largest companies in the gaming industry valued at over $22
   billion. (credit (a): modification of "Koi-Koi Setup" by "Aldaron"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY-SA 3.0;
   credit (b): modification of "Nintendo-Color-TV-Game-Blockbreaker-FL"by "Evan-Amos"/Wikimedia
   Commons, Public Domain)

 10.2 Why Early Failure Can Lead to Success Later

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, students will be able to:

  · Determine several reasons for business failure and explore strategies to overcome them
  · Understand the root of fear of failure
  · Learn to spot signs of fear of failure and take steps to overcome it

Your goal in your venture is to achieve success--ideally, fairly quickly--but most successful entrepreneurs
experience some failures along the way. While these setbacks can be discouraging, they provide lessons and
experiences that can lead to eventual success. Whether a new business is a retail store, restaurant, hair salon,
consulting company, tech firm, or manufacturing plant, the truth is that many businesses fail within the first
couple of years. According to Bloomberg, only 20 percent of new businesses find success within their first
eighteen months.[22] Data from entrepreneur.com and the Small Business Administration suggest that only 30
percent of new ventures succeed to the ten-year mark.[23],[24] For women and minorities, the percentages are

21 Mary McCoy. "5 Cases of Companies That Successfully Pivoted Business Models." Continuum. July 21, 2015. https://www.continuum.net/
blog/5-cases-of-companies-that-successfully-pivoted-business-models
22 Eric T. Wagner. "Five Reasons 8 out of 10 Businesses Fail." Forbes. September 12, 2013. https://www.forbes.com/sites/ericwagner/2013/09/
12/five-reasons-8-out-of-10-businesses-fail/#1c5fbca26978
23 Patrick Henry. "Why Some Startups Succeed (and Why Most Fail)." Entrepreneur. February 18, 2017. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
288769
24 "Frequently Asked Questions." US Small Business Administration Office of Advocacy. June 2016. https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/
advocacy/SB-FAQ-2016_WEB.pdf
404  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

even lower. Success and longevity are possible, of course, but it takes a lot of work, and sometimes it takes a
second or third try.

Entrepreneurs recognize that failure is part of the success of being a business owner. Business failure is the
ending of a business due to the lack of goal attainment, which can mean low levels of revenue and profits, or
not meeting investors' expectations. Business failure can result in the loss of assets--such as revenue,
equipment, and capital--and can cause trauma for the business owner. However, these failures often help
entrepreneurs improve the outcomes for their next business, as they have now learned valuable lessons that
can be applied to new projects.

As Jack Ma, billionaire founder of Alibaba (the biggest and most profitable online retailer in China) said, "No
matter what one does, regardless of failure or success, the experience is a form of success in itself."[25] Ma
experienced many failures--including being rejected from job opportunities and universities he wanted to
attend, and having his pitch rejected by all but one person in a room full of friends. But he persevered,
founded Alibaba, learned as he went, and today runs China's largest online retailer with almost $24 billion in
revenue.[26]

Another company, Quirky, launched by Ben Kaufman in 2009, was an initial failure. Quirky was a platform that
allowed inventers to submit their ideas to a panel of Quirky experts who would then manufacture the product
at a low price and sell it to different markets. Initially, Quirky gained $185 million in funding and had support
partnerships from Amazon, Bed Bath & Beyond, and Best Buy. Thousands of people flocked to the site and
submitted their inventions to get seen and voted on. Unfortunately, Quirky struggled to sell many of the
products at a sustainable profit margin and filed for bankruptcy in 2015 after investors stopped funding the
venture. Fortunately, one of its businesses, the smart-home business section, was spun off and sold as Wink in
September 2017. The company was rebooted by a new set of entrepreneurs with a better business model.[27]

Common Contributors to Failure

There are some common reasons for failure that often combine to end a business. However, there are often
ways to prevent these failures from happening. CB Insights, a company that mines and analyzes data for
companies and uses machine learning to help them answer complicated strategic questions, researched the
factors that contributed to the failures of 101 startups. Figure 10.6 shows some of the main factors they
identified in their research.

25 Zach Ho. "Jack Ma: If You're Still Poor at 35, You Deserve It!" Vulcan Post. April 15, 2014. https://vulcanpost.com/7702/jack-ma-youre-still-
poor-35-deserve/
26 Zach Ho. "Jack Ma: If You're Still Poor at 35, You Deserve It!" Vulcan Post. April 15, 2014. https://vulcanpost.com/7702/jack-ma-youre-still-
poor-35-deserve/
27 Jessica Sylvester. "The Rise and Fall of Quirky: The Startup That Bet Big on the Genius of Regular Folks." New York Magazine. September 13,
2015. http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2015/09/they-were-quirky.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  405

Figure 10.6 Startups that falter identify some common obstacles to success. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

In the following discussion, we expand on some of these reasons for failure and offer advice on how to avoid
them. Considering the following failures will give you an idea of what may go wrong in a business but will also
help you spot and correct them before you launch.

Marketing Failure

Some of the most common failures result from marketing missteps.

  · Lack of differentiation of product or service. Creating or running a company with a me-too mentality and
      without a clear unique selling proposition or difference from other established businesses can be
      detrimental. Answering questions such as "Why should customers leave other companies to buy my
      product?" "What is a benefit I provide that no one else does?" and "If I open a yogurt parlor in a
      commercial area, what will help my business differentiate itself from all the other yogurt, ice cream,
      dessert, and fast food places?" can help create ways to be special rather than a me-too business. This also
      needs to be defined in your mission, within your products and their benefits, and a clearly defined
      competitive advantage that can be translated into a superior value proposition. The chapters on
      Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales and Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity discuss competitive
      advantages and value propositions in more detail.

  · Missing the right customer. Not reaching the target market can lead to failure. Perhaps for your travel tour
406                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

      business, you targeted single people ages 18-34 who like to experience travel in a different way, but
      maybe your true target--the people who want to book your tours--are couples with children and those
      50 and over. You would have sent out marketing communications to the wrong age group. Or, the right
      message is not being conveyed and your positioning is off, preventing you from connecting with your
      true consumer. Conducting market research as discussed in Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales and
      testing your communication with various targets can help better define your customer.

Management Failure

These are some typical management challenges that can prove detrimental.

  · Passion wanes or not the right business. Sometimes the reason a business fails is due to a simple reason:
      The founder has lost excitement over the business and is no longer interested in making it succeed. Other
      times, the problem may stem from not having the right focus or idea, which can come from a lack of
      awareness about trends in the market. Joel Delgado, a young entrepreneur who started El Paso's first
      escape room called El Paso Disaster Room 915 in 2015, developed this business with three of his friends
      right after college. Although the business was very well received by young people who wanted this new
      form of entertainment, a few years later, he decided to close down the business and pursue a career in
      teaching. His passion had waned. Sometimes, entrepreneurs get bored with their startup, but there are
      ways to keep the business exciting by changing the product offerings.

  · Fighting founders. Not agreeing over the strategies and direction of a business can deter companies from
      moving forward. If the founders are not working together and disagree too much, this can help dissolve
      the business quickly. Differing points of view can be healthy for a business, as these can bring other
      complementing perspectives, but when conflict doesn't get resolved, it can be difficult to continue moving
      forward. Some business partners have found themselves ousted by their business partners because the
      relationships have suffered a deep strain. This happened to Steve Jobs in 1985 when he was let go by his
      own company. Often, it is difficult to assess when conflict will arise, so it is recommended that business
      partners work with people who have the same love for the business and its core values, even if they bring
      different strengths and temperaments to the table. This may reduce fights and sustain relationships.
      Having a contract in place that defines who is in charge of what part of the business, their compensation,
      and what happens if anyone departs, is a good way to ensure that the investment won't be lost if partners
      decide to part ways.

  · Lack of planning. One of the surest roads to failure is to not have a business plan or marketing plan. Even
      using the lean startup method requires some sort of planning before embarking on the process. Planning
      helps business owners flesh out ideas and understand the business better. Following the business plan in
      Business Model and Plan and the marketing plan in Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales can help solidify
      where the business is headed, whether its viable, and what resources are required to make it work. For
      example, imagine a business owner who opens a restaurant in an already-crowded market only to realize
      how much competition existed in the area. If the owner had researched and planned ahead, the venture
      could have been differentiated through the type of food offered, the location, or different promotional
      tactics to build clientele. Failure to plan in a situation like this can result in struggling to keep afloat and
      can lead to successive challenges. For example, the owner might raise prices to compensate for lower-
      than-expected revenue, but higher prices may drive away an already fragile customer base, and the
      venture may not be sustainable.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  407

Financial Failure

Cash flow, debt, and capital are just some of the many financial factors that play a large role in startup success
or failure.

  · Lack of cash. Lacking cash to operate the business can trample its operations and lead to a quick decline.
      If there is no cash flow, it can also indicate that perhaps the business model is not working. For example,
      consider our fictional restaurant owner. A lack of customers means a lack of cash flowing in as revenue.
      Loans can provide some assistance while working to build the clientele, but loans can go only so far. If the
      business doesn't grow and develop a sustainable cash flow, its ability to operate will come to an end.

  · Too much debt. Significant debt can hurt a business because it needs to pay back its lenders. In the
      previous example, if the restaurant owner takes on too much debt, it may struggle to pay it back due to its
      lack of cash flow.

  · Lack of capital. Not having sufficient capital can deter the business from expanding or even from meeting
      customer demand. Having a clear business plan can help determine the financial requirements, which are
      the estimated sales and profits required for the successful attainment of goals. Financing for the business
      can come from an entrepreneur's own savings, bank loans, investors, and even friends and family. Having
      the right funding to start or grow a business can make or break the business. For instance, our restaurant
      owner would need enough capital to invest in kitchen equipment, appliances, and furniture to start the
      business. Undercapitalization in a startup could shut the business down before it even gets up and
      running. Once the business is running, ensuring that financial goals are met through metrics such as
      sales and profits can help prevent shortages of cash flow, which is essential to keeping a business alive.

Innovation Failure

Innovation can be tricky because it requires creativity, risk, and often some subjectivity, taking into
consideration feelings and intuition in decision making. Lack of innovation and missteps in innovation can be
obstacles to success.

  · Lack of innovation or failing to change effectively. Companies that don't change their strategies, technology,
      or products run the risk of jeopardizing the business. Similarly, those that do change but not with the
      right adjustments risk failure. The build-measure-learn loop can help avoid these pitfalls by discerning
      what consumers really want and need by asking for their feedback.

Blockbuster, an instant hit out of the gates in the 1980s, failed to innovate, or pivot its business model, and
went out of business. The video store revolutionized the media and movie industry by displaying empty boxes
of its titles on shelves categorized by genre (the VHS tapes were kept behind the counter) and keeping late
hours for night owls and last-minute weekenders wanting to catch a flick. Using a computer system to track
videos as they were rented, most of its profit was made by the fees charged for late movie returns. In 1987, the
company was bought by Wayne Huizenga, an American entrepreneur who owned several businesses in
different industries and who developed Blockbuster into a successful business by modeling McDonald's
approach. The enterprise grew from twenty locations to over 9,000 locations. Blockbuster was then acquired in
1993 by media giant Viacom in an intricate transaction. As streaming and related technology entered the
market, Blockbuster failed to innovate by not making necessary pivots to its delivery of entertainment and so
could not compete with new technology. Over the ensuing decade, it became more common to see
Blockbuster stores with "store closing" banners, as shown in Figure 10.7, than it did to see a thriving store.
There were other reasons why Blockbuster failed. Embedded with the lack of technology was the lack of
fostering a culture of creativity from all of its employees, which hindered innovation. It lacked visionary
408  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

leadership. It needed a culture of collaboration and teamwork to facilitate communication with stakeholders,
such as employees, customers, and upper administration. Finally, it closed all but one of its stores in 2013.[28]
By then, Netflix had completely changed the landscape of digital streaming services and left Blockbuster
without a ticket to the show.

Figure 10.7 Blockbuster failed to change its distribution channel to cater to new generations of movie
watchers. (credit: modification of "Blockbuster Store Closing, Ypsilanti Township, Michigan" by Dwight
Burdette/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 3.0)

   ARE YOU READY?

   Proactively Considering Failure

   Consider the list of reasons for failure presented in Figure 10.6. Come up with solutions to each of those
   reasons, focusing on a business of your choice.

      · How would you avoid the failure?
      · What strategies or goals can you have in place to avoid the pitfalls of failure?

Fear of Failure

Even the fear of failure can be enough to lead a business to fail. Fear can freeze entrepreneurs and force them
into a corner instead of advancing their businesses; it can freeze them from reaching potential clients and
being profitable. When companies struggle, the owners may experience many emotions, such as pain, grief,
shame, humiliation, self-blame, anger, and hopelessness. Business failure is hard to separate from personal
failure, as the business is often associated with the identity of the entrepreneur. Managing these emotions can

28 Jeanine Poggi. "Blockbuster's Rise and Fall: The Long, Rewinding Road." TheStreet. September 23, 2010. https://www.thestreet.com/story/
10867574/1/the-rise-and-fall-of-blockbuster-the-long-rewinding-road.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                                                     409

help business owners heal and continue moving forward to their next business. Reaching out for help to a
trusted mentor or therapist can help provide guidance in dealing with these feelings.

There are likewise many stories of entrepreneurs who, despite their fears, continued working toward their
goal and were successful. They kept going, determined that fear would not run their lives. Tony Robbins,
author and serial entrepreneur, says that people are afraid of failure because it is painful, and people try to
avoid pain and suffering at all costs. "Failure," he says, "is the ultimate loss."[29] But overcoming fear doesn't
have to be painful if you understand it as a program or detrimental thinking running in your mind. People are
hardwired to believe they are not good enough or can't do it. These patterns can be embedded in people's
minds and can deter creativity and success. Some signs of fear of failure are listed in Table 10.3.

                                                             Signs of Fear of Failure

     · Believing you are not good enough, you don't belong, or you're not smart enough to be successful.
     · Feeling that you have to be perfect in everything you do and have a need for approval.
     · Not wanting to adapt or be flexible. Not wanting to take on difficult clients or projects.
     · Feeling anxious about performing, leaving things for later, and not following through with plans.

Table 10.3 Fear can freeze up entrepreneurs. The important thing is to let go of old thinking patterns and
adopt a positive outlook. It also helps to move forward despite fear and have mentors who can help deal with
negative thoughts and emotions.

Fear of failure often stems from thoughts of inadequacy or a belief that you don't have the experience and
skills necessary to succeed, that you're not smart enough, and so on. Thoughts like these can prevent a person
from starting or advancing their business. Individuals with a high level of stress about failure tend to lack self-
esteem, have anxiety, be perfectionists, and tend to avoid new or unfamiliar things at all costs.[30] Fortunately,
these traits and behaviors can be controlled and conquered.

Most entrepreneurs will tell you that, at some point, they had to fight their fears before they had any success.

Most entrepreneurs who succeed will tell you that behind every success there were many failures. Many
people in general think that those who are great and successful were born that way. But that is simply not
true.

Take Michael Jordan, for example. One of the most successful basketball players of all time, with five
championship rings and thousands of points and assists, Jordan often said that he owed his success to failure.
"I've missed more than 9,000 shots in my career. I've lost almost 300 games. Twenty-six times I've been
trusted to take the game-winning shot and missed. I've failed over and over and over again in my life. And that
is why I succeed."[31] Michael Jordan, a kid who didn't make the varsity team in his high school, got his act
together and propelled himself to stardom because he didn't give up when he failed. The same goes for
entrepreneurs: Just because it didn't work the first time, it doesn't mean that they can't try again.

James Dyson, founder and inventor of the Dyson vacuum cleaner, had failed 5,126 times before he came up
with his Dual Cyclone vacuum cleaner in 1993, fifteen years after he created the first version. When asked
about how failure helped him, he said, "Failure is interesting--it's part of making progress. You never learn

29 Team Tony. "Overcoming the Fear of Failure." Tony Robbins. n.d. https://www.tonyrobbins.com/stories/overcoming-fear-failure/
30 Mind Tools Content Team. "Overcoming Fear of Failure." MindTools. n.d. https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/fear-of-failure.htm
31 The Greatest Team. "Quote: Michael Jordan on Success through Failure." The Greatist. June 10, 2012. https://greatist.com/fitness/quote-
michael-jordan-success-through-failure
410  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

from success, but you do learn from failure. When I created the Dual Cyclone vacuum, I started out with a
simple idea, and by the end, it got more audacious and interesting. I got to a place I never could have
imagined because I learned what worked and didn't work."[32] Dyson also says that he continuously embraces
risk and failure, and allows his employees to explore that: "Nothing beats the thrill of invention. Letting people
go out and try their ideas, getting them totally involved, and unleashing new thinking. They're not bound to
any methodology--in fact, the stranger and riskier, the better."[33]

Fear of Failure around the World

According to research, fear of failure is influenced by people's upbringing and cultural backgrounds. The
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM), an organization that researches entrepreneurship around the
world, has studied this topic. According to its 2018-2019 report, Americans are not as afraid to fail in business
as people from many other countries are.[34] This report includes those who would like to start a business but
feel stuck because of fear of failure. Fear of failure is highest in Greece, Italy, Russia, and Cyprus, and lowest in
Latin America and Africa. Usually, the fear is lowest in countries where there are few jobs and where people
have to become entrepreneurial to survive.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   GEM Data

   Go to the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor at http://www.gemconsortium.org/ and look up the report
   on entrepreneurship for the United States. Compare it with two other countries.

      · What are the differences and similarities between the countries?
      · What can you do to address some of the factors in the US that hinder entrepreneurial development?

          What can be done to improve entrepreneurial conditions in the two other countries you examined?

GEM also reports that women are usually more afraid of failure than men and show less confidence in their
abilities (Figure 10.8). The research also shows that women tend to open ventures in consumer industries,
whereas male-driven startups are often in manufacturing and tech sectors, and men receive more capital and
incentives to open those businesses. This can be attributed to the lack of women in science and tech
industries.[35] Other studies corroborate GEM's findings, showing that women are more afraid to start a
business, they don't receive as much funding, and feel they have to prove themselves more than men to be
taken seriously.[36]

32 Nadia Goodman. "James Dyson on Using Failure to Drive Success." Entrepreneur. November 5, 2012. https://www.entrepreneur.com/
article/224855
33 Madison Malone-Kircher. "Dyson on the 5,126 Vacuums That Didn't Work--and the One That Finally Did." New York Magazine. November
22, 2016. http://nymag.com/vindicated/2016/11/james-dyson-on-5-126-vacuums-that-didnt-work-and-1-that-did.html
34 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor. "Fear of Failure." 2018-2019. GEM. https://www.gemconsortium.org/report
35 Catherine Clifford. "Lack of Confidence, Fear of Failure Hold Women Back from Being Entrepreneurs." Entrepreneur. July 31, 2013.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/227631
36 Ruth Simon. "Women Started Smaller Percentage of Businesses in 2014." The Wall Street Journal. March 13, 2015. https://www.wsj.com/
articles/women-started-smaller-percentage-of-u-s-businesses-in-2014-1431560888

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  411

Figure 10.8 Research shows that women tend to be more afraid of failure and have less confidence in their
abilities than men. Getting support from business organizations, programs, and mentors can help women
build their self-assurance to begin or grow an enterprise. (credit: "Accomplished Achievement Agreement" by
"rawpixel"/Pixabay, CC0)

What Failure Teaches You

Some would argue that, in reality, failure does not exist. There is only perceived failure, or obstacles that can
become steps up the ladder to a better outcome. The importance in failing lies in learning how to get back up
again. As Eric Ries dove into failure with his first company and felt the deep pain and disappointment of having
to let go of an unsuccessful idea, he applied his lessons to create his new virtual reality company IMVU. IMVU
then became a very successful experiment from which he derived the lean startup method. He was able to
pinpoint his shortcomings and find ways to better himself and his performance. With his new company, he
was able to get the product to market faster without it being perfect and ask for much-needed feedback from
customers that he hadn't received before.

Converting Lessons Learned to Success

Most successful business owners will tell you that success didn't come to them easily. They had to persevere in
pursuit of their goals to attain them. Converting their failures to lessons often led them to higher success than
they had imagined. Entrepreneurs who can turn their obstacles into positive lessons can resurrect from failure.

Take Evan Williams, a visionary who launched a software tool to help users easily publish blogs. That venture,
Blogger.com, was launched in 1999 and purchased by Google in 2003. The next year, Williams decided to
establish Odeo, a platform for creating and sharing podcasts. Apple had been working on a similar platform
and shared it earlier on iTunes to the demise of Odeo. Williams didn't want to go head to head with iTunes, as
this could potentially destroy his company, so he found a way to go in a different direction and establish a new
412  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

way of sharing status updates and other data. Williams took that failure, and with a few friends, co-founded
Twitter. We all know how that worked out: Twitter is one of the most popular microblogging tech platforms.[37]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Check out Evan Williams's TedTalk (https://openstax.org/l/52TedTalkWill) where he takes you through
   iterations from actual Twitter users.

Kathryn Minshew, shown in Figure 10.9, also experienced failure but has learned from it. In 2010, she quit her
job to create Pretty Young Professionals (PYP). She invested $25,000 of her own money to develop a
networking platform for women who were smart and passionate about their careers. After a few months, she
and the three other co-founders started to disagree on some issues, including their approach to advertising.
As they hadn't completely formalized the ownership of PYP, two of the founders lost their investments,
including Minshew. After experiencing the loss of her investment, her friendships, and the original idea,
Minshew persevered with a new opportunity and established The Muse. This platform is similar to PYP but
added job listings, workshops, and advice. Currently, the site has over 4 million users and is a major
competitor of LinkedIn. Minshew didn't let her first disappointment prevent her from starting a new venture.
She applied the lessons learned in building the original platform to the creation of a new one--with the right
contracts and right people in place.[38] Minshew now speaks at business conferences and events, sharing her
mistakes and how she used them to lift herself up to launch a new venture properly. She hopes that her
experience helps other entrepreneurs avoid the pitfalls she went through so they can be as successful.

37 Paige Cooper. "28 Twitter Statistics All Marketers Need to Know in 2019." Hootsuite. January 16, 2019. https://blog.hootsuite.com/twitter-
statistics/
38 Doria Lavagnino. "Muse CEO and Co-Founder Kathryn Minshew: Journey of an Entrepreneur." Centasi. August 24, 2017.
https://centsai.com/entrepreneurship-blogs/muse-ceo-co-founder-kathryn-minshew-journey-entrepreneur/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  413

Figure 10.9 Kathryn Minshew, co-founder of The Muse, used the lessons from her first business's failure and
built a successful platform for professional networking. (credit: modification of "Kathryn Minshew" by
"Techcrunch"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.0)

Being able to learn from different types of failure is as important as experiencing success because you get to
know your strengths and how to leverage them. Failures can be seen as stepping stones rather than
embarrassments. Feeling comfortable takes practice. Table 10.4 shares several tips on dealing with these
dynamics.

                                                Tips for Converting Lessons to Successes

     · Let go of the fear of failure: It is not as bad as you think.
     · Experiment with your business and try new things; take risks if necessary.
     · Go for it, even if you're not ready. Listen to your gut.
     · Ask for feedback, and don't be afraid to hear negative things.
     · Be willing to change when things are not working out.
     · Learn from others and be willing to ask for help.

Table 10.4

Coping with Fear

When coping with fear of failure, there are two strategies that entrepreneurs can use. The first way to reduce
fear of failure is to modify your business strategy by changing the target outcomes for your business. Instead
of aiming to make $50,000 in the first six months, you can be open to the idea of a leaner start, learning about
your customers and how best to serve them. Learning/growth goals can be just as valuable as hitting a
revenue target in terms of overall success and longevity. Also, if a goal is not met, don't consider it a total
414                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

failure: Refocus and ask yourself what you learned from the experience and how to apply that knowledge to a
revised goal. More than likely you will find this experience has enhanced your toolbox to help you make
changes within the business or start a new one.

A second way to reduce high stress is to practice some sort of meditation or breathing exercise that can help
lower the anxiety created by fearful thinking. Reaching out to a mentor, support group, therapist, or counselor
can also help alleviate fearful thinking.

 10.3 The Challenging Truth about Business Ownership

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the pros and cons of business ownership before you launch
  · Understand current trends in entrepreneurship in the US
  · Determine the challenges women face in entrepreneurship and what resources they can use to overcome

      them
  · Determine the challenges minority entrepreneurs face and resources available for them

People usually have different reasons for starting a business. Some of the reasons--other than the idea
they've hit upon--include the freedom to set their own hours, spend more time with family, be their own boss,
and make money. However, in many cases, they will probably work more than planned, be challenged to find
the work-life balance, face fears and doubts, and perhaps struggle to make ends meet for the first few months
or years. Prior to launch, they will need the support of family, friends, and mentors to understand the
limitations of time and the pressures they face.

Pros and Cons of Business Ownership

Table 10.5 lists the positives and negatives that should be considered prior to opening a business and
throughout its operation. Positives of entrepreneurship include having the freedom and independence to
expand your skills and develop your own ideas. Instead of working for another organization on projects and
ideas that are not your own, you get to serve people in a way that feels right for you. You also have the
opportunity to make a profit and have a better lifestyle. Having the freedom to set your own schedule and
work at your own pace can be very satisfying as well.

On the opposite side, those "freedoms" translate into being in charge of the business and the significant
responsibility that entails. You must resolve issues that arise every day, such as dealing with employees,
customers, production, marketing, and financing, among others. Most of the time, you wear many hats,
especially during the venture's early lifecycle stages, and most entrepreneurs usually work more hours than
anticipated. In addition, you must deal with losses and risk if things don't go well. The important thing to k eep
in mind is that all of the negative aspects have solutions and can even be prevented if planning, mentorship,
and a good support system are in place, which can alleviate many of the stresses that entrepreneurs
experience. Also, having attainable goals in creating awareness of the business, number of clients, and sales or
profit can be beneficial in alleviating some of that pressure.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                      415

                                         Pros and Cons of Business Ownership

            Pros                                                              Cons

· Being autonomous, being your own boss,            · Being in charge, resolving issues, hiring/firing
   expanding ideas, enjoying creative freedom          employees, and wearing many hats

· Lifestyle, making your own schedule, flexibility  · Dealing with stress, time constraints, and
· Satisfied with career                                management
· Serving customers and employees
· Profit                                            · Lack of focus, loss of passion
· Being known in the community                      · Customer and employee complaints
                                                    · Money/cash flow problems
                                                    · Must deal with losses and financial risk

Table 10.5

Entrepreneurship and Competition in the US

Entrepreneurs operate in an unbelievably competitive landscape. Although competition helps create better
products and services, it also places many stresses on a business owner who must compete with new, more
flexible businesses that may have lower prices and better products. As shown in Figure 10.10, the number of
new establishments that are less than one year old has increased over the past two decades from 1994 to
2015. There was a dip during the 2009 recession, but the trend continued after 2011, and the number of
businesses increased again. This means more competition for businesses that are already established.
416  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.10 The number of new businesses usually rises and falls with the economy. This graph shows that
the number of new establishments has risen in recent years.[39] (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
The number of jobs created by these young establishments has also decreased in this period, which affirms
the likelihood that entrepreneurs are wearing many hats in their own businesses. Figure 10.11 charts this
trend.

39 Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Entrepreneurship and the US Economy." United States Department of Labor. April 28, 2016. https://www.bls.gov/
bdm/entrepreneurship/entrepreneurship.htm
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  417

Figure 10.11 While the number of new business establishments has risen, the number of jobs and the
survival of businesses (following) have decreased during the same period.[40] (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

As you've learned, only about 20-30 percent of businesses succeed to the five- or ten-year mark. Figure 10.12
shows that only half of businesses survive to the five-year mark, and only 20 percent are sustained for two
decades. Their failures may be due to a number of factors such as cash flow problems, lack of passion, lack of
support, lack of innovation, difficulty adapting to new technologies or customer demand, and environmental
factors that can influence a business as well, such as the economy, trends, regulations, or sociocultural
changes. Therefore, it's important for entrepreneurs to research their internal as well as their external
environments before launching. The chapters on Identifying Entrepreneurial Opportunity and Entrepreneurial
Marketing and Sales take a look at such research, as it pertains to both the entrepreneur and the marketing
environment respectively.

40 Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Entrepreneurship and the US Economy." United States Department of Labor. April 28, 2016. https://www.bls.gov/
bdm/entrepreneurship/entrepreneurship.htm
418  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.12 Survival rates of businesses from 1994-2015. This graph shows that as years go by, fewer
businesses stay open.[41] (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Challenges of Business Ownership for Women

Challenges for business owners can be many. Female entrepreneurs, however, can face additional hardships.
These can range from not being able to secure financing for their businesses, having a hard time breaking into
an industry, and dealing with fears of starting and growing a business, and not being taken seriously.

Current research shows that the importance of female entrepreneurship is key to economic success. Women
own 40 percent of the country's businesses,[42] generating over $1.4 trillion in sales.[43] Women entrepreneurs
are closing the gender gap, as their ventures have grown substantially in the past few years. In the past two
years, women entrepreneurship rates have gone up by 10 percent each year, compared to men's 5 percent
growth. This surge has been spurred by increased available resources, including mentorship, funding, and
programs to help women succeed.[44] Nonetheless, there are still great challenges to overcome, as women
move into the next generation of business ownership. Some of the main challenges are:

  · Difficulty gaining entry in certain industries. Women have made great strides in business, but they still face
      many obstacles, especially in certain industries. Women tend to be underrepresented in specific areas,
      notably in the tech industry, where they run only 9 percent of businesses.[45] Women tend to be underpaid

41 Bureau of Labor Statistics. "Entrepreneurship and the US Economy." United States Department of Labor. April 28, 2016. https://www.bls.gov/
bdm/entrepreneurship/entrepreneurship.htm
42 Bernard Meyer. "Business Woman Challenges, Examples and Opportunities in 2107 and Beyond." InvoiceBerry. June 19, 2017.
https://blog.invoiceberry.com/2017/06/business-woman-challenges-examples-opportunities/
43 National Association of Women Business Owners (NAWBO). "Women Business Owner Statistics." NAWBO. 2017. https://www.nawbo.org/
resources/women-business-owner-statistics
44 Elaine Pofeldt. "Why Women Entrepreneurs Will Be the Economic Force to Reckon with in 2017." CNBC. February 28, 2017.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/28/why-women-entrepreneurs-will-be-economic-force-to-reckon-with-in-2017.html
45 Sahil Raina. "Research: The Gender Gap in Startup Success Disappears When Women Fund Women." Harvard Business Review. July 19, 2016.
https://hbr.org/2016/07/research-the-gender-gap-in-startup-success-disappears-when-women-fund-women

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  419

   in tech positions, they experience sexism, and they are often passed over for promotions, especially if
   they have families with young children. So, if there are no female role models, it is difficult for women to
   follow an entrepreneurial path that is already full of obstacles. Although young girls and women desire to
   study and expand their careers, historically, they have not been presented with the opportunities and
   encouragement to do so, especially in STEM. By the time they get into college, the number of women in
   these careers--which can be rich in entrepreneurial opportunities--is very small. However, more efforts
   are being made today to support young girls interested in scientific, technological, and mathematical
   careers.
· Lower sales and fewer employees. Women overall tend to struggle more to keep their businesses afloat, as
   they have fewer employees,[46] less revenue, and less profit than male-owned businesses. Only 2 percent
   of female-owned businesses make over $1 million in sales. Male-owned businesses, on the other hand,
   are 3.5 times more likely to hit that revenue target.[47] Some of the reasons why women experience this is
   because women may enter entrepreneurship part time, often striving to sustain a decent family work
   balance, which is difficult when children, especially young children, are part of the equation. This set-up
   usually includes one employee, who is the entrepreneur herself, and she may have attained her goals
   without wanting to make millions. Time, flexibility, and work-life balance can be reasons women become
   entrepreneurs, and they are happy with their goals of making some money while taking care of their
   family and household. Lack of experience in business or managing a family business, and lack of access to
   capital are also reasons for the lower metrics.[48]
· Less access to capital. Regardless of their success and prowess, women still have a harder time securing
   funding for their businesses. A recent Kauffman Foundation survey determined that more than 72
   percent of women don't have the access to capital they need.[49] Nirupama Mallavarupu, founder of
   MobileArq says, "As a woman entrepreneur with a focus on helping non-profits and schools, it has been
   difficult to get investors. We have turned this around by pursuing customer acquisition organically and
   relying on direct revenues instead of investment growth."[50] Women usually don't ask for funding, or if
   they do but are turned down, they turn to funding from family and friends. They are more likely to finance
   their ventures this way than men.[51]
· Not taken seriously. Sometimes it's not that women don't have the opportunities, money, or mentorships
   to start a business: Sometimes, women are just not taken seriously. Research by Freshbooks Accounting
   and Software firm and Research Now asked 2,700 entrepreneurs about gender discrimination and the
   wage gap that exist today. Thirty percent of women pointed out that they are not taken seriously as
   business owners, as they must work harder than their male counterparts and have to charge less to get a
   client.[52] Emily Harsh, owner of Heart Move Collective, comments in her blog, "Because I am in the fitness

46 Michael J. McManus. "Women's Business Ownership: Data from the 2012 Survey of Business Owners." US Small Business Administration
Office of Advocacy. May 31, 2017. https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/advocacy/Womens-Business-Ownership-in-the-US.pdf
47 Eilene Zimmerman. "Only 2% of Women-Owned Businesses Break the $1 Million Mark--Here's How to Be One of Them." Forbes. April 1,
2015. https://www.forbes.com/sites/eilenezimmerman/2015/04/01/only-2-of-women-owned-businesses-break-the-1-million-mark-heres-how-
to-be-one-of-them/#2a53233727a6
48 Robert W. Fairlie and Alicia M. Robb. "Gender Differences in Business Performance: Evidence from the Characteristics of Business Owners
Survey." SpringerLink. May 5, 2009. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s11187-009-9207-5
49 Elaine Pofeldt. "Why Women Entrepreneurs Will Be the Economic Force to Reckon with in 2017." CNBC. February 28, 2017.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/28/why-women-entrepreneurs-will-be-economic-force-to-reckon-with-in-2017.html
50 Bernard Meyer. "Business Woman Challenges, Examples and Opportunities in 2107 and Beyond." InvoiceBerry. June 19, 2017.
https://blog.invoiceberry.com/2017/06/business-woman-challenges-examples-opportunities/
51 Elaine Pofeldt. "Why Women Entrepreneurs Will Be the Economic Force to Reckon with in 2017." CNBC. February 28, 2017.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/02/28/why-women-entrepreneurs-will-be-economic-force-to-reckon-with-in-2017.html
52 "New Research from FreshBooks Discovers a 28% Wage Gap among Self-Employed Men and Women." FreshBooks. n.d.
https://www.freshbooks.com/press/data-research/women-in-the-
workforce-2018?ref=10400&utm_source=sas&utm_medium=affiliate&utm_campaign=314743&sscid=31k3_f8pv3
420  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

      industry and female, I am often not taken seriously as a professional. I think the number one most
      important thing you can do as a woman fighting to pave your own path is to continually stay
      authentic."[53]
  · Resources. Fortunately, there are many resources that women can take advantage of. Organizations such
      as the Women's Business Center of the Small Business Administration, the National Association for
      Women Owners, the Female Entrepreneur Association, Ladies Who Launch, Minority Business
      Development Agency, the National Association of Professional Women, and the Women's Business
      Enterprise National Council strive to help women succeed in all industries by providing loans and
      programs that prepare them for a competitive landscape. Mentoring by other women has also proven to
      be effective in women's success in entrepreneurship.[54] Having peers that can help and strong mentors
      can make a difference in the outcome of a business.

Other helpful tips to counteract the challenges facing women entrepreneurs include being assertive, being
authentic, networking, and developing a thick skin for rejections and other challenges. Facebook COO Sheryl
Sandberg, in her book Lean In, states that "being confident and believing in your own self-worth is necessary
to achieving your potential" and she encourages women entrepreneurs to ask themselves: "What would you
do if you weren't afraid?"[55]

Women bring great qualities to entrepreneurship such as strong leadership, as well as management, time,
multitasking, and listening skills. Women also have a collaborative approach to relationships that works well in
many industries.[56]

Challenges of Business Ownership for Minorities

Entrepreneurs from minority groups encounter additional challenges. Minority groups are a strong force in
the economy of the country, yet they still experience additional challenges that sometimes prevent them from
succeeding in their businesses. These can range from having lower capital access[57] due to little credit history,
small or nonexistent business networks, and lower business knowledge.[58] According to the Census Bureau,
minorities own about 29 percent of US businesses.[59]

Hispanics[60] comprise 17 percent of the population and own approximately four million (13%) companies in
the US with $661 billion in revenue. From 2007 to 2015, business revenue grew 88 percent for Hispanics, which
means that they have more power to employ more people to provide goods and services to a wider audience,
and to purchase from other vendors. Given its growth and current size, this group is vital to the health of the
economy.[61] Unfortunately, research shows that if measured by financial outcomes, Hispanics still struggle to
succeed in business ventures due to a lack of funding, less managerial/business education, and lack of

53 Bernard Meyer. "Business Woman Challenges, Examples and Opportunities in 2107 and Beyond." InvoiceBerry. June 19, 2017.
https://blog.invoiceberry.com/2017/06/business-woman-challenges-examples-opportunities/
54 Robin L. Laukhuf and Timothy A. Malone. "Women Entrepreneurs Need Mentors." International Journal of Evidence Based Coaching and
Mentoring 13(1): 70-86. 2015. http://ijebcm.brookes.ac.uk/documents/vol13issue1-paper-05.pdf
55 Sheryl Sanders. Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead. (New York: Knopf. March 12, 2013).
56 S. Mohan Kumara, H.S. Chandrika Mohana, Vijaya C., and Lokeshwari N. International Journal of Current Engineering and Technology (Special
Issue 1): 100-104. 2013. http://inpressco.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Paper20100-104.pdf
57 Minority Business Development Agency. "Access to Capital Is Still a Challenge for Minority Business Entrepreneurs." US Department of
Commerce: Minority Business Entrepreneur. March/April 2010. https://www.mbda.gov/news/blog/2010/07/access-capital-still-challenge-minority-
business-enterprises
58 David Kiger. "Minority Entrepreneurs Face Challenges in Business Development." Business 2 Community. April 2, 2016.
https://www.business2community.com/small-business/minority-entrepreneurs-face-challenges-business-development-01497508
59 Aleks Merkovich. "30 Insightful Small Business Statistics." FitSmallBusiness. March 18, 2019. https://fitsmallbusiness.com/small-business-
statistics/
60 "Of Hispanic or Latino Origin" as used in the 2010 Census refers to a person of Cuban, Mexican, Puerto Rican, South or Central American,
or other Spanish culture or origin regardless of race. https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-02.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                                                       421

mentorship.[62] A higher rate of foreign-born entrepreneurs can experience these challenges due to the lack of
networks and financial history in the country.[63]

African Americans make up 14 percent of the total US population, and their businesses represent about 7
percent of total businesses. Although they are opening businesses faster than their Caucasian counterparts,
their businesses, as well as Hispanic businesses, tend to have higher failure rates than Caucasian- and Asian-
owned businesses.[64] Similar to Hispanics, African Americans tend to lack funding, managerial/business
education, and mentorship.

Asian Americans make up 5 percent of the population and own just over 4 percent of the businesses in the
country. Although they are considered minorities, Asian Americans tend to be better educated and have more
access to capital than Hispanic Americans and African Americans.[65]

Organizations such as the Hispanic, Black, and Asian American Chambers, the Minority Business and
Development Agency (MBDA), and the Small Business Administration (SBA) have developed programs to help
minority entrepreneurs succeed in various ways. These organizations hold workshops once or twice a month
to provide helpful information and business plan templates so owners work through their preparation to
launch a venture. Chambers are also helpful in matching companies with banks for loans based on their needs
and industries. The 8a certification is also facilitated by the Chambers and the MBDA, and provides
disadvantaged businesses with an assistance program.

LINK TO LEARNING

Go to the MBDA's page on the 8(a) Business Development Program (https://openstax.org/l/52MBDA)
and read about the requirements and benefits of 8a certification. You can also see that the MBDA offers
access to grant and loan programs, and many other helpful resources.

Disadvantaged businesses are those that are small, owned by someone economically disadvantaged (a person
who has less than $250,000 in personal net worth, which includes assets such as cash, home, car, and real
estate minus liabilities such as mortgages, credit card debt, and car and bank loans), with an owner
demonstrating that the business can be successful. This program helps minority business owners access
finances, mentors, counselors, and management assistance, among other resources.[66] In addition to this
support, some organizations, such as the SBA, provide certifications on various business topics on marketing,
finance, accounting, management, and production that usually take the form of short classes for business
owners to acquire business acumen. These programs help entrepreneurs gain needed knowledge, grow

61 Geoscape. "Hispanic Businesses and Entrepreneurs Drive Growth in the New Economy: Third Annual Report." Geoscape. 2015.
https://ushcc.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/HispanicBusinessReport2015_Final_Sept19.pdf
62 Denisse Olivas. Entrepreneurship Success: A Hispanic Point of View. Center for Hispanic Entrepreneurship. University of Texas at El Paso.
Proceedings from the International Conference of Facets Doing Business in Emerging Markets. July 2016. https://www.utep.edu/
business/_Files/docs/cfhe/newentrepreneurship-success-presentation-cfhe.pdf
63 Geoscape. "Hispanic Businesses and Entrepreneurs Drive Growth in the New Economy: Third Annual Report." Geoscape. 2015.
https://ushcc.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/HispanicBusinessReport2015_Final_Sept19.pdf
64 "Race." Kaufmann Foundation. n.d. https://www.kauffman.org/microsites/state-of-the-field/topics/background-of-entrepreneurs/
demographics/race
65 "Race." Kaufmann Foundation. n.d. https://www.kauffman.org/microsites/state-of-the-field/topics/background-of-entrepreneurs/
demographics/race
66 Minority Business Development Agency. "What Is the 8(a) Business Development Program." US Department of Commerce. n.d.
https://www.mbda.gov/news/blog/2012/03/what-8a-business-development-program
422                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

professionally, and connect with people as they go through their entrepreneurial journeys.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Go to the US Department of Labor's blog post on women business owners (https://openstax.org/l/
   52DOLWomenBus) and look at some of the facts listed about women business owners. Which ones
   surprised you the most?

 10.4 Managing, Following, and Adjusting the Initial Plan

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the difference between a business plan and a lean plan
  · Know how to develop a lean plan quickly and accurately
  · Run the build-measure-learn loop

In this chapter, we've discussed how to start the imperfect business using the lean startup approach. We've
looked at the build-measure-learn loop and how to test an MVP. We've also covered how to deal with fear of
failure and how to overcome negative thinking. In addition, we've covered how minorities can tap into
resources to help them be successful. Now it's time to build the lean plan to help you launch your venture.

As you must realize, having a lean plan is important to executing its process. A lean plan follows the path of
lean methodology. It is a brief business plan shown to potential investors and employees that is a fast and
effective way to set, manage, and evaluate goals and strategies in a business. Figure 10.13 shows its
components.

Traditionally, a business plan requires a detailed document of the company's background, the target,
objectives, financials, and marketing strategies. Developing this usually takes a long time, from a few months
to a year, as you will see in Business Model and Plan. A full business plan requires robust information as it's
developed for internal purposes, for banks or investors who need proof that the business is a good
investment, and for other stakeholders. In contrast, a lean plan is short and includes only specific information,
sufficient to go through the build-measure-learn loop. This plan is where you clarify initial ideas about the
product to help you work through the loop and to share with potential investors and employees who need
only so much information to decide on their role in the project.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  423

Figure 10.13 The founders of a business create a lean plan to help them set expectations and goals.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Developing a Lean Plan

As mentioned earlier, a lean plan uses lean methodology. This type of planning begins by drafting a short
living set of lists to guide you, meaning you can update it as you go.[67] The plan shouldn't take months to
develop; you can set it up in a few days. The plan focuses on the business core, so only important details about
marketing, the business model, finances, the build-measure-learn loop, and the MVP are added to it.[68]
The following is a list of basic procedures and details to include in a lean plan.

 1. Write a short and simple document.
 2. Test your MVP through the build-measure-learn loop.
 3. Review your results.
 4. Revise your plan.
Once these steps are complete, the entrepreneur can start or continue the venture.

Write a Short and Simple Document

This plan does not need to include an executive summary, a company background, or team information. It is
literally a short pitch that you can use to share with investors and potential partners. Focus on what is
important and include the following:

  · Basic strategies for product, price, place, promotion; add people, physical environment, and process if it is
      a service

  · Basic strategies for target market and positioning
  · Day-to-day tactics, which include specific tasks or actions that will get an objective done
  · A schedule with dates for acquiring needed licenses, launch date, and when to review and revise the plan
  · A business model that details how you will make money
  · A basic forecast of sales, costs, profit, and break-even analysis
This plan is just a bare bones list of things that need to get done and by whom. It also includes a timeline, a
cost, and a reward. It is less like a traditional document and more a series of lists and bullet points. In this case,
the entrepreneur is only writing down the essentials of the business to achieve the goal at hand. Later on,
when a document is needed for outside stakeholders or bank loans, then a full plan can be developed with

67 Tim Berry. "Business Planning for the `Lean Startup.' " Entrepreneur. September 22, 2010. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/217343
68 Noah Parsons. "An Introduction to Lean Planning." LivePlan. July 13, 2017. https://www.liveplan.com/blog/2017/07/an-introduction-to-
lean-planning/
424                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

research and details about the market, the environment, trends, and strategies that are more fleshed out.

For example, an entrepreneur who is just opening a prosthetics company can start a lean plan by describing
its main product, which can focus on creating custom prosthetics for children. Then it can add a basic price or
range of prices for its basic product since it's a custom product, and it will probably vary in price from
customer to customer. Another strategy to keep in the plan is where to conduct the business. A central
location would probably be a good idea, especially close to doctors and hospitals. Finally, basic promotional
strategies used in reaching out to this market, which can include speaking to children's hospitals and local
doctors who can refer the patients to the company, can also be listed. In addition, the entrepreneur may
decide to create a basic website, online ads, and simple brochures to give information to potential customers.
Once all the strategies are laid out, then the timelines can be added from the inception until the launch date,
which includes assignments for everyone who will be in charge of the activities in this new business. These can
include an office manager, the prosthetist, and a marketer.

Next, the entrepreneur may detail how the money will be made. Will the new business charge the client
directly for the product? How about accepting insurance and copayments? These are questions that need to
be written down. Then a basic forecast of the market demand will help forecast sales, expenses, and profit.

Test Your MVP through the Build-Measure-Learn Loop

Once the lean plan has been put into place, the next step is to execute it and test the MVP through the build-
measure-learn loop. Here is where the rubber will meet the road, and all the assumptions that were made in
the plan will be tested in real life.

  · Build your MVP.
  · Test your idea by sharing it with potential customers.
  · Measure results by talking to customers and recording feedback.
  · Ask questions such as: Are we building a product people want? What benefits do we need to add? Is this

      our target market?
  · Test different versions and cohorts of users.

In our example, the entrepreneur will have a chance to build the prosthetics and ask questions that will help
create a better product over time. At this time, the entrepreneur might find out that the product can be
expanded to include orthotics and not just prosthetics, and perhaps that adults can also be included in the
market.

Review Your Results

This step should be done at least once a month, where customer feedback, marketing, and outcomes are
thoroughly reviewed. This is a great opportunity for the entrepreneur to assess if goals have been met and
identify areas for improvement. However, many times, you will encounter that reviewing results can stir
resistance from employees (if there are any), as they may become tired of planning, having meetings about
planning, and demonstrating results. The reviewing process can inspire some fear or negative feelings over
concerns of being blamed, but as a leader, you must always assure them that this process helps them get
better at what they do and gives them the information and tools necessary to make the changes that will steer
the business onto a more successful path. This is about managing the results and not being deterred by them.

  · Review customer feedback and go back to your plan to compare.
  · Review target market, 7Ps of marketing, features, and benefits.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                          425

  · Review numbers or outcomes, which may include sales, profit, customer signups, and even customer
      reactions to advertisements and product attributes.

In our example, if the prosthetics business is not bringing in enough customers to sustain it, then this is the
opportunity to see where issues exist so changes can be made to the lean plan.

   ARE YOU READY?

   A Lean Scooter Plan

   You are interested in opening a new electric scooter business in your small city, as there is no
   competition. You would like to enable your small town to have smart mobility that is environmentally
   conscious while reducing dependence on regular transportation such as buses and vehicles.

      · Create a lean plan that details how you plan to start your business.

Revise the Plan

Make changes to the plan as needed. Once metrics have been measured against results, marketing is tested
and measured, and customer feedback is received, then it is time to revise the plan and make adjustments.
This can take the form of adding a feature to the product, adding new products, changing promotional tactics,
or communicating differently with customers and consultants.

If there aren't enough customers to sustain the prosthetic business, here is where the founders can make
changes to correct course. It may be that customers are not aware of the business, or there aren't enough
pediatric customers and perhaps adults can be added to the target market. Once the plan is revised and the
resulting changes are made, the business can continue and the process of testing restarts. As you can see in
Figure 10.14, this is a continuous process. It requires constant updating and cooperation from everyone
involved in the business. Once the process is set up, then it is easier to maintain it and see it as necessary
within the business that helps it grow.
426  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.14 The lean plan cycle for small businesses. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

Tim Berry--entrepreneur, former Apple employee, writer, and now a lean startup guru--advises businesses on
the art of lean planning, as he does not like long planning himself and has little patience for extensive plans
and coding. For Berry, lean planning does not contain elaborate information and details that are unnecessary
for the business to run. It is not a document per se, but an assortment of short bullet points, some lists, and
tables. For Berry, the most important steps to lean planning are to have the following:

 1. A lean strategy or plan in place
 2. Execution of the plan (or run it like in the Figure 10.14)
 3. Review of the results and check against milestones
 4. Revision of the plan--change what didn't work and start the whole process again[69]

   ARE YOU READY?

   Developing a Lean Plan

   A local entrepreneur owns a print shop that has been in business for 20 years. The owner focuses mainly
   on printing business cards, flyers, posters, brochures, and banners for local businesses. He has noticed
   that his sales have been declining for the past five years because promotions have been evolving into
   digital ads, social media, and other Internet marketing techniques rather than printed material. He will

69 Tim Berry. "Lean Business Planning Guide." Lean Business Planning. https://leanplan.com/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                427

need to innovate if he wants to stay in business.

Last week, he came to see one of your entrepreneurship professors to ask for a student or someone to
help him. Since you aced the class, your professor thinks that you can show him how to develop a lean
plan, and he offers you an internship. You accept gladly and begin to work on the project.

  · Develop a lean plan and explain to the owner how this can help him grow in the next three years.

 10.5 Growth: Signs, Pains, and Cautions

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Determine the lifecycle of a business
  · Identify strategies to manage the main needs of each lifecycle stage
  · Explain how businesses grow and adapt to changes in their cycles

The work of the entrepreneur is not over after the launch of a business. There are constant changes to
manage. Sustained business growth requires a company to improve profits by increasing its revenue, cutting
costs, or both. Increasing profit yearly indicates improvement and helps secure financing from banks, attract
and reward investors, support opportunities for opening new business locations, and helps reinvest those
profits in research and development. As a business matures and stabilizes, so do its revenues and profits,
sometimes holding the company stagnant if changes aren't made.

At the beginning of your startup, everything is new, exciting, and sometimes (or seems) less complex than it
will be as the venture grows. Perhaps you have one or two employees, and you manage the operation's day-
to-day activities. Managing the business is still within your power, and the structure of the business is fairly
straightforward. Once the business takes off and encounters the challenges of development, such as hiring
more employees to keep up with demand, adding new products, or expanding to new locations, you will need
more resources and a different strategic approach to managing the business. You must be aware of these
changes and steer the business in the right direction to continue its growth. As you begin to understand the
signs of growth, you can correctly assess the challenge and come up with solutions. Going through these
changes is what is called the business lifecycle, a process of five basic stages: starting a business, growth
(expansion to new markets and products), maturity, decline, and death or rebirth, as Figure 10.15, shows.
428  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.15 Businesses go through cycles of birth, growth, maturity, decline, and rebirth or death. Knowing
the cycle of your business and industry will help you to take the steps in the right direction. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Lifecycle Stages

As companies reach new lifecycle stages, owners need to be on the lookout for change indicators. These may
include rapid (growth stage), leveled (maturity stage), or diminishing (decline stage) sales. Or they may
include the inability to keep up with demand without investing in capital, equipment, software, or technology.
Other signs may be a need to increase staff and hire top- or mid-level managers to oversee an expanding
workforce, or the need to grow by updating the product, introducing new products, or adding new markets.

Startup/Birth Stage

This stage centers around acquiring the first batch of customers. Entrepreneurs are focused on being able to
actually provide and deliver the product, grow their customer base, and have enough cash flow to keep up
with demand. The major concern is to survive by at least breaking even. This stage is simple in terms of
ownership because there are usually only a few employees, if any. The processes are often informal, and
technology and systems can be minimal. The owner usually wears many hats to launch the operation.
For example, an advertising agency might start operations with the co-founders and perhaps one or two
employees who work as art designers and/or account executives. At the beginning, the point is to gain clients
and deliver the services and products promised--such as TV ads, radio commercials, print ads, or digital
ads--while consulting and managing client accounts. The goal is to gain client trust and make sure clients are
paying for the services rendered so the agency can pay its employees and vendors. Breaking even is the most
basic goal, which means that costs are at least covered, but no profits are seen just yet. Many times, the owner
or owners of the company will not take a paycheck for many months, sometimes years, to ensure the business
takes off.

Growth Stage

The growth stage, when sales rise due to higher demand, is full of change. There are increases in sales, profits,
additional market/product penetration, and an expansion of professional staff. There is usually an increase in

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  429

cash coming in and going out. A key factor in this phase is to avoid cash strain by paying close attention to
costs and ensuring the payment from customers of product and services provided by looking at running
reports on costs and sales daily, weekly, and/or monthly. At this stage, systems such as databases and
software systems that help keep track of customers and sales, as well as formal processes, need to be put in
place for marketing, technology, production, and human resources. Owners must also decide whether to
continue with current strategies, sell, or perhaps merge with another company to continue growing. The
owner will usually hire managers with experience to take the company to the next level. At this time, owners
may need to take out loans and use equity power or shares of the company as capital to leverage further
growth. The chapter on Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting discusses these strategies in more detail.

At this point in our advertising agency example, there are more clients being served; the company is
expanding as it adds new clients to the roster and hires more employees to keep up with demand. Revenue is
higher, but costs are increasing as well. Processes need to be put into place so employees know what their
tasks are and how to do them. Software that handles operations, such as accounting and project
management, are put into place because the number of people and processes are increasing. Sometimes, the
growth is so unprecedented that perhaps a merger with another company is necessary to be able to provide
all the services that clients need.

Maturity Stage

As the business continues, it could enter maturity, which means it has grown to the point where revenues and
profits level off. There is adequate staff and more management engaged in maintaining operations. Systems
are well developed in all departments and working efficiently, with larger financials and management. The key
to remaining active and spurring new life into the business is to remain flexible and continue being a creative
and entrepreneurial company. Apple offers a great example of a company that, although its size and power
have grown tremendously, continues to innovate as if it were a small company. Other companies such as GE
and Procter & Gamble, although they are big corporations with many resources, are now mature and well
balanced because they have been in business for a long time. However, they too must continue to innovate
and shift with trends, and this is where the lean startup methodology fits well in both small and large
businesses because it allows them to be creative and entrepreneurial, regardless of size.

Decline Stage

At this stage, as industries change or business owners fail to keep their offerings relevant, decline is imminent.
Sales wane, and a rebirth or death of the business can be expected.

For example, Sears, Payless, Victoria's Secret, and JCPenney have recently been hit by the new technological
and fashion trends that are affecting brick-and-mortar retailers. The way customers shop has been shifting
from spending time browsing and shopping in a physical store to adopting new technology to shop from
computers and mobile devices. Today, Amazon and other online retailers have developed strategic ways to
help customers shop for items they want at an affordable price from the comfort of their devices. Retailers
must come up with new, experiential ways to engage the consumer. Interestingly, companies such as GoPro
and Fitbit are also struggling with declining sales due to competition, lower demand for cameras, and pricing.
GoPro and Fitbit are still good brands that can benefit from a buyout from a bigger company, so they could
have a rebirth.

Rebirth or Death Stage

When there are big changes in the decline stage that the company doesn't evolve to meet, or the business
430  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

owner doesn't retain passion, focus, or ability for the venture, the business will end. Blockbuster failed to
embrace the new era of video streaming and closed its stores in 2013. Similarly, small retailers, restaurants,
tech companies, and manufacturers that fail to innovate cannot sustain a business and usually dissolve.

That is not to say that a rebirth is not possible. If a business innovates and changes to embrace new
technology and ideas, it may restart the lifecycle. Polaroid, a pioneer in the instant camera market, saw its
demise in the 2000s when the photography industry started to shift toward digital products. The company
went bankrupt in 2001 and was sold to several holding companies (controlling companies that buy a stake in
the business but don't operate the business), which licensed the name Polaroid to various electronics
manufacturers. Recently, the company entered into an agreement with a holding company that specializes in
brand resurrection to develop photography products. These products include a new instant camera and the
Polaroid Swing app that allows people to create moving GIF photographs, which are several pictures rotated in
a way that show movements and resemble very short videos.[70] Most recently, Polaroid has launched the
camera OneStep+, which connects the camera to the phone through an app, allowing the photographer to use
different filters and shoot and print instantaneously.[71] This camera, along with other lines of Polaroid instant
cameras, have helped resurrect the brand.

The Pain of Growth

Expanding a business usually entails some growing pains. Professional stressors can include figuring out how
to serve the customer in the best way possible, produce the right product, create a great brand, sell the right
amount, manage cash, delegate tasks to others, and ensure the right people and systems are in place. And of
course there are the personal stressors of managing a healthy work/life balance and meeting the demands of
the venture.

In 2011, Jessica Thompson, owner of Johnson Security in New York City, felt the strains of growth. She had
expanded from sixty to seventy employees and expected to hire ten to twenty more that year. News of her
unprecedented business growth had catapulted Johnson Security into higher sales, thanks to better
assessment of prospects (potential customers) and better written contracts, but it also heightened her
concerns. She had to hire more people. She had to create the infrastructure needed to support the new
positions. She had to make sure her liability costs were based on estimates of working hours, because if the
number of employees grew, so did her costs. Her visible and public success also made her a target of the New
York State Department of Labor, which audited the company to make sure she had classified her workers
correctly as W-2 workers instead of as contractors. The audit results were fine and her growth proved organic,
but the stress was something she had to go through to succeed as a business owner.[72]

Victor Clark of Clarke Inc., a consulting company, also knows a little about the pain of growth. When asked
about his experience as a business owner, Clark said, "My biggest lesson would be `profit is an opinion, cash is
a fact.'" He says that he struggled many times with cash flow because he disregarded his checking account
and because of late receivables. His advice is to pay attention to the checking account, never do a job that
makes you lose money, know your costs, and review your numbers every single month.[73]

70 Brian Mastroianni. "Polaroid Swing App Brings Moving Photos to Life." CBS News. July 27, 2016. https://www.cbsnews.com/news/polaroid-
swing-moving-photos-smartphone-app/
71 "Meet the Polaroid OneStep+." Polaroid. n.d. https://www.polaroid.com/onestep-plus
72 Adrianna Gardella. "Growing Pains at a Growing Business." New York Times. November 3, 2011. https://boss.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/11/
03/growing-pains-at-growing-businesses/
73 Andrea Lotz. "5 Entrepreneurs Share Their Business Growing Pains." AllProWebTools. October 9, 2015. https://www.allprowebtools.com/
5-Entrepreneurs-Share-their-Business-Growing-Pains/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                     431

Strategies for Growth

What are some strategies for growth? Growth can mean increases in revenue and profits, and decreasing
expenses. Here are various strategies that can help expand a business whether they are young or established
companies.

Product Improvement

An inexpensive and easy way to increase sales of a new product can be done by enhancing a product. This can
be in the form of updating the design, making it more durable, changing its size, adding a new feature, or
increasing its quality. It is easier to enhance a product than to completely start from scratch.

Take appliances, for example. Rather than creating a new machine to wash clothes, Samsung continually adds
features to its washing machines. Recently, the company changed its technology to high-efficiency (HE)
technology to save water and energy, and included a separate feature that helps wash items by hand.

Usually, creative fragrance and perfume manufacturing companies can easily adjust their current fragrances
by adding a new ingredient or scent instead of developing an entirely new fragrance. Artisanal perfume
startups such as Phlur and Pinrose have recently developed their own lines of perfumes that are
environmentally conscious, not tested on animals, and good for the body. Some of their perfumes now have
new versions of their signature perfumes. In addition to improving their products, they also created new ones
out of their original scents by adding them to body sprays, lotions, lip shimmer, and candles that smell exactly
like the original.

LINK TO LEARNING

Read this Forbes article on Phlur perfume (https://openstax.org/l/52ForbesPhlur) and see how Phlur sold
thousands of bottles of its perfume before customers could smell it.

Market Penetration

Market penetration entails selling more to current customers by showcasing new uses for an existing product.
This is the least costly way to attract more customers from within the market. A great example is the versatility
of the common pantry staple you see in Figure 10.16, baking soda. Until the 1920s, baking soda was used only
as a leavening agent for baking. The mid-century emergence of convenience foods, including premade baked
goods, meant a decrease in demand for the product as people baked less at home. To boost sales, Arm &
Hammer explored its other uses and began to sell it as a deodorizer, detergent, remedy for heartburn, and as
an additive to other products such as detergents, toothpaste, and cleansers.[74]

74 "A History of Innovation: Our Timeline." Arm & Hammer. n.d. https://www.armandhammer.com/en-ca/about-us
432  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

Figure 10.16 Arm & Hammer penetrated the baking soda market by expanding uses for the product. (credit:
modification of "Baking Soda Box White Powder" by "evita-ochel"/Pixabay, CC0)

New Distribution Channels

Adding new distribution channels gives current customers more ways to purchase the product. For instance,
the Internet has provided opportunities for companies to expand their reach by selling items online. Consider
a bakery that, in addition to distributing its cookies in its store and through retailers, adds an online store.
While a large number of companies have websites and apps that can sell directly to customers, entrepreneurs
who don't want or have an e-commerce function on their site can use portals such as Etsy, Amazon, and Ebay.
A jewelry maker, for instance, can sell his or her items through one of these websites without having to pay
someone to create or manage a website for her business. Other more conventional ways of using different
distribution systems include making products available in retail stores, kiosks, or grocery stores. Take for
instance California Pizza Kitchen. It originally existed solely as a restaurant chain but now has created frozen
pizzas that we can purchase at the grocery store.

Product Line Extension

A business can extend its product line to appeal to different customers with different needs and budgets. It
can start with a basic, no-frills product for the low-end consumer. Then, it can provide a higher quality, higher-
price product with a few more features. A step higher would be a high-end product that is more luxurious or
has additional benefits and capabilities that are higher priced. This strategy is often used with cameras,
software, vehicles, and hotels. Tech companies will have their basic products and will increase their gadgets'
quality and benefits to make them more luxurious and capture different markets along the way. Uber, for
example, offers its basic riding service to everyone who requests a ride. Drivers can pick them up in any type
of vehicle they own. An upgrade to this service is the new Uber Black service, which gives the customer the
ability to request a luxury car or SUV. These vehicles must be newer than five years old, and they must be in
excellent condition. This service is more expensive than regular rides, costing three or four times more than a
ride in a regular vehicle.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  433

Adding New Markets

Developing new markets is a riskier path to growth. A company that was catering to only local customers
might open a second location in another town or region, or provide products online to reach distant clients in
other cities, states, or countries.

Fast fashion companies have been at the forefront of this trend. These are retailers that design, manufacture,
and distribute the product to customers quickly and cheaply by skipping the regular four seasons of the
fashion year. Instead, they usually offer new designs every two or three weeks, and entice shoppers to
purchase clothing at a faster rate. Retailer store Zara, (pictured in Figure 10.17), the fast fashion company from
Spain, has seen unprecedented growth through expansion to other markets, for example.

Figure 10.17 Fast fashion company Zara has been successful at developing new markets. (credit:
modification of "Zara 222 Broadway" by "Lollasp"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

Born Global Companies

As mentioned earlier, entering global markets is a common method of expanding a business. Some
companies will turn to global expansion during a growth or mature cycle, and some companies will seek
global markets from the start, as born global companies do. A born global company is one that has as its goal
to serve the world with its products. Companies that have new products that have never been created
before--today mostly technological and medical products--usually benefit from this kind of strategy. Other
entertainment and consumer products can be thought of as global as well, especially when it's a new product
category.
Red Bull is an example of a born global company that had its eyes set on the global stage, even before it
started growing, because it had a new product that no other company had ever created. After Red Bull came
up with its products, other companies followed suit, and a new product category of energy drinks was born. So
far, the company has been around for 31 years, has more than 12,000 employees in 171 countries, and has
sold more than 75 billion cans around the world.[75] The success that this born global company has
experienced can be attributed to its grassroots marketing approach on college campuses, the sponsoring of
events (Figure 10.18 shows two examples), as well as a massive distribution approach that targets young

75 "Company." Red Bull. n.d. https://www.redbull.com/us-en/energydrink/company-profile
434                                                                           Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

people, extreme sports athletes, and professionals who need an energy boost.

Figure 10.18 Red Bull owes its success to its promotional efforts across the globe. The company has found
success (a) targeting consumers interested in extreme sports, such as these spectators attending a cliff diving
event in Massachusetts, and in sponsoring events like this (b) Motocross competition. (credit (a): modification
of work by "{enry"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit (b): modification of work by "GO Visual"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   In its efforts to be a global company, Red Bull sponsors many events. In 2012 Red Bull sponsored Stratos,
   the highest jump (https://openstax.org/l/52RBStratos) ever recorded by a person from space, in a
   "beyond global" event. They also sponsored the "Can You Make It?" 2018 competition
   (https://openstax.org/l/52RBCanMakeIt) in which teams of students traveled across Europe to
   Amsterdam in a week using only Red Bull as currency.

Licensing, Franchising, Joint Ventures, Mergers, and Acquisitions

Other riskier ways to grow include the integration of outside ventures through licensing, mergers and
acquisitions, joint ventures, and strategic alliances.
Licensing is a contract in which one enterprise gives permission to another entity to manufacture and sell its
products for a royalty, which is a payment in exchange for the use of property or an asset, whether intellectual
or physical that can be used to generate revenue. Some of the property that can be licensed can be in the form
of a design, a copyright, an invention, a patent, or formula.[76] Instead of investing directly in manufacturing
and marketing additional items, many companies such as Disney, Mattel, NBA, and Warner Brothers lend their
characters and copyrights to other companies to use on their merchandise. They then receive a royalty
payment for their license.

76 "Licensing." Entrepreneur n.d. https://www.entrepreneur.com/encyclopedia/licensing

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success                                                                                            435

Licensing can also occur in reverse: Small companies with a technology, medical solution, software, or product
that cannot be manufactured by them can seek other companies to which they can license their intellectual
property. The smaller company can also license from another company and create the product or service
because that is its core competency.

Franchising is a form of licensing that allows the business (franchisor) to share its business model to expand
the business through various distributors (franchisees) for a fee. In turn, the franchisor provides the training,
marketing, know-how, management, and support to help the franchisee fulfill its sales objectives. Franchising
is common in industries such as restaurants, automotive, hotel, cleaning, and home services, to name a few.
Popularly known franchises are fast-food restaurants, such as Chick-Fil-A or McDonald's, which have quickly
expanded in the US--and around the world in the case of McDonald's. Smaller local and national franchises
include Fit4Mom, Mosquito Squad, Chocolate Factory, and Soccer Shots.

A joint venture is the creation of a new business in which two different enterprises share the expenses and
profit to achieve certain goals of a project. This approach reduces the risk of investing directly in capital
equipment, and it also allows them to share each other's knowledge and expertise. You can see this done with
small businesses that collaborate to save money and help each other out.

Larger companies do this as well to leverage a particular advantage and reduce risks and costs.[77] Google and
NASA joined efforts to bring NASA's information about the weather, locations, and forecasting to the fingertips
of people via a Google search. This joint venture proved fruitful, as they continue to collaborate on various
projects including robotics and space exploration.[78]

In mergers and acquisitions, two companies combine or one buys the majority stake of the other. The goal is
to enhance profitability and reduce their risk by diversifying their portfolios, combining resources such as
boards of directors, combining efforts to achieve efficiency (for example, being able to increase production
and thereby reduce production costs), broadening market access, sharing technology, and increasing access
to capital. Usually, mergers and acquisitions are conducted by larger companies such as Dow Chemical and
DuPont, Anheuser-Busch InBev and SAB Miller, Heinz and Kraft, and CVS and Aetna, but smaller companies
can also benefit if they both have an opportunity for synergy.

Strategic alliances are arrangements that two or more entities create to work on a project by sharing some of
their strengths and resources, but not actually creating a new entity like in the case of a joint venture. In this
alliance, both entities are still considered independent and only pool their resources to work on a specific
project because it may be faster and more cost effective to work together. Both companies' assets remain
separate.[79] An example of this is Star Alliance, a strategic distribution alliance between many airlines such as
United Airlines, Lufthansa, Air New Zealand, Turkish Airlines, Croatia Airlines, and 22 additional airlines, to
connect customers all over the world through a shared booking system.[80]

Pros and Cons of Growth Strategies

Each growth opportunity has pros and cons, which are outlined in Table 10.6.

77 "Joint Ventures." Inc. n.d. https://www.inc.com/encyclopedia/joint-ventures.html
78 "Google Moves into NASA's Space." Financial Times. November 10, 2014.
79 Will Kenton. "Strategic Alliance." Investopedia. September 5, 2019. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/s/strategicalliance.asp
80 "Proud Member of Star Alliance." United. n.d. https://www.united.com/web/en-US/content/company/alliance/star.aspx
436                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

              Pros and Cons of Growth Strategies

   Strategy   Pros                                                                Cons
Product
improvement   Improving performance, quality, and                                 Fails to deliver a benefit; can turn out to be a
              cost of product; can also add to sales                              lost investment
New product   and profits
development
              Staying ahead of the competition,                                   Create products no one wants, make costly
Market        increasing sales/profit, going into new                             mistakes
penetration   markets

New           Increase sales by adding new benefits                               Mispositioning the product, which will miss
distribution  to existing products                                                communicating to the right market or by
channels                                                                          communicating benefits the target doesn't care
Product line                                                                      for
extension
              Reaching target market multiple times                               More channels to keep track of and to manage
Adding new    or reaching them at least once
markets
Seek global   Cater to different markets and                                      Fails to differentiate between products,
markets       different budgets; educate consumers                                cannibalization (decrease in sales due to
Integration   to want better, more expensive                                      introduction of new product by same company)
of            products
businesses                                                                        More customers to take care of, not engaging
              Expanding customer reach, adding to                                 them correctly
              sales and profit
                                                                                  Dealing with more customers, mistakes in many
              Serve global markets, reach more                                    areas could happen
              customers, increase sales and profits
                                                                                  Losing investment, losing project, not getting
              Add new capabilities, synergy, take on                              along well, breaking up
              more projects

Table 10.6

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  437

     Key Terms

born global venture seeking to be a global company from its inception
build-measure-learn loop step-by-step approach on how to maneuver a startup, how to change course if

     necessary, how to persevere, and how to accelerate the expansion of a business
business failure ending a business due to the lack of goal attainment, which can include low levels of

     revenue and profit, or not meeting investors' expectations
business lifecycle stages companies go through: birth, growth (or expansion to new markets and products),

     maturity, decline, death or rebirth
early adopters people who like to try new things and can be found at the onset of the adoption process for a

     product
franchising form of licensing that allows the business (franchisor) to share its business model to expand

     through various distributors (franchisees) for a fee
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) organization that researches entrepreneurship around the world
innovation accounting assesses whether the changes made to the product are creating the desired results
iterations small changes to the current version of a product to make it better fit consumer needs
joint venture temporary partnership in which two different enterprises combine for the purpose of mutual

     benefits such as sharing of expenses and to work toward shared goals and the associated potential
     revenue
lean pitch verbal delivery of an idea or business plan as a request to a group of investors by an entrepreneur
lean plan brief business plan shown to potential investors and employees that is a fast and effective way to
     set, manage, and evaluate goals and strategies in a business
lean startup methodology entrepreneurs use this method to help them innovate by continuously testing
     their products and getting feedback from customers in real time
licensing contract in which one enterprise gives permission to another entity to manufacture and sell its
     products for a royalty
mergers and acquisitions when two companies combine, or one buys the majority stake of the other
minimum viable product (MVP) early version or prototype of a product that may not be polished or
     complete but that functions well enough that you can begin to market it or test it with potential users
pivoting crucial change done to test a hypothesis regarding the basic product, its growth potential, and
     business model; if something is not working, then a change or a "pivot" needs to take place
strategic alliance arrangement created by two entities to work on a project by sharing some of their
     strengths and resources, but not actually creating a new entity as in the case of a joint venture

     Summary

10.1 Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup

There is no such thing as launching a perfect business. A startup requires time to clarify its identity, market,
product, and business model through the build-measure-learn loop, which requires businesses to describe or
build a prototype of a product, ask for feedback from potential and actual early customers, measure their
responses, and learn from that feedback and make changes to improve the product to something customers
want. Older companies usually have a more stable and developed set of strategies because they have been in
business for a while, but even they have opportunities to innovate and grow. The lean startup method
provides an opportunity for companies to approach management in a measurable and provable way.
Customer feedback allows the companies to make iterations and pivots that are necessary to get back on the
438                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

right track. Pitching to investors can yield better results when using the lean approach, because investors like
to see experience-gained data. The lean startup method is a tested way for new and old companies to stay in
business and operate, even when there is a lot of uncertainty.

10.2 Why Early Failure Can Lead to Success Later
Failure is common in business creation, especially in the early stages. Only a small percentage of ventures
make it to the two-, five-, and ten-year mark. Common reasons for this include mistakes and missed
opportunities in marketing, financing, management, and innovation. However, there are steps the owner can
take, such as making sure they are targeting the right customer, ensuring proper finances are in place to
operate and grow the business, creating contracts when sharing the business with stakeholders, and
innovating when needed. Fear of failure is also a major contributor to business failure. Some suggestions to
manage fear include adjusting expectations and asking for help.

10.3 The Challenging Truth about Business Ownership
Entrepreneurs operate in an extremely competitive landscape. This space has positives and negatives,
including being autonomous, being able to expand one's own ideas, and schedule flexibility. Serving people
and employees well can be very satisfying as can the financial success of a strong profit. On the negative side,
resolving constantly arising challenges, wearing many hats, dealing with challenges and issues, and having
adequate time and cash flow can make entrepreneurship difficult. Women and minority entrepreneurs face
additional challenges that can make the experience of being an entrepreneur much more difficult. These
include lack of funding opportunities, lack of business education, not being taken seriously, lack of
mentorship, and lack of resources. However, there are several organizations that provide the guidance and
connections targeted to these groups.

10.4 Managing, Following, and Adjusting the Initial Plan
Having a lean plan is helpful in setting up expectations and measurements. This is a living document, so its
creation and updating are a process. The process starts with building a short document that outlines the
basics of product, market, and strategies, with a short schedule of tasks. After a trial run, where the prototype
or actual product is tested with customers, the plan is reviewed and revised to incorporate the feedback.

10.5 Growth: Signs, Pains, and Cautions
A company goes through a lifecycle of birth, growth, maturity, decline, and death or rebirth. At each of these
stages, there are opportunities and choices to make based on the owner's personal and business goals.
Business growth requires the owner to innovate through various means to survive and to thrive. These
strategies are meant to increase sales, cut costs, or a little of both. Some of these strategies include making
changes to the product, adding new products and markets, adding new channels, and acquiring other
companies.

     Review Questions

1. What is pivoting?
2. How is pitching different in the lean startup method?
3. What is the lean startup process?
4. What are some examples of an MVP?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  439

5. What is the success rate of businesses in the first two to ten years of life in the United States?
6. How can an entrepreneur learn from failures?
7. Which gender experiences more fear about opening a business? Why do you think it they are more fearful?
8. What are some of the realities of business ownership?
9. How can entrepreneurs deal with these negative realities?
10. What percentage of businesses last five years or more?
11. What percentage of US businesses are minority owned?
12. What is a lean plan and what are its components?
13. What are some of the items or sections that do not have to be included in a lean plan?
14. What kind of lifecycles do businesses go through? Why?
15. How does each phase affect business decisions?

     Discussion Questions

1. Find an example of a video of a lean pitch online. What, in your opinion, makes it successful?
2. Find a company that has made a pivot and explain why the pivot worked.
3. If you were starting a business and had to create an MVP, what would that MVP be?
4. Are there any downsides to the lean startup method? If so, what might they be and what sorts of products
or companies might fall prey to them?
5. If you were conducting a lean pitch to investors, which steps of the pitch would you find most difficult and
why?
6. Discuss how you could identify and manage your fears as you start your own business.
7. What strategies do you think can help women overcome their fear of failure? Relate your answers, if
applicable, to a woman you know who has such fear and describe strategies she uses to overcome it.
8. Discuss how minorities and women can use resources and strategies to deal with their additional challenges
as entrepreneurs.
9. Pick three cons of business ownership and strategize how to turn them into pros.
10. Now choose three of the pros of business ownership and consider whether any of them could be cons in
certain situations.
11. Discuss how a lean plan allows you the flexibility to change course if something is not working for your
business.
12. Discuss the differences between making changes to a product for growth and creating a new product from
scratch.
440  Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

     Case Questions

1. A friend recently heard that you won a pitching competition and she would like you to help her with her
business pitch to investors. She started a company called "Fit for You," a prosthetics company for children and
adults that is using the latest materials and technology to help people live better lives. She has been in
business for a year, and she uses lean methodology to innovate and create better products, but she needs
capital to buy additional equipment to meet demand. She has determined that investors would be the best
funding source for her needs. What should she focus on in a five-minute lean pitch to investors to secure the
$120,000 for additional equipment?

2. One of your friends has recently opened a 24-hour gym for women ages 18-45. She is excited about the
opening but wants to ensure that she is providing the right services to her customers and is wondering
whether she did enough research up front to really figure it out. She comes to you for advice. What would you
tell her?

3. Take a look at the GEM page http://www.gemconsortium.org/country-profiles and click on the US link.
Determine how the United States ranks in several measures on its profile. How does its entrepreneurial
ecosystem compare to that of another country, such as Mexico or Canada?

4. Your best friend is a kindergarten teacher who has decided to open a new learning center where toddlers
and young children can play in an interactive environment to enhance their motor skills, cognitive
development, and leadership skills. She is very excited about her new entrepreneurial experience, but has no
idea about the challenges she may face as a young Hispanic woman in her 30s. She knows you have taken an
entrepreneurship class before, so she asks for your help in figuring out where to find business resources and
recommendations to overcome the challenges she may face. You are happy to help and you answer the
following questions:
What kind of overall advice would you give her? What groups and resources do you think she can tap into?
What are some of the challenges she may face as a minority? How can she overcome them?

5. You and a team of students from your university are interested in creating a virtual agent (chatbot) that can
interact with humans online. You have noticed that small businesses could benefit from adding a chatbot to
provide great customer service at all times of the day at a fraction of the cost. Your goal is to create chatbots
for a few industries that are very customer-service intensive (realtors, restaurants, doctors' offices, etc.), and
you think you can come up with a product that can be sold to small- or medium-sized businesses. One of your
team members who is a computer science major has already starting coding the first program, but you know
very well that you will need lean planning to get your ideas down in writing and to pitch it to a few investors.
Develop your 7Ps for one of the chatbots in bullet point format and include the target market, the positioning,
and the business model that you would use to make money.

6. You and your business partner have been in business for five years selling cellphones and other accessories.
Recently, you noticed that the market is quite saturated, and your competition is very high. Your sales have
been flat for the last year and a half, and no matter what promotions or cellphones you carry, you can't seem
to improve your sales. You also realize that the industry is mature and it will be difficult to make money unless
something drastic changes. What kind of changes do you think you can implement to expand your business?

     Suggested Resources

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success  441

10.1 Launching the Imperfect Business: Lean Startup
Lean startup: http://theleanstartup.com/#principles
Toyota's Way: https://vimeo.com/44328452
14 Management Principles of Toyota: http://www.panview.nl/en/lean-production/toyota-way-j-liker-summary
Innovation accounting video: https://www.inc.com/eric-ries/entrepreneur-eric-ries-innovation-accounting-

  secret-to-fast-growth.html

10.2 Why Early Failure Can Lead to Success Later
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: http://www.gemconsortium.org/

10.3 The Challenging Truth about Business Ownership
Asian American Chamber of Commerce: http://www.asian-americanchamber.org/
Black Chamber of Commerce: https://www.nationalbcc.org/
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce: https://ushcc.com/
Ladies Who Launch: https://www.ladieswholaunch.org/
Minority Business Development Agency: https://www.mbda.gov/
National Association of Professional Women: http://womenforhire.com/company/national-association-of-

  professional-women-napw/
National Association for Women Owners: https://www.nawbo.org/
Small Business Agency: https://www.sba.gov/
The Female Entrepreneur Association: https://femaleentrepreneurassociation.com/
Women's Business Center at SBA: https://www.sba.gov/tools/local-assistance/wbc
Women's Business Enterprise National Council: https://www.wbenc.org/

10.4 Managing, Following, and Adjusting the Initial Plan
Tim Berry's Lean Business Planning Guide: https://leanplan.com/

10.5 Growth: Signs, Pains, and Cautions
International Franchise Association: https://www.franchise.org/
US Small Business Administration Licenses and Permits: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-

  business/apply-licenses-permits
442                                                                               Chapter 10 Launch for Growth to Success

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    11

              Business Model and Plan

Figure 11.1 The initial plan for Vita Coco did not work for its founders, Michael Kirban and Ira Liran, but the
coconut water found later success, ultimately becoming the market leader, by using customer-focused design
throughout the entrepreneurial process. (credit: modification of "Vita Coco at Vitality Show" by Zeyus Media/
Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

 Chapter Outline

        11.1 Avoiding the "Field of Dreams" Approach
        11.2 Designing the Business Model
        11.3 Conducting a Feasibility Analysis
        11.4 The Business Plan

      Introduction

   Michael Kirban and Ira Liran had no experience in their industry when they launched their business. After a
   chance encounter with Brazilian women in a bar who mentioned how much they missed having coconut water,
   Kirban and Liran decided to launch Vita Coco.
   The Vita Coco founders promised to deliver a product they had not even created yet, and further, they had no
   experience in manufacturing, but they launched the business nonetheless in the early 2000s. The initial plan
   for the business did not work after the US Food and Drug Administration blocked shipments to the United
   States because they failed to register the business properly. The partners developed the business into a social
   movement with a specific mission: to make an impact on both their consumers and the people they work with
   and the communities in which they live. Things ultimately worked out for Kirban and Liran. Vita Coco became
   the market leader in this niche segment, as they turned their attention to putting customers first. Although
   customer-focused design is integral to the entrepreneurial planning process, you should avoid launching a
   venture with the attitude that if you build it, customers will automatically come, because it does not always
   work that way. There are tools available to entrepreneurs to use to plan their journey to make goals a reality
444  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

rather than just a wish or a dream.

 11.1 Avoiding the "Field of Dreams" Approach

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand the importance of planning
  · Understand the concepts of product and service innovation, and define and understand key business

      models
  · Describe and be able to construct a value proposition for a new business idea (product or service)

In the 1989 film Field of Dreams, Kevin Costner plays an Iowa farmer who hears a voice that tells him, "If you
build it, he will come." Inspired by this vision, Costner's character turns his cornfield into a baseball field (of
dreams), and eventually the ghosts of deceased baseball players such as Shoeless Joe Jackson appear on the
field as younger versions of themselves. The movie coined the popular axiom that "if you build it, they will
come," just as the players appeared after the field of dreams was built. Although it's a fun saying for film buffs
and sports fans, this approach is one you will want to avoid in entrepreneurship. In fact, the entrepreneurial
graveyard is littered with ghosts of startups that never gained traction with customers, never to be heard from
again. (Seventy-five percent of venture-backed startups fail, according to one recent study.)[1] Thus, you don't
want to blindly build a product and hope that customers will come. Juicero is one recent example of product
that conducted little-to-no customer discovery before launch. A cold press juicer made by this San Francisco
startup cost $699 at launch. The juicer squeezed packs of cut up fruits and vegetables, but customers found
they could just as easily squeeze the juice out of the packs by hand and avoid the hefty price of the juicer.

Customer acquisition and customer retention are not easy processes by any means. You have to work to gain
a customer and work even harder to get her to return. One study by the data analysis firm CBInsights of why
101 startups failed found that 42 percent of them joined the "entrepreneurial afterlife" because there was "no
market need," which suggests a customer (or lack thereof) problem.[2] Current trends in entrepreneurial
thinking reflect a customer-centric approach: From the start, entrepreneurs infuse their insights into the
planning process through a process called "customer discovery." The entrepreneurial journey should begin
with finding what the serial entrepreneur, author, and educator Steve Blank, one of the founders of modern
entrepreneurship, calls the problem/solution fit.[3],[4] In a complementary approach, the Mosaic/Netscape
founder Marc Andreesen discussed the need to achieve product-market fit.[5] In other words, don't just build a
baseball field and expect players to show up. This is an oversimplification, but if we extend the Field of Dreams
analogy before blindly believing in the magic, you would want to talk to prospective players and fans to see if a
field is needed, what type of field (corn-to-baseball?), why that field is needed, how that field would be used,
and what features of the field would be most useful--before you go to bat (Figure 11.2).[6]

1 Patrick Henry. "Why Some Startups Succeed (and Why Most Fail)." Entrepreneur. February 18, 2017. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/
288769
2 "298 Startup Failure Post-Mortems." CBINSIGHTS. February 28, 2019. https://www.cbinsights.com/research/startup-failure-post-
mortem/#original
3 Steve Blank. "Driving Corporate Innovation: Design Thinking vs. Customer Development." July 30, 2014. https://steveblank.com/2014/07/30/
driving-corporate-innovation-design-thinking-customer-development/
4 Hayley Leibson. "How to Achieve Product-Market Fit." Forbes. January 18, 2018. https://www.forbes.com/sites/hayleyleibson/2018/01/18/
how-to-achieve-product-market-fit/#10814b68476b
5 Tren Griffin. "12 Things about Product-Market Fit." Andreessen Horowitz. February 18, 2017. https://a16z.com/2017/02/18/12-things-about-
product-market-fit/
6 Mike Pinder. "Innovation Reality Check: Are You Building a `Field of Dreams'?" Board of Innovation. December 31, 2017.
https://www.boardofinnovation.com/blog/2017/01/31/innovation-reality-check-are-you-building-a-field-of-dreams/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  445

Figure 11.2 This field in Dyersville, Iowa, was used in the filming of Field of Dreams. (credit:
"FieldofDreamsMay06" by "JoeyBLS"/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.5)

Business Model

Although there are countless varieties of business models, the Scaling Lean author Ash Maurya offers three
common types: direct, multisided, and marketplace. Direct businesses are the most common and involve one-
sided actors--that is, users--becoming your customers. A coffee shop is a classic example; other examples
include retail stores, software as a service (SaaS), many mobile apps, hardware stores, and stores that sell
physical goods. In multisided models, users and customers--multi-actors--are usually different people. Ad-
based models, big data, and enterprise are common examples where the products are free to users, and their
value is monetized by a different customer base. Marketplace models are a more complex variant of
multisided models made up of two different customer segments of buyers and sellers. eBay and Airbnb are
well-known examples of marketplace models.[7]

Although planning is important, adaptability within the planning process is equally important. That's what the
business model approach is all about: outlining an approach but changing that approach throughout if or
when you discover that your assumptions and educated guesses were wrong. For each new iteration, or
version, the entrepreneur makes a minor change to the current business model to better capitalize on market
opportunities.

Successful entrepreneurs are often multidimensional: part dreamer, part pragmatist. Adam Grant, Wharton
School of Business professor and author of the best-selling book Origins: How Non-Conformists Move the World,
explores how entrepreneurs are "capable of recognizing a good idea, speaking up without getting silenced,
building a coalition of allies, choosing the right time to act, and managing fear and doubt."[8] Entrepreneur
magazine tells the story of FedEx founder Fred Smith, who, while attending Yale University in the mid-1960s,
wrote an economics term paper on the need for a new approach to overnight delivery in the computer age.
His professor, unimpressed with Smith's idea, graded his paper a C because the idea was not feasible.[9] After
graduation, using innovative thinking, dogged determination, and hard work, Smith would turn his
"unfeasible" concept into the world's first overnight delivery company, and in so doing, change the
transportation industry forever. Smith embodied the entrepreneurial concept of being part dreamer, part
pragmatist.

7 Ash Maurya. Scaling Lean. New York: Portfolio/Penguin, 2016.
8 "Bio." Adam Grant. n.d. https://www.adamgrant.net/bio
9 "Fred Smith: An Overnight Success." Entrepreneur. October 9, 2008. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/197542
446  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read about the popular corporate narratives related to relatively new companies. Consider whether
   these stories involve inventor-founders. If so, what is the invention and how does that tie in with the
   current and future narrative of the company?

   Listen to the NPR podcast "How I Built This" with Guy Raz (https://openstax.org/l/52NPRGuyRaz) to hear
   stories about more than 100 startup companies and their founders.

   Several more brief narratives on how to tell your company's story (https://openstax.org/l/
   52CompanyStory) are also available.

Sports metaphors offer important entrepreneurial lessons beyond insights on customer discovery and
planning. In baseball and softball, you must field a team to enter the game. In boxing, you enter the ring alone
to go toe to toe with your competitor (where some of the best-laid plans get thrown out after you get hit). The
tides of entrepreneurial thinking have shifted from the twentieth-century economist Joseph Schumpeter's
early belief that it is "lone individuals who carry novelty" for wider market exploitation and benefit to society to
the notion that it takes a team to innovate and back to the idea that individuals can enact entrepreneurial
change.[10] "Solopreneurs," for instance, are hard-working entrepreneurs who are comfortable working alone
on all the requisite tasks of starting a venture.[11] At the same time, many successful investors preach the
merits of teams in entrepreneurship. Venture capitalist Aileen Lee says that people are the second-most
important factor behind addressable market when evaluating startups.[12] The cohesion, diversity, and makeup
of the team all contribute to investable worthiness and potential entrepreneurial success (Figure 11.3). Many
successful accelerator programs have typically required teams in order to be considered for entry into their
programs. The accelerator Techstars has said that what they look for in a startup is "team, team and team,"[13]
and the accelerator Boomtown requires at least two present founders for the duration of its accelerator
program.[14]

10 Joseph A. Schumpeter. Can Capitalism Survive? New York: George Allen & Unwin, 1942.
11 John Rampton. "4 Differences Between Solopreneurs and an Entrepreneur Working Alone." Entrepreneur. May 15, 2015.
https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/245766
12 Aileen Lee. "Investing and Business Lessons from Aileen Lee (Cowboy Ventures)." 25iq. April 21, 2018. https://25iq.com/2018/04/21/
investing-and-business-lessons-from-aileen-lee-cowboy-ventures/
13 Michael Cohn. "Team, Team, Team: Welcome Tyler Scriven to Techstars Atlanta." Techstars. April 13, 2016. https://www.techstars.com/
content/accelerators/team-team-team-welcome-tyler-scriven-techstars-atlanta/
14 The Farm. "Accelerator FAQs." n.d. https://thefarmatl.com/about/faq/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  447

Figure 11.3 While solopreneurs can certainly find success, many ventures find value in a team approach.
(credit: "achievement agreement arms business" by rawpixel/Pixabay, CC0)

Multiple shifts in sources of innovations and rapid business model exploration may reflect high startup failure
rates. Lack of planning is also a major reason for failure. Most small businesses fail within the first few years
because of cash-flow issues. With more people today willing to field a startup team or enter the
entrepreneurial ring, failure is more often than not a part of the entrepreneurial journey. Serial entrepreneurs
launch numerous ventures, many of which fail, before moving on to other efforts. Entrepreneurs are the
modern-day equivalent of Hamilton: An American Musical's Hercules Mulligan to the world: They get back up
again after getting knocked down.

Innovation

One of the fundamental theories of entrepreneurship is that it brings innovation, which can be a new addition
to the market or a novel change to an existing product or service. The famed management guru Peter Drucker
put it simply: "Entrepreneurs innovate."[15] Of course, we should note that not all entrepreneurial ventures
involve innovation. Even for those that do, however, the term innovation can be ambiguous. Further
complicating the issue, a plethora of different extensions (or "types") has arisen surrounding the concept of
innovations--such as radical, incremental, and disruptive--that have been used to describe and emphasize
different innovations in different situations.[16] Innovation can also refer to products or processes because
there are differences between product innovation and process innovation. In other words, not all innovations
are created equal.[17]

As it pertains to entrepreneurship, the creative destruction of old markets with inferior technology and the
creation of new markets, as defined by Schumpeter back in the 1930s, occurs through disruptive
innovation.[18]

15 Peter F. Drucker. Innovation and Entrepreneurship: Practice and Principles. (New York: Harper Business, 1985), 30.
16 Henri Simula. "Concept of Innovation Revisited: A Framework for Product Innovation." International Association for Management of
Technology 2007 Proceedings. 2007.
17 Salem Baer. "The 3 Types of Innovation: Product, Process, & Business Model." Differential. January 16, 2017. https://differential.com/
insights/the3typesofinnovation/
18 Joseph Schumpeter. Theory of Economy Development: An Inquiry into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1934), 19.
448  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

The adjective disruptive also became a bit of a catchphrase in the 1990s during the first Internet era, largely

due to the popularity of Clayton Christensen's Figure 11.4 theory of incumbent failure in the face of what he
first termed "disruptive technology" and later renamed "disruptive innovation."[19]

Figure 11.4 Clayton M. Christensen has contributed many ideas about innovation to the field of
entrepreneurship. (credit: "Follow Business of Software - Clayton Christensen" by Betsy Weber/Flickr, CC BY
2.0)

As Christensen defines them, disruptive innovations are often more advantageous to new entrants than to
incumbent firms. This is because once market uncertainty occurs as a consequence of the disruption around
the disruptive product, established firms consider it irrational to abandon their existing paying customers for
the smaller customer base of the new, initially small market for what they believe is inferior technology. New
entrants challenge incumbent firms by either creating markets where no markets exist, turning nonconsumers
into consumers, or by targeting overlooked segments of the market and later moving up market as the
product improves. Leading firms' decision criteria for developing new products and commercializing
innovations are all biased toward supporting incremental innovations that build on their existing technology
base and help maintain or grow revenue and profitability in established markets. This opens the door for
startups to develop and introduce disruptive innovations and profit from them. Table 11.1 lists some disruptive
innovations.

19 C. M. Christensen. The Innovator's Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to Fail (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997).
C. M. Christensen, Taddy Hall, Karen Dillon, and David S. Duncan, Competing Against Luck: The Story of Innovation and Customer Choice (New York:
HarperCollins, 2016).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                           449

                                            Disruptive Innovations

      Area     Timeframe            Established                     Disruptive Innovation
Medical        1960s                   Market
imaging        1990s-2000s
Screens                             X-rays       Ultrasound offered a new type of imaging; X-ray
               2000s                             companies lost out to the market and could not match
Entertainment                                    the innovation, although eventually they purchased many
                                                 ultrasound companies

                                    CRT          LED/LCDs innovated to overcome their display
                                    (cathode     limitations, replacing heavy and bulky CRTs. More recent
                                    ray tube)    innovations like foldable screens and retinal scans have
                                                 added more functionality and "intelligence" to link to
                                                 Internet of Things devices

                                    Video        Streaming services ousted much of the video rental
                                    rental       market and companies like Blockbuster found themselves
                                                 irrelevant in the market. More recently, multiple
                                                 streaming services along with proprietary content (and
                                                 "Over the Top" menu options) have disrupted cable TV
                                                 companies

Table 11.1

ARE YOU READY?

Netflix's Disruption

Netflix, founded in 1997 in California, disrupted video rental stores such as Blockbuster with its
subscription service, which mailed DVDs directly to customers' homes. The rental stores, whose business
model was predicated on revenue from late fees, could not compete with the ease and convenience of
home delivery coupled with lower costs than the per-tape rental fees. But as streaming video content
directly to televisions or over-the-top devices disrupted Netflix's original DVD-by-mail model, Netflix
moved to offer a streaming service in addition to the DVD by mail model. In both instances, Netflix's
prevailing model was predicated on serving as a distribution outlet for content created by other
businesses. Netflix in recent years has begun not only distributing others' content but creating its own
TV and movie content as well. (Orange Is the New Black and The Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt are both
original Netflix series; The Irishman is an original Netflix film.) Now content creators such as Disney and
Marvel are creating their own streaming distribution platforms to exclusively deliver their own content,
eventually pulling those shows from Netflix.

  · What should Netflix do to counter this threat to the third iteration of its business model?
  · What threats does the end of net neutrality pose to Netflix's business model?
450  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     · If you were in charge at Netflix, would you pay more to Internet providers to gain faster delivery of
        your content on the Internet? Why or why not?

In separate but related work, Christensen also developed the jobs-to-be-done theory, which aids companies in
determining how to create products and services that customers want to buy by getting at the causal driver
behind a purchase. Christensen uses the term job as shorthand for what an individual wants to accomplish in a
given circumstance, often with social, emotional, and functional dimensions. For example, two jobs that a
newspaper does for its readers are to inform and entertain, whereas the jobs to be done of a newspaper are
completely different for another customer segment--advertisers. A newspaper's jobs to be done for
advertisers, for instance, may include promotions, attracting customers, or selling products. The jobs-to-be-
done approach has also been incorporated into the development of business models in the form of customer
empathy maps and value proposition canvases covered.[20]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video illustrating Christensen's jobs-to-be-done theory through a milkshake
   (https://openstax.org/l/52ChristenMilk) to learn more.
   After you watch this video, think about how Christensen's definition of jobs relates to innovation. What
   are some jobs to be done for your entrepreneurial idea?

Disruptive innovations are contrasted with sustaining technologies, which improve the performance of
established products through characteristics that mainstream customers adopt. Disruptive technologies allow
for new entrants in the market, often with simpler, more affordable, more convenient products. Entrepreneurs
and marketers have difficulty predicting or projecting how the emergence of an innovation will occur, and
anticipating how customers will react to the new offerings. Predicting who the early adopters will be can also
be difficult during the early stage of an innovation's emergence. The mainstream customer base initially fails
to find value in the new product. New customer segments, however, see value in the new features and lower
prices. Eventually, developments improve the new product's features to a level that will satisfy mainstream
customers and thus attract more of the mainstream market.[21]

20 Clayton M. Christensen, Taddy Hall, Karen Dillon, and David S. Duncan. "Know Your Customers' `Jobs to Be Done'." Harvard Business Review.
September 2016. https://hbr.org/2016/09/know-your-customers-jobs-to-be-done
21 Christian Hopp, David Antons, Jermain Kaminski, and Torsten Oliver Salge. "What 40 Years of Research Reveals about the Difference
between Disruptive and Radical Innovation." Harvard Business Review. April 9, 2018. https://hbr.org/2018/04/what-40-years-of-research-reveals-
about-the-difference-between-disruptive-and-radical-innovation

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  451

WORK IT OUT
Ride Sharing

   Figure 11.5 Uber and Lyft are popular ride-sharing services. (credit: "navigation car drive road gps" by
   "DariuszSankowski"/Pixabay, CC0)

   Ride-sharing services disrupted the traditional taxicab business by providing a mobile platform that
   connected ride-seeking consumers with drivers willing to provide transportation. In rapidly becoming the
   market leader of ride-sharing services, Uber became the poster child for disruptive innovation. A
   customer using a ride-sharing service like Uber or Lyft no longer had to wave down a cab on the street,
   nor did she need cash in hand anymore through its mobile payment system within the app. An Uber ride
   usually costs less than a regular cab ride. Ride-sharing services also offer more versatility in choices and
   greater overall convenience. Now Uber continues to evolve its model, adding options like Uber Eats and
   Uber Copter.

      · What are the jobs to be done that Uber addresses?
      · What areas of a taxi cab's business model does Uber disrupt?

Christensen prefers the term disruptive innovation to disruptive technology because even in his original
theoretical framework, technology was not the driving force disrupting existing markets, products, and
models--rather, business models were.[22] The root of the tension in disruptive innovation is the conflict
between the previously established business model for the incumbent technology and the new business
model that may be necessary for exploiting the disruptive technology or process.
The efforts of incumbents to capitalize on a disruptive technology will fail in most instances because
commercializing the new technology will require a different business model from the one that the incumbents
currently use. When disruption occurs, incumbents struggle to commercialize, whereas new entrants take
control through their mastery of the requisite new business models. Thus, a disruptive business model can
fundamentally reshape profits within an industry because managers are faced with a technological disruption/
innovation that alters their businesses, specifically their business models. This phenomenon is known as
business model innovation.[23]
Business model innovation, as defined by Professor Constantinos Markides of the London Business School,

22 C. M. Christensen. The Innovator's Dilemma. (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 1997), 13.
23 C. M. Christensen and M. Raynor. The Innovator's Solution. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2003.
452  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

occurs when an existing business fundamentally changes their business model.[24] In order to be an
innovation, the "new business model must enlarge the existing economic pie, either by attracting new
customers or by encouraging existing consumers to consume more." Disruptive innovations tend to require a
business model that is not only different from but even in conflict with the traditional way of competing.[25] In
contrast, radical innovations (see the preceding text) are new-to-the-world products that are disruptive to both
consumers and producers.

In the context of disruptive innovation, business model innovation is distinct from open business model
innovation, which leverages external ideas together with internal ones. We also can define a business model
innovation as a reformulation of an existing product or service, including a shift in how it is provided to the
end user. A business model innovation "leads to a new way of playing the game" and can consist of new
performance attributes on price or distribution outlets.[26] Stitch Fix uses data to offer personal styling at scale
and ships customized clothing boxes from its own in-house label and from 1,000 brands in its collection
directly to customers who want to avoid the hassles of in-store shopping. Despite volatility from investors,
which dropped its initial $5.1 billion valuation at offering by two-thirds over three months, the company
continues to reinvent the $334 billion US apparel industry.[27]

Value Proposition

Entrepreneurs play a key role in determining the value of their products. Of course, there are financial
measures of value such as economic performance, job creation, wealth, and growth measures. But more often
than not, value creation at the outset of a new startup venture lies outside these financial realms and
addresses instead individual value to customers. The value proposition in a business model, for example, is a
summary describing the benefits (value) customers can expect from a particular product or service. Your value
proposition describes the benefits customers can expect from your products and services.[28] The value
proposition is an integral part of the business model canvas, which we will discuss in Designing the Business
Model.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     From Odeo to Twitter

     Evan Williams and Biz Stone, both ex-Google employees, began a podcasting platform startup called
     Odeo around 2005. According to an early engineer in the company, Blaine Cooke, they built and tested
     Odeo but never used it. Shortly after co-founder Noah Glass created Odeo's podcasting platform, Apple
     announced plans to include a podcasting platform in all of its iPods. Faced with the reality that many of
     Odeo's fourteen employees weren't using the product they had built and the emergence of a giant
     competitor with a tremendous unfair advantage in Apple, Williams decided Odeo's future wouldn't be in

24 Constantinos Markides. "Disruptive Innovation: In Need of Better Theory." Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (2006): 19-25.
25 Constantinos Markides. "Disruptive Innovation: In Need of Better Theory." Journal of Product Innovation Management 23 (2006): 19-25.
26 Constantinos D. Charitou and Constantinos C. Markides, "Responses to Disruptive Strategic Innovation." MITSloan Management Review.
January 15, 2003. https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/responses-to-disruptive-strategic-innovation/
27 Lauren Smiley. "Stitch Fix's radical data driven way to sell clothes- $1.2 billion last year--is reinventing retail." Fast Company. February 19,
2019. https://www.fastcompany.com/90298900/stitch-fix-most-innovative-companies-2019
28 Alexander Osterwalder, Yves Pigneur, Gregory Bernarda, and Alan Smith. Value Proposition Design: How to Create Products and Services
Customers Want. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2015.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                       453

podcasting.

The company held hackathons among employees and began searching for a pivot. One of those fourteen
Odeo employees, Jack Dorsey, focused his efforts on the problem of status, the position of affairs at a
particular time. In February 2006, Dorsey, Glass, and Florian Weber, a German contract developer,
presented what they called Twttr, a system whereby a user could send a text message to a phone
number, and it would be broadcast to the user's friends. A month later, Odeo had a working Twttr
prototype, while obsessed employees were racking up hundreds of dollars in text messaging bills using
the product. By the fall, Twitter (as it was now called) had thousands of users. Many began to see the
product's utility after a San Francisco earthquake when it was heavily used to broadcast messages
throughout the Bay Area.

  · What type of innovation would you consider the original Odeo platform? Why?
  · Why did Apple have an "unfair advantage" with its podcasting platform over competitors like Odeo?
  · What value proposition did the early version of Twttr offer its users?

 11.2 Designing the Business Model

Portions of the material in this section are based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with
support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license at
https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define a business model and its purpose
  · Describe a business model canvas
  · Describe a lean model canvas
  · Describe a social business model canvas

According to Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur, the authors of Business Model Generation, a business
model "describes the rationale of how an organization creates, delivers and captures value." Nevertheless,
there is no single definition of this term, and usage varies widely.[29]
In standard business usage, a business model is a plan for how venture will be funded; how the venture
creates value for its stakeholders, including customers; how the venture's offerings are made and distributed
to the end users; and the how income will be generated through this process. The business model refers more
to the design of the business, whereas a business plan is a planning document used for operations.
Each business model is unique to the company it describes. A typical business model addresses the
desirability, feasibility, and viability of a company, product, or service. At a bare minimum, a business model
needs to address revenue streams (e.g., a revenue model), a value proposition, and customer segments. In
non-jargon English, this means you want to address what your idea is, who will use it, why they will use it, and
how you will make money off it.

29 Alexander Osterwalder and Yves Pigneur. Business Model Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game Changers, and Challengers. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley, 2010.
454  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

A canvas is a display that would-be entrepreneurs commonly use to map out and plan different components of
their business models. There are several different types of canvases, with the business model canvas and the
lean canvas being the most commonly used. There are hard-copy canvases modeled after an art canvas as well
as digital versions. The original physical canvases are meant to serve as visual tools, used with sticky notes and
sketches.

As developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur, the business model canvas has nine components, as shown in
Figure 11.6.

Figure 11.6 The business model canvas can be used to map or lay out the initial concept of your business.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit this site to see examples of completed Business Model Canvases for a variety of industries
   (https://openstax.org/l/52BMCsamples) for a deeper understanding of how the different categories are
   filled in.

Osterwalder and Pigneur wrote Value Proposition Design as a sequel to Business Model Generation. Their value
proposition canvas is a plug-in that complements the business model canvas, going in depth on activities such
as encouraging entrepreneurs to address and tackle customer pains, gains, and jobs-to-be-done trigger
questions, and designing pain relievers and gains. The complementary and accompanying activities and
resources can be useful for a deeper dive into and understanding of customer value creation in the form of
value proposition, although there are other approaches to conceptualizing your value proposition. For
Christensen, the originator of the disruptive innovation and jobs-to-be-done theories, a value proposition is a
product that helps customers do a job they've been trying to do more effectively, conveniently, and affordably.
Finding the intersection of your customers' problems and your solutions is how you create a unique value
proposition, according to the entrepreneur Ash Maurya, the author of Scaling Lean and Running Lean. In
Running Lean, Maurya offers the following formula for creating an initial value proposition in the canvas, as
shown in Figure 11.7.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  455

Figure 11.7 Maurya's formula to determine value proposition considers customer needs and potential
objections within a specific period of time. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

Maurya deviated from the standard business model canvas to create the lean canvas. It overlaps the business
model canvas in five of the nine components: customer segments, value proposition, revenue streams,
channels, and cost structure (Figure 11.8]. Rather than addressing key partners, key activities, and key
resources, the lean canvas helps you tackle problems, solutions, and key metrics instead.

Figure 11.8 The lean model canvas is a modification of the Business Model Canvas. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit this site to see examples of completed Lean Model Canvases from some major companies
   (https://openstax.org/l/52LMCsamples) for a deeper understanding of how the canvas can be applied.

While the business model canvas and the lean canvas are similar in format, there are differences in how they
are used. It is generally accepted that the lean canvas model is a better fit for startups, whereas the business
model canvas works well for already established businesses. The lean canvas is simpler; the business model
canvas provides a more complete picture of a mature business.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this Railsware video that demonstrates how the lean canvas model might be applied to startups
   (https://openstax.org/l/52LeanCanvUb) to learn more. In the case example in the video, the lean canvas
456  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     model is applied to the successful P2P ride-sharing app Uber, as if it were a startup.

Both the business model canvas and the lean canvas are designed for constant iterations, allowing for multiple
versions and changes throughout the entrepreneurial process. Part of that process involves customer
discovery; thus, the canvases invoke customer-focused design. The target customer is integrated into the
canvas from the start through the use of a customer empathy map and a number of design-thinking ideation
activities.[30] The customer empathy map is a portrayal of a target customer--the most promising candidate
from a business's customer segments--that explores the understanding of that person's condition from their
perspective to understand his or her problems and needs (Figure 11.9). Osterwalder and Pigneur used a
customer empathy map as part of the design ideation phase of developing a business model canvas. There are
differing versions of customer empathy maps, but most seek to answer common questions pertaining to the
customer, such as:

  · With whom are we empathizing?
  · What do they need to do?
  · What do they see?
  · What do they say?
  · What do they do?
  · What do they hear?
  · What do they think?

Phillips, Proctor & Gamble, Microsoft, and Yeti are examples of well-known companies that make use of
customer empathy mapping because, according to the journal Entrepreneur, every transaction can be turned
into a meaningful and valuable customer interaction.[31] Once a company analyzes the results of customer
mapping exercises, it may very well lead to new products that serve customer needs and/or wants.

For example, Philips used empathy mapping to detect a high level of fear in young patients immediately
before an MRI medical procedure, so it invented a miniature version of the CAT scan equipment used in the
procedure called the "kitten scanner" along with toy animal characters that were used to dispel the fear of
MRIs among children. Proctor & Gamble created a new advertisement that was released for the 2012 Olympics
visualizing the trials and tribulations of mothers raising young athletes, demonstrating Proctor and Gamble's
awareness that some of its customers wanted or needed empathy for the sacrifices they had made to help
their children succeed. Likewise, Microsoft has attempted to demonstrate empathy with customers' privacy
concerns by developing an interactive website that explains not only how data is stolen but also how we can
better protect our own data.[32]

On their company website, the now-famous Yeti cooler company publicly extols the value of empathy
mapping, explaining that it leads to better products. Yeti doesn't just create one on its own, it actually asks its
clients to work with the company to create an empathy map.[33] Thus, empathy mapping for Yeti is part of its
product development process.

Customer empathy maps also strive to address customer pains (in this case, fears, frustrations, and anxieties)
and gains (wants, needs, hopes, and dreams).[34]

30 Charlene Perrin. "Create A Customer Empathy Map in 6 Easy Steps!" Conceptboard. March 28, 2019. https://conceptboard.com/blog/
create-a-customer-empathy-map-in-6-easy-steps/
31 Vineet Arya. "How to Infuse Empathy in Your Marketing?" Entrepreneur. June 28, 2019. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/335987
32 Vineet Arya. "How to Infuse Empathy in Your Marketing?" Entrepreneur. June 28, 2019. https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/335987
33 Mike Godlewski. "The Secret to Knowing What a Client Is Thinking? Empathy Maps." Yeti. February 8, 2016. https://yeti.co/blog/the-secret-
to-knowing-what-your-client-is-thinking-empathy-maps/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  457

Figure 11.9 An empathy map portrays the target customer in order to understand the market needs.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Strategyzer offers six videos outlining the business model canvas (https://openstax.org/l/52BMCvideos)
   that total about 12 minutes; specifically they cover the prototyping journey from ideation to visualization
   of conceptualization.

Business Model Canvas[35]

As Osterwalder and Pigneur describe it, according to Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship, their business
model canvas blocks include revenue streams, customer segments, value propositions, cost structures,
channels, key activities, key partners, key resources, and customer relationships.
Early on, your greatest focus should be on the right side of the canvas because:

  · These are, in many ways, the most critical aspects of starting a new venture (customer segments, value
      propositions, channels, and revenue streams).

  · The most fluid (revenue streams, channels, and value propositions will likely differ for the differing
      customer segments and, as you iterate and adapt throughout the customer discovery process, could likely
      change).

  · These follow a logical temporal order (there's no need to focus on the costs of building a company if you
      won't have customers).

In a follow-up to business model generation, the Strategyzer team created a second canvas, the value
proposition canvas: https://www.strategyzer.com/canvas/value-proposition-canvas. The value proposition

34 Germán Coppola. "What Is an Empathy Map, and Why Is It Valuable for Your Business?" Medium. November 28, 2017.
https://medium.com/swlh/what-is-an-empathy-map-and-why-is-it-valuable-for-your-business-14236be4fdf4
35 This material is based on original work by Geoffrey Graybeal and produced with support from the Rebus Community. The original is freely available under the terms of
the CC BY 4.0 license at https://press.rebus.community/media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.
458  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

canvas is a new tool that pulls out the customer segment and value proposition blocks of the business model
canvas, and encourages more in-depth exploration of those blocks to achieve a good fit between the two. The
value proposition canvas tool looks at customer pains, gains and jobs to be done on the customer side and
painkillers, gain creators, and products and services on the value proposition side.[36]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Read this blog that provides a walk-through of how to fill in a value proposition canvas
   (https://openstax.org/l/52VPfillin) to learn more.

When you peel away the language used to describe business models, the early startup planning stages come
down to a series of questions. When it comes to formulating a business model for a startup concept, another
popular framework used in entrepreneurial circles is that of desirability-feasibility-viability Figure 11.10). This
framework forces the entrepreneur to address broad questions about the startup concept:

  · Desirability: How desirable is the product? Who will use it and why?
  · Feasibility: How feasible is this idea? What are the costs of making it? How practical is the concept?
  · Viability: Will this idea remain viable? How will it make money? How will it be sustained over time?

These questions then begin to connect to form a narrative about where the startup concept came from, whom
it serves, why it's needed, how it will make money, and how it will be sustained in the future.

Figure 11.10 The framework of desirability, feasibility, and viability form a story about a company's startup.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The value propositions, customer relationships, customer segments, and channels address the assumptions
that will create customer value (desirability). The cost structure and revenue stream blocks are aimed at
viability, or overcoming flawed business models. The key partners, key activities, and key resources are about
execution and address feasibility. The risk of poor execution can undermine your assumptions that you chose
the right infrastructure to execute your business model (feasibility). The risk of solving an irrelevant customer
job (sometimes derisively labeled "a solution in search of a problem") undercuts desirability in your business.
The risk of a flawed business model would hamper the financial assumption that your business will earn more
money than you spend (viability). Adaptability is about the assumption that you chose the right business

36 Michelle Ferrier and Elizabeth Mays. Media Innovation and Entrepreneurship. The Rebus Foundation, 2017. https://press.rebus.community/
media-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  459

model within the context of external factors such as technology change, competition, and regulation.
The business model canvas is not an exhaustive planning tool by any means.[37],[38] The risk of such external
threats is not specifically addressed on the canvas blocks. The external threats not specifically covered by the
canvas blocks can be designed for adaptability, that is, the business model canvas is a necessary but
insufficient component of determining the viability of the business idea/concept. There are many elements not
included in the canvas that entrepreneurs must address. Industry analysis, including a competitive analysis,
for example, falls "off canvas" but is important nonetheless.

The Lean Model Canvas

The lean model canvas is Ash Maurya's adaptation of the original business model canvas. As we noted earlier,
gone are the customer relationships, key activities, key partners, and key resources blocks. Instead, a problem
block is added, because as Maurya explains, "Most startups fail, not because they fail to build what they set
out to build, but because they waste time, money and effort building the wrong product. I attribute a
significant contributor to this failure to a lack of proper `problem understanding' from the start." Maurya next
added a solution block to the lean model canvas, which corresponds well with features on a minimum viable
product (MVP), which you will recall was covered in depth in Launch for Growth to Success. The lean model
canvas also adds an "Unfair Advantage" block, similar to the block for competitive advantages or barriers to
entry found in a business plan.[39]

Social Business Model Canvas

As you've noticed by now, the core canvas components are common throughout the various versions. Many of
the blocks of the social business model canvas are similar to those used in the business model canvas and
the lean model canvas.[40] A few differences, as developed by Tandemic, focus on areas unique to social
entrepreneurship ventures. For example, the new areas added include measures of what kind of social impact
you are creating or developing, measures of surplus to address what happens with profits and where you
intend to reinvest them, and measures of beneficiary segments, and social and customer value
propositions.[41] These could be measures such as the number of trees planted, number of refugees housed
and fed, jobs created, or investments made--depending on the venture. Social impact looks at an
organization's social mission beyond the bottom line. Measurement can differ among social entrepreneurs,
but in terms of the canvas, impact measures are an effort to establish quantifiable metrics.

Social impact can be hard to measure, but nonetheless, many social entrepreneurs aim for long-lasting
impact.[42] A 2014 report by the think tank, consultancy, and member network SustainAbility lists cooperative
ownership, inclusive sourcing, and the "buy one, give one" model as three forms of social impact.[43] In
addition to the Tandemic social business model canvas, there are other versions of similar canvases used for

37 Jennifer van der Meer. "Do You Suffer from Value Proposition Confusion?" Linkedin. October 19, 2016. https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/do-
you-suffer-from-value-proposition-confusion-jennifer-van-der-meer/
38 "The Value Proposition Canvas." Strategyzer. n.d. https://strategyzer.com/canvas/value-proposition-canvas
39 Ash Maurya. "Why Lean Canvas vs Business Model Canvas?" Medium. February 27, 2012. https://blog.leanstack.com/why-lean-canvas-vs-
business-model-canvas-af62c0f250f0
40 "Social Business Model Canvas." Business Model Toolbox. 2013. https://bmtoolbox.net/tools/social-business-model-canvas/
41 "The Business Model Canvas Reinvented for Social Business." Tandemic. n.d. http://www.socialbusinessmodelcanvas.com
42 Ayse Guclu, J. Gregory Dees, and Beth Battle Anderson. "The Process of Social Entrepreneurship: Creating Opportunities Worthy of Serious
Pursuit." Duke/Fuqua case. 2002. https://centers.fuqua.duke.edu/case/knowledge_items/the-process-of-social-entrepreneurship-creating-
opportunities-worthy-of-serious-pursuit/
43 Lindsay Clinton and Ryan Whisnant. "Model Behavior: 20 Business Model Innovations for Sustainability." SustainAbility. February 2014.
https://sustainability.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/model_behavior_20_business_model_innovations_for_sustainability.pdf
460  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

social entrepreneurship. For instance, Osterwalder adapted the business model canvas for mission-driven
organizations into a mission model canvas.[44] There's also a social lean canvas that adds purpose (explaining
your reason for creating the venture in terms of social or environmental problems) and impact sections
(describing the intended social or environmental impact).[45]

   LINK TO LEARNING

   This completed social business model canvas for the popular peer-to-peer lending platform Kiva
   (https://openstax.org/l/52SocialBMC) illustrates how the business model canvas can and perhaps should
   be adapted for social entrepreneurship ventures.

     WHAT CAN YOU DO?

     TOMS Shoes

     Toms Shoes is perhaps one of the best-known companies for adopting a social entrepreneurship
     purpose into its business model. Part of its early success hinged on the fact that for every pair of shoes a
     customer bought, the company donated a pair of shoes to someone in need. The company won a prize in
     2006 for its innovative solution to poverty. This "1-for-1 business model," sometimes commonly called
     the "Toms model" after the shoe company that popularized it, gained traction among other companies
     that followed suit in similar fashion, seeing both the social and the financial successes in the Toms
     model. Warby Parker is another example of a company that does essentially the same: A customer
     purchases a pair of eyeglasses, and the company donates a pair (although Warby Parker pays a third
     party to procure the glasses, as eyeglasses require an individual prescription, whereas shoes do not).

       · Can you think of an innovative social entrepreneurship business model?

44 Alexander Osterwalder. "The Mission Model Canvas: An Adapted Business Model Canvas for Mission-Driven Organizations." Strategyzer.
February 25, 2016. https://blog.strategyzer.com/posts/2016/2/24/the-mission-model-canvas-an-adapted-business-model-canvas-for-mission-
driven-organizations
45 Social Lean Canvas. n.d. https://socialleancanvas.com/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  461

WHAT CAN YOU DO?
The Birthday Party Project

   Figure 11.11 The Birthday Party Project helps provide celebrations to honor the birthdays of homeless
   children. (credit: modification of "children's birthday table" by "Efraimstochter"/Pixabay, CC0)

   Paige Chenault wanted homeless children in Dallas to feel special on their birthdays. Many have never
   experienced a birthday party. So this professional event planner sprang into action in January 2012. She
   launched the Birthday Party Project (https://www.thebirthdaypartyproject.org/), a nonprofit group
   whose mission is to celebrate the lives of homeless children (ages one to twenty-two). The group
   organizes monthly birthday parties with partner shelters. Since its inception, the concept has spread
   beyond Texas to cities across the United States, including Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and
   San Francisco. In six years, the Birthday Party Project has celebrated 4,800 birthdays with 30,000 kids in
   attendance, eaten 40,000 cupcakes, cracked 30,000 glow sticks, and performed 1,100 renditions of
   "Happy Birthday."

      · Identify a need in your community that could become a social entrepreneurship business, as Paige
          discovered with an initial passion project.

 11.3 Conducting a Feasibility Analysis

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the purpose of a feasibility analysis
  · Describe and develop the parts of a feasibility analysis
  · Understand how to apply feasibility outcomes to a new venture

As the name suggests, a feasibility analysis is designed to assess whether your entrepreneurial endeavor is,
in fact, feasible or possible. By evaluating your management team, assessing the market for your concept,
462  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

estimating financial viability, and identifying potential pitfalls, you can make an informed choice about the
achievability of your entrepreneurial endeavor. A feasibility analysis is largely numbers driven and can be far
more in depth than a business plan (discussed in The Business Plan). It ultimately tests the viability of an idea,
a project, or a new business. A feasibility study may become the basis for the business plan, which outlines the
action steps necessary to take a proposal from ideation to realization. A feasibility study allows a business to
address where and how it will operate, its competition, possible hurdles, and the funding needed to begin. The
business plan then provides a framework that sets out a map for following through and executing on the
entrepreneurial vision.

Organizational Feasibility Analysis

Organizational feasibility aims to assess the prowess of management and sufficiency of resources to bring a
product or idea to market Figure 11.12. The company should evaluate the ability of its management team on
areas of interest and execution. Typical measures of management prowess include assessing the founders'
passion for the business idea along with industry expertise, educational background, and professional
experience. Founders should be honest in their self-assessment of ranking these areas.

Figure 11.12 An analysis of organizational feasibility focuses on resource needs and management
capabilities. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Resource sufficiency pertains to nonfinancial resources that the venture will need to move forward
successfully and aims to assess whether an entrepreneur has a sufficient amount of such resources. The
organization should critically rank its abilities in six to twelve types of such critical nonfinancial resources, such
as availability of office space, quality of the labor pool, possibility of obtaining intellectual property protections
(if applicable), willingness of high-quality employees to join the company, and likelihood of forming favorable
strategic partnerships. If the analysis reveals that critical resources are lacking, the venture may not be
possible as currently planned.[46]

46 Ulrich Kaiser. "A primer in Entrepreneurship - Chapter 3 Feasibility analysis" University of Zurich Institute for Strategy and Business
Economics. n.d. https://docplayer.net/7775267-A-primer-in-entrepreneurship-chapter-3-feasibility-analysis.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                              463

Financial Feasibility Analysis

A financial analysis seeks to project revenue and expenses (forecasts come later in the full business plan);
project a financial narrative; and estimate project costs, valuations, and cash flow projections Figure 11.13.

Figure 11.13 An analysis of financial feasibility focuses on expenses, cash flow, and projected revenue.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The financial analysis may typically include these items:

  · A twelve-month profit and loss projection
  · A three- or four-year profit-and-loss projection
  · A cash-flow projection
  · A projected balance sheet
  · A breakeven calculation

The financial analysis should estimate the sales or revenue that you expect the business to generate. A
number of different formulas and methods are available for calculating sales estimates. You can use industry
or association data to estimate the sales of your potential new business. You can search for similar businesses
in similar locations to gauge how your business might perform compared with similar performances by
competitors. One commonly used equation for a sales model multiplies the number of target customers by
the average revenue per customer to establish a sales projection:

                                                                T× A = S

              Target(ed) Customers / Users × Average Revenue per Customer = Sales Projection

Another critical part of planning for new business owners is to understand the breakeven point, which is the
level of operations that results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs (see Entrepreneurial Finance and
Accounting for an in-depth discussion on calculating breakeven points and the breakdown of cost types). It
yields neither a profit nor a loss. To calculate the breakeven point, you must first understand the two types of
costs: fixed and variable. Fixed costs are expenses that do not vary based on the amount of sales. Rent is one
example, but most of a business's other costs operate in this manner as well. While some costs vary from
month to month, costs are described as variable only if they will increase if the company sells even one more
item. Costs such as insurance, wages, and office supplies are typically considered fixed costs. Variable costs
fluctuate with the level of sales revenue and include items such as raw materials, purchases to be sold, and
464  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

direct labor. With this information, you can calculate your breakeven point--the sales level at which your
business has neither a profit nor a loss.[47] Projections should be more than just numbers: include an
explanation of the underlying assumptions used to estimate the venture's income and expenses.

Projected cash flow outlines preliminary expenses, operating expenses, and reserves--in essence, how much
you need before starting your company. You want to determine when you expect to receive cash and when
you have to write a check for expenses. Your cash flow is designed to show if your working capital is adequate.
A balance sheet shows assets and liabilities, necessary for reporting and financial management. When
liabilities are subtracted from assets, the remainder is owners' equity. The financial concepts and statements
introduced here are discussed fully in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting.

Market Feasibility Analysis

A market analysis enables you to define competitors and quantify target customers and/or users in the
market within your chosen industry by analyzing the overall interest in the product or service within the
industry by its target market Figure 11.14. You can define a market in terms of size, structure, growth
prospects, trends, and sales potential. This information allows you to better position your company in
competing for market share. After you've determined the overall size of the market, you can define your target
market, which leads to a total available market (TAM), that is, the number of potential users within your
business's sphere of influence. This market can be segmented by geography, customer attributes, or product-
oriented segments. From the TAM, you can further distill the portion of that target market that will be
attracted to your business. This market segment is known as a serviceable available market (SAM).

Figure 11.14 An analysis of market feasibility examines the overall market and focuses on the anticipated
share of the target market. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Projecting market share can be a subjective estimate, based not only on an analysis of the market but also on
pricing, promotional, and distribution strategies. As is the case for revenue, you will have a number of different
forecasts and tools available at your disposal. Other items you may include in a market analysis are a complete
competitive review, historical market performance, changes to supply and demand, and projected growth in

47 In a preliminary financial model and business plan, startup costs should be allocated, as they are intended for one-time investments in
development; pre-launch costs and other necessary expenses will not carry over once the product/solution has launched.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                            465

demand over time.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Market Feasibility Analysis

   You've been hired by a leading hotel chain to determine the market and financial potential for the
   development of a mixed-use property that will include a full-service hotel in downtown Orlando, located
   at 425 East Central Boulevard, in Orlando, Florida. The specific address is important so you can pinpoint
   existing competitors and overall suitability of the site. Using the information given, conduct a market
   analysis that can be part of a larger feasibility study.

WORK IT OUT
Location Feasibility

Figure 11.15 If you wanted to open a business in downtown Atlanta, you would need to research the
feasibility of operating a location there. (credit: "Atlanta,Georgia,downtown skyline,dusk" by
"tableatny"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

You're considering opening a boutique clothing store in downtown Atlanta. You've read news reports
about how downtown Atlanta and the city itself are growing and undergoing changes from previous
decades. With new development taking place there, you're not sure whether such a venture is viable.
Outline what steps you would need to take to conduct a feasibility study to determine whether
downtown Atlanta is the right location for your planned clothing store.
466  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

Applying Feasibility Outcomes

After conducting a feasibility analysis, you must determine whether to proceed with the venture. One
technique that is commonly used in project management is known as a go-or-no-go decision. This tool allows
a team to decide if criteria have been met to move forward on a project. Criteria on which to base a decision
are established and tracked over time. You can develop criteria for each section of the feasibility analysis to
determine whether to proceed and evaluate those criteria as either "go" or "no go," using that assessment to
make a final determination of the overall concept feasibility. Determine whether you are comfortable
proceeding with the present management team, whether you can "go" forward with existing nonfinancial
resources, whether the projected financial outlook is worth proceeding, and make a determination on the
market and industry. If satisfied that enough "go" criteria are met, you would likely then proceed to
developing your strategy in the form of a business plan.

     WHAT CAN YOU DO?

     Love Beyond Walls

     When Terence Lester saw a homeless man living behind an abandoned, dilapidated building, he asked
     the man if he could take him to a shelter. The man scoffed, replying that Lester should sleep in a shelter.
     So he did--and he saw the problem through the homeless man's perspective. The shelter was crowded
     and smelly. You couldn't get much sleep, because others would try to steal your meager belongings. The
     dilapidated building provided isolation away from others, but quiet and security in its own way that the
     shelter could not. This experience led Lester to voluntarily live as a homeless person for a few weeks. His
     journey led him to create Love Beyond Walls (www.lovebeyondwalls.org), an organization that aids the
     homeless, among other causes. Lester didn't conduct a formal feasibility study, but he did so informally
     by walking in his intended customers' shoes--literally. A feasibility study of homelessness in a particular
     area could yield surprising findings that might lead to social entrepreneurial pursuits.

       · What is a social cause you think could benefit from a formal feasibility study around a potential
           entrepreneurial solution?

 11.4 The Business Plan

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the different purposes of a business plan
  · Describe and develop the components of a brief business plan
  · Describe and develop the components of a full business plan

Unlike the brief or lean formats introduced so far, the business plan is a formal document used for the long-
range planning of a company's operation. It typically includes background information, financial information,
and a summary of the business. Investors nearly always request a formal business plan because it is an
integral part of their evaluation of whether to invest in a company. Although nothing in business is permanent,
a business plan typically has components that are more "set in stone" than a business model canvas, which is

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  467

more commonly used as a first step in the planning process and throughout the early stages of a nascent
business. A business plan is likely to describe the business and industry, market strategies, sales potential, and
competitive analysis, as well as the company's long-term goals and objectives. An in-depth formal business
plan would follow at later stages after various iterations to business model canvases. The business plan
usually projects financial data over a three-year period and is typically required by banks or other investors to
secure funding. The business plan is a roadmap for the company to follow over multiple years.

Some entrepreneurs prefer to use the canvas process instead of the business plan, whereas others use a
shorter version of the business plan, submitting it to investors after several iterations. There are also
entrepreneurs who use the business plan earlier in the entrepreneurial process, either preceding or
concurrently with a canvas. For instance, Chris Guillebeau has a one-page business plan template in his book
The $100 Startup.[48] His version is basically an extension of a napkin sketch (see the "Are You Ready?" activity
in Designing the Business Model), without the detail of a full business plan. As you progress, you can also
consider a brief business plan (about two pages)--if you want to support a rapid business launch--and/or a
standard business plan.

As with many aspects of entrepreneurship, there are no clear hard and fast rules to achieving entrepreneurial
success. You may encounter different people who want different things (canvas, summary, full business plan),
and you also have flexibility in following whatever tool works best for you. Like the canvas, the various versions
of the business plan are tools that will aid you in your entrepreneurial endeavor.

Business Plan Overview

Most business plans have several distinct sections (Figure 11.16). The business plan can range from a few
pages to twenty-five pages or more, depending on the purpose and the intended audience. For our discussion,
we'll describe a brief business plan and a standard business plan. If you are able to successfully design a
business model canvas, then you will have the structure for developing a clear business plan that you can
submit for financial consideration.

Figure 11.16 Most business plans include the same important sections. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Both types of business plans aim at providing a picture and roadmap to follow from conception to creation. If
you opt for the brief business plan, you will focus primarily on articulating a big-picture overview of your
business concept.

48 Chris Guillebeau. The $100 Startup: Reinvent the Way You Make a Living, Do What You Love, and Create a New Future. New York: Crown
Business/Random House, 2012.
468  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

The full business plan is aimed at executing the vision concept, dealing with the proverbial devil in the details.
Developing a full business plan will assist those of you who need a more detailed and structured roadmap, or
those of you with little to no background in business. The business planning process includes the business
model, a feasibility analysis, and a full business plan, which we will discuss later in this section. Next, we
explore how a business plan can meet several different needs.

Purposes of a Business Plan

A business plan can serve many different purposes--some internal, others external. As we discussed
previously, you can use a business plan as an internal early planning device, an extension of a napkin sketch,
and as a follow-up to one of the canvas tools. A business plan can be an organizational roadmap, that is, an
internal planning tool and working plan that you can apply to your business in order to reach your desired
goals over the course of several years. The business plan should be written by the owners of the venture, since
it forces a firsthand examination of the business operations and allows them to focus on areas that need
improvement.

Refer to the business venture throughout the document. Generally speaking, a business plan should not be
written in the first person.

A major external purpose for the business plan is as an investment tool that outlines financial projections,
becoming a document designed to attract investors. In many instances, a business plan can complement a
formal investor's pitch. In this context, the business plan is a presentation plan, intended for an outside
audience that may or may not be familiar with your industry, your business, and your competitors.

You can also use your business plan as a contingency plan by outlining some "what-if" scenarios and exploring
how you might respond if these scenarios unfold. Pretty Young Professional launched in November 2010 as an
online resource to guide an emerging generation of female leaders. The site focused on recent female college
graduates and current students searching for professional roles and those in their first professional roles. It
was founded by four friends who were coworkers at the global consultancy firm McKinsey. But after positions
and equity were decided among them, fundamental differences of opinion about the direction of the business
emerged between two factions, according to the cofounder and former CEO Kathryn Minshew. "I think,
naively, we assumed that if we kicked the can down the road on some of those things, we'd be able to sort
them out," Minshew said. Minshew went on to found a different professional site, The Muse, and took much of
the editorial team of Pretty Young Professional with her.[49] Whereas greater planning potentially could have
prevented the early demise of Pretty Young Professional, a change in planning led to overnight success for
Joshua Esnard and The Cut Buddy team. Esnard invented and patented the plastic hair template that he was
selling online out of his Fort Lauderdale garage while working a full-time job at Broward College and running a
side business. Esnard had hundreds of boxes of Cut Buddies sitting in his home when he changed his
marketing plan to enlist companies specializing in making videos go viral. It worked so well that a promotional
video for the product garnered 8 million views in hours. The Cut Buddy sold over 4,000 products in a few hours
when Esnard only had hundreds remaining. Demand greatly exceeded his supply, so Esnard had to scramble
to increase manufacturing and offered customers two-for-one deals to make up for delays. This led to selling
55,000 units, generating $700,000 in sales in 2017.[50] After appearing on Shark Tank and landing a deal with

49 Jonathan Chan. "What These 4 Startup Case Studies Can Teach You about Failure." Foundr.com. July 12, 2015. https://foundr.com/4-startup-
case-studies-failure/
50 Amy Feldman. "Inventor of the Cut Buddy Paid YouTubers to Spark Sales. He Wasn't Ready for a Video to Go Viral." Forbes. February 15,
2017. https://www.forbes.com/sites/forbestreptalks/2017/02/15/inventor-of-the-cut-buddy-paid-youtubers-to-spark-sales-he-wasnt-ready-for-
a-video-to-go-viral/#3eb540ce798a

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  469

Daymond John that gave the "shark" a 20-percent equity stake in return for $300,000, The Cut Buddy has
added new distribution channels to include retail sales along with online commerce. Changing one aspect of a
business plan--the marketing plan--yielded success for The Cut Buddy.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video of Cut Buddy's founder, Joshua Esnard, telling his company's story
   (https://openstax.org/l/52CutBuddy) to learn more.

If you opt for the brief business plan, you will focus primarily on articulating a big-picture overview of your
business concept. This version is used to interest potential investors, employees, and other stakeholders, and
will include a financial summary "box," but it must have a disclaimer, and the founder/entrepreneur may need
to have the people who receive it sign a nondisclosure agreement (NDA). The full business plan is aimed at
executing the vision concept, providing supporting details, and would be required by financial institutions and
others as they formally become stakeholders in the venture. Both are aimed at providing a picture and
roadmap to go from conception to creation.

Types of Business Plans

The brief business plan is similar to an extended executive summary from the full business plan. This concise
document provides a broad overview of your entrepreneurial concept, your team members, how and why you
will execute on your plans, and why you are the ones to do so. You can think of a brief business plan as a scene
setter or--since we began this chapter with a film reference--as a trailer to the full movie. The brief business
plan is the commercial equivalent to a trailer for Field of Dreams, whereas the full plan is the full-length movie
equivalent.

Brief Business Plan

As the name implies, the executive summary summarizes key elements of the entire business plan, such as
the business concept, financial features, and current business position. The executive summary version of the
business plan is your opportunity to broadly articulate the overall concept and vision of the company for
yourself, for prospective investors, and for current and future employees.

A typical executive summary is generally no longer than a page, but because the brief business plan is
essentially an extended executive summary, the executive summary section is vital. This is the "ask" to an
investor. You should begin by clearly stating what you are asking for in the summary.

In the business concept phase, you'll describe the business, its product, and its markets. Describe the
customer segment it serves and why your company will hold a competitive advantage. This section may align
roughly with the customer segments and value-proposition segments of a canvas.

Next, highlight the important financial features, including sales, profits, cash flows, and return on investment.
Like the financial portion of a feasibility analysis, the financial analysis component of a business plan may
typically include items like a twelve-month profit and loss projection, a three- or four-year profit and loss
projection, a cash-flow projection, a projected balance sheet, and a breakeven calculation. You can explore a
feasibility study and financial projections in more depth in the formal business plan. Here, you want to focus
470                                        Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

on the big picture of your numbers and what they mean.

The current business position section can furnish relevant information about you and your team members and
the company at large. This is your opportunity to tell the story of how you formed the company, to describe its
legal status (form of operation), and to list the principal players. In one part of the extended executive
summary, you can cover your reasons for starting the business: Here is an opportunity to clearly define the
needs you think you can meet and perhaps get into the pains and gains of customers. You also can provide a
summary of the overall strategic direction in which you intend to take the company. Describe the company's
mission, vision, goals and objectives, overall business model, and value proposition.

Rice University's Student Business Plan Competition, one of the largest and overall best-regarded graduate
school business-plan competitions (see Telling Your Entrepreneurial Story and Pitching the Idea), requires an
executive summary of up to five pages to apply.[51],[52] Its suggested sections are shown in Table 11.2.

     Suggested Executive Summary Components for Rice University Business Plan Competition[53]

                 Section      Description

Company summary               Brief overview (one to two paragraphs) of the problem,
                              solution, and potential customers

Customer analysis             Description of potential customers and evidence they would
                              purchase product

Market analysis               Size of market, target market, and share of market

Product or service            Current state of product in development and evidence it is
                              feasible

Intellectual property         If applicable, information on patents, licenses, or other IP items

Competitive differentiation   Describe the competition and your competitive advantage

Company founders, management  Bios of key people showcasing their expertise and relevant
team, and/or advisor          experience

Financials                    Projections of revenue, profit, and cash flow for three to five
                              years

Amount of investment          Funding request and how funds will be used

Table 11.2

51 Jennifer Post. "National Business Plan Competitions for Entrepreneurs." Business News Daily. August 30, 2018.
https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/6902-business-plan-competitions-entrepreneurs.html
52 "Rice Business Plan Competition, Eligibility Criteria and How to Apply." Rice Business Plan Competition. March 2020. https://rbpc.rice.edu/
sites/g/files/bxs806/f/2020%20RBPC%20Eligibility%20Criteria%20and%20How%20to%20Apply_23Oct19.pdf
53 "Rice Business Plan Competition, Eligibility Criteria and How to Apply." Rice Business Plan Competition. March 2020. https://rbpc.rice.edu/
sites/g/files/bxs806/f/2020%20RBPC%20Eligibility%20Criteria%20and%20How%20to%20Apply_23Oct19.pdf; Based on 2019 RBPC Competition
Rules and Format April 4-6, 2019.
https://rbpc.rice.edu/sites/g/files/bxs806/f/2019-RBPC-Competition-Rules%20-Format.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  471

   ARE YOU READY?

   Create a Brief Business Plan

   Fill out a canvas of your choosing for a well-known startup: Uber, Netflix, Dropbox, Etsy, Airbnb, Bird/
   Lime, Warby Parker, or any of the companies featured throughout this chapter or one of your choice.
   Then create a brief business plan for that business. See if you can find a version of the company's actual
   executive summary, business plan, or canvas. Compare and contrast your vision with what the company
   has articulated.

      · These companies are well established but is there a component of what you charted that you would
          advise the company to change to ensure future viability?

      · Map out a contingency plan for a "what-if" scenario if one key aspect of the company or the
          environment it operates in were drastically is altered?

Full Business Plan

Even full business plans can vary in length, scale, and scope. Rice University sets a ten-page cap on business
plans submitted for the full competition. The IndUS Entrepreneurs, one of the largest global networks of
entrepreneurs, also holds business plan competitions for students through its Tie Young Entrepreneurs
program. In contrast, business plans submitted for that competition can usually be up to twenty-five pages.
These are just two examples. Some components may differ slightly; common elements are typically found in a
formal business plan outline. The next section will provide sample components of a full business plan for a
fictional business.

Executive Summary

The executive summary should provide an overview of your business with key points and issues. Because the
summary is intended to summarize the entire document, it is most helpful to write this section last, even
though it comes first in sequence. The writing in this section should be especially concise. Readers should be
able to understand your needs and capabilities at first glance. The section should tell the reader what you
want and your "ask" should be explicitly stated in the summary.
Describe your business, its product or service, and the intended customers. Explain what will be sold, who it
will be sold to, and what competitive advantages the business has. Table 11.3 shows a sample executive
summary for the fictional company La Vida Lola.
472                                                                                        Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

              Executive Summary for La Vida Lola

 Executive                                                                        Content
 Summary
Component

The Concept   La Vida Lola is a food truck serving the best Latin American and Caribbean cuisine in the
              Atlanta region, particularly Puerto Rican and Cuban dishes, with a festive flair. La Vida Lola
              offers freshly prepared dishes from the mobile kitchen of the founding chef and
              namesake Lola González, a Duluth, Georgia, native who has returned home to launch her
              first venture after working under some of the world's top chefs. La Vida Lola will cater to
              festivals, parks, offices, community and sporting events, and breweries throughout the
              region.

Market        Latin food packed with flavor and flair is the main attraction of La Vida Lola. Flavors
Advantage     steeped in Latin American and Caribbean culture can be enjoyed from a menu featuring
              street foods, sandwiches, and authentic dishes from the González family's Puerto Rican
              and Cuban roots.

              Millennial foodies craving ethnic food experiences and Latin food lovers are the primary
              customers, but anyone with a taste for delicious homemade meals in Atlanta can order.
              Having a native Atlanta-area resident returning to her hometown after working in
              restaurants around the world to share food with area communities offers a competitive
              advantage for La Vida Lola in the form of founding chef Lola González.

Marketing     The venture will adopt a concentrated marketing strategy. The company's promotion mix
              will comprise a mix of advertising, sales promotion, public relations, and personal selling.
              Much of the promotion mix will center around dual-language social media.

Venture Team  The two founding members of the management team have almost four decades of
              combined experience in the restaurant and hospitality industries. Their background
              includes experience in food and beverage, hospitality and tourism, accounting, finance,
              and business creation.

Capital       La Vida Lola is seeking startup capital of $50,000 to establish its food truck in the Atlanta
Requirements  area. An additional $20,000 will be raised through a donations-driven crowdfunding
              campaign. The venture can be up and running within six months to a year.

Table 11.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                         473

Business Description

This section describes the industry, your product, and the business and success factors. It should provide a
current outlook as well as future trends and developments. You also should address your company's mission,
vision, goals, and objectives. Summarize your overall strategic direction, your reasons for starting the
business, a description of your products and services, your business model, and your company's value
proposition. Consider including the Standard Industrial Classification/North American Industry Classification
System (SIC/NAICS) code to specify the industry and insure correct identification. The industry extends beyond
where the business is located and operates, and should include national and global dynamics. Table 11.4
shows a sample business description for La Vida Lola.

                                    Business Description for La Vida Lola

Business     La Vida Lola will operate in the mobile food services industry, which is identified by SIC code
Description  5812 Eating Places and NAICS code 722330 Mobile Food Services, which consist of
             establishments primarily engaged in preparing and serving meals and snacks for immediate
             consumption from motorized vehicles or nonmotorized carts.

             Ethnically inspired to serve a consumer base that craves more spiced Latin foods, La Vida
             Lola is an Atlanta-area food truck specializing in Latin cuisine, particularly Puerto Rican and
             Cuban dishes native to the roots of the founding chef and namesake, Lola González.

             La Vida Lola aims to spread a passion for Latin cuisine within local communities through
             flavorful food freshly prepared in a region that has embraced international eats. Through its
             mobile food kitchen, La Vida Lola plans to roll into parks, festivals, office buildings,
             breweries, and sporting and community events throughout the greater Atlanta metropolitan
             region. Future growth possibilities lie in expanding the number of food trucks, integrating
             food delivery on demand, and adding a food stall at an area food market.

             After working in noted restaurants for a decade, most recently under the famed chef José
             Andrés, chef Lola González returned to her hometown of Duluth, Georgia, to start her own
             venture. Although classically trained by top world chefs, it was González's grandparents'
             cooking of authentic Puerto Rican and Cuban dishes in their kitchen that influenced her
             profoundly.

             The freshest ingredients from the local market, the island spices, and her attention to detail
             were the spark that ignited Lola's passion for cooking. To that end, she brings flavors
             steeped in Latin American and Caribbean culture to a flavorful menu packed full of street
             foods, sandwiches, and authentic dishes. Through reasonably priced menu items, La Vida
             Lola offers food that appeals to a wide range of customers, from millennial foodies to Latin
             natives and other locals with Latin roots.

Table 11.4
474                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

Industry Analysis and Market Strategies

Here you should define your market in terms of size, structure, growth prospects, trends, and sales potential.
You'll want to include your TAM and forecast the SAM. (Both these terms are discussed in Conducting a
Feasibility Analysis.) This is a place to address market segmentation strategies by geography, customer
attributes, or product orientation. Describe your positioning relative to your competitors' in terms of pricing,
distribution, promotion plan, and sales potential. Table 11.5 shows an example industry analysis and market
strategy for La Vida Lola.

            Industry Analysis and Market Strategy for La Vida Lola

Industry    According to Mobile Food Trends and Insights' first annual report from the San Francisco-based
Analysis    Off The Grid, a company that facilitates food markets nationwide, the US food truck industry
and         alone is projected to grow by nearly 20 percent from $800 million in 2017 to $985 million in
Market      2019. Meanwhile, an IBISWorld report shows the street vendors' industry with a 4.2 percent
Strategy    annual growth rate to reach $3.2 billion in 2018. Food truck and street food vendors are
            increasingly investing in specialty, authentic ethnic, and fusion food, according to the IBISWorld
            report.

            Although the IBISWorld report projects demand to slow down over the next five years, it notes
            there are still opportunities for sustained growth in major metropolitan areas. The street
            vendors industry has been a particular bright spot within the larger food service sector.

            The industry is in a growth phase of its life cycle. The low overhead cost to set up a new
            establishment has enabled many individuals, especially specialty chefs looking to start their
            own businesses, to own a food truck in lieu of opening an entire restaurant. Off the Grid's
            annual report indicates the average typical initial investment ranges from $55,000 to $75,000 to
            open a mobile food truck.

            The restaurant industry accounts for $800 billion in sales nationwide, according to data from
            the National Restaurant Association. Georgia restaurants brought in a total of $19.6 billion in
            2017, according to figures from the Georgia Restaurant Association.

            There are approximately 12,000 restaurants in the metro Atlanta region. The Atlanta region
            accounts for almost 60 percent of the Georgia restaurant industry. The SAM is estimated to be
            approximately $360 million.

            The mobile food/street vendor industry can be segmented by types of customers, types of
            cuisine (American, desserts, Central and South American, Asian, mixed ethnicity, Greek
            Mediterranean, seafood), geographic location and types (mobile food stands, mobile
            refreshment stands, mobile snack stands, street vendors of food, mobile food concession
            stands).

            Secondary competing industries include chain restaurants, single location full-service
            restaurants, food service contractors, caterers, fast food restaurants, and coffee and snack
            shops.

Table 11.5

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  475

                                     Industry Analysis and Market Strategy for La Vida Lola

                  The top food truck competitors according to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, the daily
                  newspaper in La Vida Lola's market, are Bento Bus, Mix'd Up Burgers, Mac the Cheese, The Fry
                  Guy, and The Blaxican. Bento Bus positions itself as a Japanese-inspired food truck using
                  organic ingredients and dispensing in eco-friendly ware. The Blaxican positions itself as serving
                  what it dubs "Mexican soul food," a fusion mashup of Mexican food with Southern comfort
                  food. After years of operating a food truck, The Blaxican also recently opened its first brick-and-
                  mortar restaurant. The Fry Guy specializes in Belgian-style street fries with a variety of
                  homemade dipping sauces. These three food trucks would be the primary competition to La
                  Vida Lola, since they are in the "ethnic food" space, while the other two offer traditional
                  American food. All five have established brand identities and loyal followers/customers since
                  they are among the industry leaders as established by "best of" lists from area publications like
                  the Atlanta Journal-Constitution. Most dishes from competitors are in the $10-$13 price range for
                  entrees. La Vida Lola dishes will range from $6 to $13.

                  One key finding from Off the Grid's Mobile Food Trends and Insights report is that mobile food
                  has "proven to be a powerful vehicle for catalyzing diverse entrepreneurship" as 30 percent of
                  mobile food businesses are immigrant owned, 30 percent are women owned, and 8 percent are
                  LGBTQ owned. In many instances, the owner-operator plays a vital role to the brand identity of
                  the business as is the case with La Vida Lola.

                  Atlanta has also tapped into the nationwide trend of food hall-style dining. These food halls are
                  increasingly popular in urban centers like Atlanta. On one hand, these community-driven areas
                  where food vendors and retailers sell products side by side are secondary competitors to food
                  trucks. But they also offer growth opportunities for future expansion as brands solidify
                  customer support in the region. The most popular food halls in Atlanta are Ponce City Market in
                  Midtown, Krog Street Market along the BeltLine trail in the Inman Park area, and Sweet Auburn
                  Municipal Market downtown Atlanta. In addition to these trends, Atlanta has long been
                  supportive of international cuisine as Buford Highway (nicknamed "BuHi") has a reputation for
                  being an eclectic food corridor with an abundance of renowned Asian and Hispanic restaurants
                  in particular.

                  The Atlanta region is home to a thriving Hispanic and Latinx population, with nearly half of the
                  region's foreign-born population hailing from Latin America. There are over half a million
                  Hispanic and Latin residents living in metro Atlanta, with a 150 percent population increase
                  predicted through 2040. The median age of metro Atlanta Latinos is twenty-six. La Vida Lola will
                  offer authentic cuisine that will appeal to this primary customer segment.

                  La Vida Lola must contend with regulations from towns concerning operations of mobile food
                  ventures and health regulations, but the Atlanta region is generally supportive of such
                  operations. There are many parks and festivals that include food truck vendors on a weekly
                  basis.

Table 11.5
476  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

Competitive Analysis

The competitive analysis is a statement of the business strategy as it relates to the competition. You want to be
able to identify who are your major competitors and assess what are their market shares, markets served,
strategies employed, and expected response to entry? You likely want to conduct a classic SWOT analysis
(Strengths Weaknesses Opportunities Threats) and complete a competitive-strength grid or competitive
matrix. Outline your company's competitive strengths relative to those of the competition in regard to
product, distribution, pricing, promotion, and advertising. What are your company's competitive advantages
and their likely impacts on its success? The key is to construct it properly for the relevant features/benefits (by
weight, according to customers) and how the startup compares to incumbents. The competitive matrix
should show clearly how and why the startup has a clear (if not currently measurable) competitive advantage.
Some common features in the example include price, benefits, quality, type of features, locations, and
distribution/sales. Sample templates are shown in Figure 11.17 and Figure 11.18. A competitive analysis helps
you create a marketing strategy that will identify assets or skills that your competitors are lacking so you can
plan to fill those gaps, giving you a distinct competitive advantage. When creating a competitor analysis, it is
important to focus on the key features and elements that matter to customers, rather than focusing too
heavily on the entrepreneur's idea and desires.

Figure 11.17 This chart shows one sample format for a competitor analysis. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Figure 11.18 This chart provides a more complex template for creating a competitive analysis. (attribution:
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                   477

Operations and Management Plan

In this section, outline how you will manage your company. Describe its organizational structure. Here you can
address the form of ownership and, if warranted, include an organizational chart/structure. Highlight the
backgrounds, experiences, qualifications, areas of expertise, and roles of members of the management team.
This is also the place to mention any other stakeholders, such as a board of directors or advisory board(s), and
their relevant relationship to the founder, experience and value to help make the venture successful, and
professional service firms providing management support, such as accounting services and legal counsel.

Table 11.6 shows a sample operations and management plan for La Vida Lola.

                                    Operations and Management Plan for La Vida Lola

 Operations                         Content
       and

Management
      Plan

   Category

Key          The key management personnel consist of Lola González and Cameron Hamilton, who are
Management   longtime acquaintances since college. The management team will be responsible for
Personnel    funding the venture as well as securing loans to start the venture. The following is a
             summary of the key personnel backgrounds.

             Lola González: Chef Lola González has worked directly in the food service industry for
             fifteen years. While food has been a lifelong passion learned in her grandparents' kitchen,
             chef González has trained under some of the top chefs in the world, most recently having
             worked under the James Beard Award-winning chef José Andrés. A native of Duluth,
             Georgia, chef González also has an undergraduate degree in food and beverage
             management. Her value to the firm is serving as "the face" and company namesake,
             preparing the meals, creating cuisine concepts, and running the day-to-day operations of
             La Vida Lola.

             Cameron Hamilton: Cameron Hamilton has worked in the hospitality industry for over
             twenty years and is experienced in accounting and finance. He has a master of business
             administration degree and an undergraduate degree in hospitality and tourism
             management. He has opened and managed several successful business ventures in the
             hospitality industry. His value to the firm is in business operations, accounting, and
             finance.

Advisory     During the first year of operation, the company intends to keep a lean operation and does
Board        not plan to implement an advisory board. At the end of the first year of operation, the
             management team will conduct a thorough review and discuss the need for an advisory
             board.

Table 11.6
478                                                                                        Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

                Operations and Management Plan for La Vida Lola

 Operations                                                                       Content
       and

Management
      Plan

   Category

Supporting      Stephen Ngo, Certified Professional Accountant (CPA), of Valdosta, Georgia, will provide
Professionals   accounting consulting services. Joanna Johnson, an attorney and friend of chef González,
                will provide recommendations regarding legal services and business formation.

Table 11.6

Marketing Plan

Here you should outline and describe an effective overall marketing strategy for your venture, providing
details regarding pricing, promotion, advertising, distribution, media usage, public relations, and a digital
presence. Fully describe your sales management plan and the composition of your sales force, along with a
comprehensive and detailed budget for the marketing plan. Table 11.7 shows a sample marketing plan for La
Vida Lola.

                Marketing Plan for La Vida Lola

     Marketing                                                                    Content
         Plan

      Category

Overview        La Vida Lola will adopt a concentrated marketing strategy. The company's promotion mix
                will include a mix of advertising, sales promotion, public relations, and personal selling.
                Given the target millennial foodie audience, the majority of the promotion mix will be
                centered around social media platforms. Various social media content will be created in
                both Spanish and English. The company will also launch a crowdfunding campaign on two
                crowdfunding platforms for the dual purpose of promotion/publicity and fundraising.

Advertising     As with any crowdfunding social media marketing plan, the first place to begin is with the
and Sales       owners' friends and family. Utilizing primarily Facebook/Instagram and Twitter, La Vida
Promotion       Lola will announce the crowdfunding initiative to their personal networks and prevail
                upon these friends and family to share the information. Meanwhile, La Vida Lola needs to

Table 11.7

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                   479

                                    Marketing Plan for La Vida Lola

Marketing                           Content
    Plan

 Category

            focus on building a community of backers and cultivating the emotional draw of
            becoming part of the La Vida Lola family.

            To build a crowdfunding community via social media, La Vida Lola will routinely share its
            location, daily if possible, on both Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter. Inviting and
            encouraging people to visit and sample their food can rouse interest in the cause. As the
            campaign is nearing its goal, it would be beneficial to offer a free food item to backers of
            a specific level, say $50, on one specific day. Sharing this via social media in the day or two
            preceding the giveaway and on the day of can encourage more backers to commit.

            Weekly updates of the campaign and the project as a whole are a must. Facebook and
            Twitter updates of the project coupled with educational information sharing helps
            backers feel part of the La Vida Lola community.

            Finally, at every location where La Vida Lola is serving its food, signage will notify the
            public of their social media presence and the current crowdfunding campaign. Each meal
            will be accompanied by an invitation from the server for the patron to visit the
            crowdfunding site and consider donating. Business cards listing the social media and
            crowdfunding information will be available in the most visible location, likely the counter.

            Before moving forward with launching a crowdfunding campaign, La Vida Lola will create
            its website. The website is a great place to establish and share the La Vida Lola brand,
            vision, videos, menus, staff, and events. It is also a great source of information for
            potential backers who are unsure about donating to the crowdfunding campaigns. The
            website will include these elements:

              · About Us. Address the following questions: Who are you? What are the guiding
                  principles of La Vida Lola? How did the business get started? How long has La Vida
                  Lola been in business? Include pictures of chef González.

              · Menu. List of current offerings with prices.
              · Calendar of Events. Will include promotional events and locations where customers

                  can find the truck for different events.
              · Social Media. Steps will be taken to increase social media followers prior to launching

                  the crowdfunding campaign. Unless a large social media following is already
                  established, a business should aggressively push social media campaigns a
                  minimum of three months prior to the crowdfunding campaign launch. Increasing
                  social media following prior to the campaign kickoff will also allow potential donors
                  to learn more about La Vida Lola and foster relationship building before attempting
                  to raise funds.

Table 11.7
480                                                                                        Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

                Marketing Plan for La Vida Lola

     Marketing                                                                    Content
         Plan

      Category

Facebook        The key piece of content will be the campaign pitch video, reshared as a native Facebook
Content and     upload. A link to the crowdfunding campaigns can be included in the caption. Sharing the
Advertising     same high-quality video published on the campaign page will entice fans to visit
                Kickstarter to learn more about the project and rewards available to backers.

                  · Promoted Post(s): Boosting/promoting a Facebook post for only $5 can go a long
                      way for a business page the size of La Vida Lola's. Reach and engagement will be
                      exponentially higher than it would have been organically. Promoting two or three
                      posts during the first few weeks of the campaign would be highly effective.

                  · Video Views Ad: Video ads are a little more ambitious than promoted posts and cost
                      a little more. But the objective is the same: increase the number of people who
                      watch the pitch video and drive them to the campaign page.

Crowdfunding    Foodstart was created just for restaurants, breweries, cafés, food trucks, and other food
Campaigns       businesses, and allows owners to raise money in small increments. It is similar to
                Indiegogo in that it offers both flexible and fixed funding models and charges a
                percentage for successful campaigns, which it claims to be the lowest of any
                crowdfunding platform. It uses a reward-based system rather than equity, where backers
                are offered rewards or perks resulting in "low-cost capital and a network of people who
                now have an incentive to see you succeed."[54]

                Foodstart will host La Vida Lola's crowdfunding campaigns for the following reasons: (1)
                It caters to their niche market; (2) it has less competition from other projects which
                means that La Vida Lola will stand out more and not get lost in the shuffle; and (3) it has/
                is making a name/brand for itself which means that more potential backers are aware of
                it.

                La Vida Lola will run a simultaneous crowdfunding campaign on Indiegogo, which has
                broader mass appeal.

Publicity       Social media can be a valuable marketing tool to draw people to the Foodstarter and
                Indiegogo crowdfunding pages. It provides a means to engage followers and keep
                funders/backers updated on current fundraising milestones. The first order of business is
                to increase La Vida Lola's social media presence on Facebook, Instagram, and Twitter.
                Establishing and using a common hashtag such as #FundLola across all platforms will
                promote familiarity and searchability, especially within Instagram and Twitter. Hashtags

54 Foodstart. http://foodstart.com
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                   481

                                    Marketing Plan for La Vida Lola

Marketing                           Content
    Plan

 Category

            are slowly becoming a presence on Facebook. The hashtag will be used in all print
            collateral.

            La Vida Lola will need to identify social influencers--others on social media who can assist
            with recruiting followers and sharing information. Existing followers, family, friends, local
            food providers, and noncompetitive surrounding establishments should be called upon to
            assist with sharing La Vida Lola's brand, mission, and so on. Cross-promotion will further
            extend La Vida Lola's social reach and engagement. Influencers can be called upon to
            cross promote upcoming events and specials.

            The crowdfunding strategy will utilize a progressive reward-based model and establish a
            reward schedule such as the following:

              · $5 or more (unlimited): Exclusive updates on fundraising progress
              · $10 or more (500): $1 OFF; a coupon for $1 off purchase
              · $20 or more (200): BOGO! Buy one entree, get one FREE
              · $50 or more (100): FREE entrée coupon
              · $250 or more (2): One-on-one with chef González!

            In addition to the publicity generated through social media channels and the
            crowdfunding campaign, La Vida Lola will reach out to area online and print publications
            (both English- and Spanish-language outlets) for feature articles. Articles are usually
            teased and/or shared via social media. Reaching out to local broadcast stations (radio
            and television) may provide opportunities as well. La Vida Lola will recruit a social media
            intern to assist with developing and implementing a social media content plan. Engaging
            with the audience and responding to all comments and feedback is important for the
            success of the campaign.

            Some user personas from segmentation to target in the campaign:

              · Influencer Isabel: Social media-savvy, college-age Latina influencer
              · Food truck Freddie: An avid food truck follower, this thirty-three-year-old white

                  urban hipster professional seeks out the best food trucks around town on a regular
                  basis looking for "noms" to satisfy his cravings.
              · Taco townies: In-town residents who religiously eat tacos on "taco Tuesday," as a
                  family rite of passage for the wives, husbands, and kids. The entire neighborhood
                  turns out for the occasion as a community event of sorts.

Table 11.7
482                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

Financial Plan

A financial plan seeks to forecast revenue and expenses; project a financial narrative; and estimate project
costs, valuations, and cash flow projections. This section should present an accurate, realistic, and achievable
financial plan for your venture (see Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting for detailed discussions about
conducting these projections). Include sales forecasts and income projections, pro forma financial statements
(Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team, a breakeven analysis, and a capital budget. Identify your possible
sources of financing (discussed in Conducting a Feasibility Analysis). Figure 11.19 shows a template of cash-
flow needs for La Vida Lola.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                         483

Figure 11.19 La Vida Lola can use a template like this to project cash flow. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)
484  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Laughing Man Coffee

     Hugh Jackman (Figure 11.20) may best be known for portraying a comic-book superhero who used his
     mutant abilities to protect the world from villains. But the Wolverine actor is also working to make the
     planet a better place for real, not through adamantium claws but through social entrepreneurship.

   Figure 11.20 Hugh Jackman launched a social entrepreneurship venture called Laughing Man Coffee.
   (credit: "Hugh Jackman navy" by "U.S. Navy photo by Photographer's Mate Airman Dennard
   Vinson"/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

   A love of java jolted Jackman into action in 2009, when he traveled to Ethiopia with a Christian
   humanitarian group to shoot a documentary about the impact of fair-trade certification on coffee
   growers there. He decided to launch a business and follow in the footsteps of the late Paul Newman,
   another famous actor turned philanthropist via food ventures.
   Jackman launched Laughing Man Coffee two years later; he sold the line to Keurig in 2015. One Laughing
   Man Coffee café in New York continues to operate independently, investing its proceeds into charitable
   programs that support better housing, health, and educational initiatives within fair-trade farming
   communities.[55] Although the New York location is the only café, the coffee brand is still distributed, with
   Keurig donating an undisclosed portion of Laughing Man proceeds to those causes (whereas Jackman
   donates all his profits). The company initially donated its profits to World Vision, the Christian
   humanitarian group Jackman accompanied in 2009. In 2017, it created the Laughing Man Foundation to
   be more active with its money management and distribution.

      · You be the entrepreneur. If you were Jackman, would you have sold the company to Keurig? Why or
          why not?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                                          485

· Would you have started the Laughing Man Foundation?
· What else can Jackman do to aid fair-trade practices for coffee growers?

WHAT CAN YOU DO?

Textbooks for Change

Founded in 2014, Textbooks for Change uses a cross-compensation model, in which one customer
segment pays for a product or service, and the profit from that revenue is used to provide the same
product or service to another, underserved segment. Textbooks for Change partners with student
organizations to collect used college textbooks, some of which are re-sold while others are donated to
students in need at underserved universities across the globe. The organization has reused or recycled
250,000 textbooks, providing 220,000 students with access through seven campus partners in East Africa.
This B-corp social enterprise tackles a problem and offers a solution that is directly relevant to college
students like yourself. Have you observed a problem on your college campus or other campuses that is
not being served properly? Could it result in a social enterprise?

WORK IT OUT

Franchisee Set Out

A franchisee of East Coast Wings, a chain with dozens of restaurants in the United States, has decided to
part ways with the chain. The new store will feature the same basic sports-bar-and-restaurant concept
and serve the same basic foods: chicken wings, burgers, sandwiches, and the like. The new restaurant
can't rely on the same distributors and suppliers. A new business plan is needed.

  · What steps should the new restaurant take to create a new business plan?
  · Should it attempt to serve the same customers? Why or why not?

LINK TO LEARNING

This New York Times video, "An Unlikely Business Plan," describes entrepreneurial resurgence
(https://openstax.org/l/52EntreResurg) in Detroit, Michigan.

55 "Hugh Jackman Journey to Starting a Social Enterprise Coffee Company." Giving Compass. April 8, 2018. https://givingcompass.org/article/
hugh-jackman-journey-to-starting-a-social-enterprise-coffee-company/
486                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     Key Terms

balance sheet financial statement that summarizes a company's financial condition according to the
     accounting equation

breakeven point level of operations that results in exactly enough revenue to cover costs
business model plan for how venture will be funded; how the venture creates value for its stakeholders,

     including customers; how the venture's offerings are made and distributed to the end users; and the how
     income will be generated through this process
business model canvas developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur, used to develop a business model for a
     venture, including nine blocks that are mapped out to address customer segments, customer
     relationships, channels, revenue streams, value propositions, key partners, key activities, key resources,
     and cost structure
business model innovation occurs when an existing business fundamentally changes their business model
business plan formal document that typically describes the business and industry, market strategies, sales
     potential, and competitive analysis, as well as the company's long-term goals and objectives
competitive matrix shows how and why a startup has a clear if not measurable competitive advantage for
     relevant features/benefits by weight according to customers, such as price and quality in relation to
     competitors
customer empathy map portrayal of a target customer, the most promising candidate from a business'
     customer segments, which explores the understanding of that person's condition from their perspective
     to understand his or her problems and needs
disruptive innovation process that significantly impacts the market by making a product or service more
     affordable and/or accessible often by smaller companies in an industry
executive summary initial section of a business plan document that summarizes the key elements of the
     entire plan
feasibility analysis feasibility analysis is the process of determining if a business idea is viable; it includes
     testing the viability of your product or service, evaluating your management team, assessing the market
     for your concept, and estimating financial viability
financial analysis forecasts revenue and expenses; projects a financial narrative; and estimates project
     costs, valuations, and cash flow projections
fixed costs costs that do not change, regardless of the amount of sales
go-or-no-go decision determination to proceed with or abandon a plan or project
innovation new idea, process, or product, or a change to an existing product or process
lean model canvas developed by Ash Maurya as a derivation of the original business model canvas; this
     canvas differs by addressing unfair advantages, problems, solutions, and key metrics rather than
     customer relationships, key partners, key activities, and key resources
market analysis analysis of the overall interest in the product or service within the industry by its target
     market
projected cash flow outline of preliminary expenses, operating expenses, and reserves
serviceable available market (SAM) portion of the market that a business can serve based on its products,
     services, and location
social business model canvas modification of the business model canvas, designed for social
     entrepreneurship venues; new areas address impact measures around social impacts and its
     measurement, surplus, beneficiary segments and social and customer value propositions
SWOT analysis strategic analytical tool used to help a potential venture or existing company identify its

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  487

     strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats related to business competition
total available market (TAM) total perceived demand for a product or service within the marketplace
value proposition summary describing the benefits (value) customers can expect from a particular product

     or service
value proposition canvas one of the nine blocks on the business model canvas, this additional tool

     developed by Osterwalder and Pigneur is designed to illustrate a deeper dive into customer
     understanding and value creation of a business
variable costs costs that fluctuate with the level of revenue

     Summary

11.1 Avoiding the "Field of Dreams" Approach
Business models and business plans are tools involved in the strategic process of charting a path for your
entrepreneurial venture. When starting a company, it's best to avoid the Field of Dreams approach of building a
business and hoping that customers will just show up. Innovation has been linked to entrepreneurship for at
least nine decades. More recent theories suggest that disruptive innovations are disruptive because they
disturb the underlying business model of the companies being disrupted.

11.2 Designing the Business Model
A business model, which is unique to a company, describes the rationale of how an organization creates,
delivers, and captures values. A business model canvas is a popular tool used by entrepreneurs and
intrapraneurs to map out and plan different components of a business model. The business model canvas
addresses customer segments, customer relationships, channels (of distribution), revenue streams, value
propositions, key partners, key activities, key resources, and cost structure. The lean model canvas and social
business model canvas are derivations of the original business model canvas. They are designed more for
tech/software/app endeavors and social entrepreneurial ventures, respectively.

11.3 Conducting a Feasibility Analysis
A feasibility study is a tool in the entrepreneurs' toolkit that can help determine whether to proceed on a
venture early on. A feasibility study is usually more in depth than a business plan and focuses on analysis of
real-world numbers and projections. The most common elements of a feasibility study include a market
analysis, a financial analysis, and management analysis. Feasibility studies can be used to make a "go-or-no-
go" decision for a new product or business, as well as help narrow the focus of what that venture should be
(what the market would potentially support).

11.4 The Business Plan
The business plan is a formal document used for long-range planning of a company's operation that typically
includes financial information, background information, and a summary of the business. Business plans can be
used as internal guiding documents early in the entrepreneurial process. They also can be presentation
documents for raising funds from prospective investors later in the process, complementing an investor pitch
and iterative canvases. A brief business plan functions somewhat like an extended executive summary that
summarizes key elements of the entire business plan, such as the business concept, financial features, and
current business position. A full business plan can range from ten to twenty-five pages. It includes a business
description, industry and marketing analyses, and descriptions of management, marketing, and operational
and financial plans.
488                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     Review Questions

1. According to Ash Maurya's typology, Airbnb is an example of what type of business model?
    A. direct
    B. multisided
    C. open
    D. marketplace

2. Which startup grew from a failed podcasting company called Odeo?
    A. Instagram
    B. Twitter
    C. StubHub
    D. Groupon

3. What is the job to be done of a milkshake according to Christensen's team's customer observation research
in the Link to Learning video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m3mVM_koAio&feature=youtu.be?

    A. employ Chick-Fil-A cows
    B. accompany on a long morning commute
    C. placate children
    D. satisfy hunger

4. What is a change, typically minor, of the current business model in an attempt to capitalize on a closely
related market opportunity?

    A. innovation
    B. disruption
    C. iteration
    D. increment

5. A tool to identify your idealized target customer and develop a better understanding of his or her
environment, behavior, concerns, and aspirations.

    A. jobs to be done
    B. business plan
    C. business model canvas
    D. empathy map

6. A ________ is a formal document that typically describes the business and industry, market strategies, sales
potential, and competitive analysis, as well as the company's long-term goals and objectives.

    A. business plan
    B. business model
    C. customer empathy map
    D. revenue model

7. Select the item that does not belong to the business model canvas.
    A. market size
    B. revenue streams
    C. value proposition
    D. customer segments

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  489

8. The finished story benefit formula of [end customer wants] + [specific period of time] + [address objections]
is designed for what component of the lean model canvas?

    A. unfair advantage
    B. unique value proposition
    C. early adopters
    D. high concept pitch

9. How does the social business model canvas differ from the business model canvas and lean model canvas?
    A. is only used by nonprofit company
    B. doesn't have customer block and investment block
    C. has profit block to talk about ways the company can makes more money
    D. has impact measure, surplus, beneficiary segments, and social and customer value propositions

10. Which of the following has the purpose of evaluating the team, the market for the concept, the financial
viability, and possible pitfalls?

    A. feasibility analysis
    B. market analysis
    C. financial analysis
    D. management analysis

11. Which of the following has the purpose of forecasting revenue and expenses, projecting a financial
narrative, estimating project cost, and projecting cash flow?

    A. feasibility analysis
    B. market analysis
    C. financial analysis
    D. management analysis

12. Which of the following identifies competitors and quantifies target customers and/or users in a specific
industry?

    A. feasibility analysis
    B. market analysis
    C. financial analysis
    D. management analysis

13. What assesses the prowess of the management and sufficiency of resources to bring the product or idea to
market?

    A. management analysis
    B. operational feasibility analysis
    C. financial analysis
    D. cash flow

14. What are expenses that do not vary with the level of sales, such as rent, salaries, utilities, insurance and
other operating expenses?

    A. fixed costs
    B. variable costs
    C. balance sheet
    D. cash flow statements
490                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

15. Which of the following is a formal document that typically describes the business and industry, market
strategies, sales potential, and competitive analysis, as well as the company's long-term goals and objectives?

    A. business plan
    B. business model
    C. customer empathy map
    D. revenue model

16. Which of these is not the purpose of a business plan?
    A. thoroughly explain a business idea and how it will be carried out
    B. planning tool and working plan over the course of several years
    C. requirement to start a business
    D. planning for "what-if" scenarios and explore new options

17. Which of these components are not in a business plan?
    A. business description
    B. industry and market analysis
    C. financial analysis
    D. None of these options is correct.

18. Estimated profits and expenses of the business is included in which of the following?
    A. financial analysis
    B. industry and market analysis
    C. operation plan
    D. marketing plan

19. Who is best suited to write a business plan?
    A. investor
    B. founder(s)
    C. consultant
    D. chief financial officer

     Discussion Questions

1. What role do customers play in innovation? Is innovation possible without customer support?
2. Do you believe that teamwork is important to entrepreneurship? Or do you prefer solopreneurship? Is one
approach "better" than the other? Why or why not?
3. What are the advantages of using a canvas to plan your business?
4. What types of businesses fit best with each respective canvas type?
5. Why would impact measures be important in social entrepreneurship ventures?
6. How do the arts relate to the business model creation process?
7. What are the advantages of using a lean model canvas compared to the traditional business model canvas?
8. What components are in the breakeven analysis? How would you calculate your breakeven point?
9. Why is feasibility analysis important?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan                                                               491

10. What are the different components of a feasibility analysis?
11. Explain the purpose and importance of business plan.
12. Describe the components of a business plan.
13. Should you write a business plan even if you do not need outside financing? Why or why not?

     Case Questions

1. The National Association of Broadcasters launched its PILOT Innovation Challenge in 2016. The challenge is
centered around a specific challenge question aimed at helping the association's primary customers,
broadcasters. The most recent challenge question was, "What is an unconventional way broadcasters and
other local media could serve communities?" The PILOT organizers have contracted you to help them design
their next challenge. Using your knowledge of innovation and customer-centric entrepreneurship processes,
what would you advise? How would you go about determining the challenge question? What questions about
innovation would you have regarding the Innovation Challenge?

2. The Guidewell Innovation Center at Lake Nona Medical Center on the outskirts of Orlando, Florida, is a
92,000-square-foot facility aimed at accelerating innovation within the healthcare industries. Guidewell, the
parent company of Florida Blue, brings in outside companies to help with that innovation process. One of the
features of the Innovation Center is its Collaborative Resource Ecosystem. Some of the center's strategic areas
of focus are next-generation consumer engagement, computational health, well-being and human
performance, digital health, and remote management, among other areas. How could Christensen's theory of
disruptive innovation and jobs-to-be-done theory help guide Guidewell's mission? What are the prevalent
business models in the strategic areas for incumbent businesses? What are opportunities for innovation for
new companies?

3. As youth programs face severe budget cuts, many youth sports organizations respond by raising their fees,
which shifts the costs to families. Good Sports was founded in 2003, to tackle this problem by providing new
equipment, footwear, and apparel to those most in need. The organization's addressable markets include
children ages five to eighteen living in low-income households, as defined by poverty data, and participating in
youth sports in top fifty metropolitan service areas. This Boston-based organization has plans to expand from
its three existing markets in Dallas, Chicago, and Boston to seven total markets by 2023 with a goal to serve
600,000 kids by that target date.

    A. What would a customer empathy map look like for Good Sports' target user? What about its target
          customer segment? Would it or should it differ in differing markets? Is the Boston area user any
          different from say, an Atlanta, user?

    B. Given its social mission, what are some impact measures Good Sports could use to gauge success and
          impact?
492  Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

4. DoSomething.Org is a "global movement for good" among 6 million young people, transforming their
communities across the United States and in 131 countries worldwide. This nonprofit organization constantly
holds cause-based campaigns, ranging from receiving over 1 million pairs of donated jeans from teens to
clothe homeless youth to cleaning up 3.7 million cigarette butts through its Get the Filter Out initiative. A past
campaign, "Don't Be a Sucker," addressed the problem of Americans losing $5.8 billion annually and
producing 8.7 billion pounds of carbon pollution by leaving unused devices plugged in. The campaign sought
to slay those "energy vampires" not in use by having users unplug equipment and post a sticky note next to
the outlet to remind others not to let them suck the energy dry. Further research the problem, solution and
this campaign and answer the following:

    A. Identify what social impact(s) the campaign addressed.
    B. What impact measures could the campaign assess?
    C. Could a viable business be created around this problem?

5. In recent years, the entrepreneurial educator and author Steve Blank began applying lean startup principles
to various US governmental agencies. Through a Hacking for Diplomacy course, students at Stanford
University began tackling problems for the Department of State. A former US ambassador to the United
Nations, a State Department representative to Silicon Valley and senior advisor for technology and innovation,
a retired US Army colonel, and other entrepreneurial educators joined Blank in applying lean startup methods
to State Department issues. Then-Secretary of State John Kerry even visited the Stanford students and said he
was looking forward to the solutions students develop during the ten weeks. One project that emerged was
from a group calling themselves Team Space Evaders. The team was tasked with working on the problem of
satellite collision. Members charted satellite positioning data and explored how information about potential
collision was shared by commercial operators and governmental entities ranging from the Federal Aviation
Administration to the Department of Defense.

    A. Apply the lean startup methodology to identify potential customer segments and problems and
          solutions that students such as yourself could identify for the State Department on the issue of satellite
          collision.

    B. What would a unique value proposition for a State Department solution to this issue be? How could a
          high-level concept pitch work when selling the concept within the State Department?

6. Incorporated in 2003, Tesla declared in its mission statement that its goal is "to accelerate the world's
transition to sustainable transport,"[56] and it has proven itself a leader in green technology in the automotive
sector. In its initial business plan, by co-founder Martin Eberhard, the electric sports car company promised to
provide the value of a high-end sports car at a lower cost to the customer and a lower environmental cost to
the planet. Electric vehicles were seen as inferior to standard vehicles prior to Tesla's innovations in creating
powerful cars that piqued consumer desire. The generic automotive manufacturing business model relies on
collaborative manufacturing with industry partners and a distribution model dependent on third parties.
Standard cars are aimed at people and businesses with individual transportation needs. This model is
commercially viable because of custom-equipped add-on features to the per-vehicle prices.

    A. Tesla's business model is different. Identify at least three ways in which the Tesla model differs from
          the traditional automotive business model.

56 In 2016, it was changed from "sustainable transport" to "sustainable energy." https://www.tesla.com/about
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan  493

7. In the mid-1990s, at least one newspaper company, the now-defunct Knight-Ridder chain, created the
prototype for a tablet newspaper that very much resembles the present-day iPad. A 1994 video titled "The
Tablet Newspaper: A Vision for the Future" shows off the design of a futuristic newspaper designed at the
Knight Ridder Information Design Lab in Boulder, Colorado. The video went viral in 2011 after it was posted on
YouTube and numerous websites and blogs. The person behind the tablet vision, Roger Fidler, had even
published an essay describing a tablet future as far back as 1981. The Knight-Ridder lab shared a wall with its
neighbor Apple, with executives swapping ideas and visitors. The newspaper company, focused on content
creation and not the hardware side, decided to not patent its tablet design and scrapped the project because
screens took too much energy, and it was too expensive.

    A. Using the components of a feasibility study, consider how the newspaper company would stack up on
          go-or-no-go decisions for each component of the feasibility study.

    B. How did the newspaper company in the 1990s fare in terms of management prowess, resource
          capabilities, financial viability, and market analysis?

    C. Do you think the newspaper made a wise decision to abandon the project when it did? Why or why
          not?

8. Founded in 2013 primarily as a coding boot camp, Tech Talent South offers both part-time and full-time
courses on topics like Ruby on Rails and Big Data Analytics. Most of the camp's programs are run out of
cooperative working spaces and temporary locations throughout the cities it has a presence in. The primary
focus of the Atlanta-founded and now North Carolina-based company as branded in the name was on coding
in the South, but the company to date has expanded to eleven markets with plans to expand even more. The
founder, Betsy Idilbi, jokes that she wouldn't have named the company Tech Talent South if she had known its
full potential and growth, including being plugged into the entrepreneurial ecosystem in places such as
Columbus, Ohio. The company even has offices in the northeastern city of Hartford, Connecticut.

    A. Could a feasibility analysis have helped Betsy from the start?
    B. The company has expanded its business to offer corporate trainings at existing companies, rather than

          teaching classes directly to student enrollees. How would you identify a new potential market for Tech
          Talent South to enter?
    C. What could be done with its existing business?
    D. How would you advise the company on making go-or-no-go decisions for entering new markets?

9. You were introduced to The Cut Buddy, a plastic hair and beard grooming tool that began selling on Amazon
in 2016, in The Business Plan. Following funding from the Shark Tank investor Daymond John, the company
plans to expand into retail and extend its product line.

    A. How would a business plan for the company's ecommerce business differ from a retail distribution
          outlet?

    B. Discuss how changes to aspects of the original business plan affected the outcome of the success of
          The Cut Buddy.

    C. What do you think should be the key markets and strategies moving forward for the company?

10. Pretty Young Professional, discussed in The Business Plan, failed because of disagreements among its four
founders that emerged shortly after launch.

    A. If you were to launch the venture today, outline what steps you would need to take in formulating a
          business plan.

    B. What do you think the total addressable market would be, which industry classification would it fall
          under, and who would be the primary competition?
494                                                                               Chapter 11 Business Model and Plan

     Suggested Resources

11.2 Designing the Business Model
Business model canvas and resources: Strategyzer.com
Lean canvas and associated resources: Leanstack.com
Social business model canvas and related resources: Socialbusinessmodelcanvas.com
Christopher Steiner and Brett Nelson. "The 20 Most Important Questions in Business." Forbes. June 17, 2010:

  https://www.forbes.com/2010/06/17/most-important-questions-in-business-entrepreneurs-management-
  small-business.html#7975585a3e93

11.3 Conducting a Feasibility Analysis
Bruce Barringer, Preparing Effective Business Plans: An Entrepreneurial Approach, 2nd ed. (Upper Saddle River,

  NJ: Pearson, 2015).
https://bizfluent.com/how-8048004-prepare-financial-feasibility-study.html
https://thebusinessprofessor.com/knowledge-base/financial-analysis-of-business-idea-overview/

11.4 The Business Plan
SBA Business Plan resources: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/write-your-business-

  plan

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    12

              Building Networks and Foundations

Figure 12.1 US 1 is the route into and out of the Florida Keys that residents and visitors alike take to their
intended destinations. But more importantly, US 1, a physical structure of steel-reinforced concrete, is the
artery through which economic exchanges are created and enhanced. (credit: modification of "Seven mile
bridge" by Tinsley Advertising/Wikimedia Commons, CC BY)

 Chapter Outline

        12.1 Building and Connecting to Networks
        12.2 Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team
        12.3 Designing a Startup Operational Plan

      Introduction

   US Route 1 in southern Florida connects 43 islands of the Florida Keys via 42 bridges. It is a bidirectional
   economic path from the US mainland to its endpoint at Key West and for all points in between. Without the
   bridges it provides, residents, workers, and tourists would be required to ferry to their destinations, sacrificing
   time, money, economic efficiency, market productivity, and recreation. The bridges ensure an unimpeded flow
   of economic activities that benefit residents and visitors, increasing tourism across the entire state, and
   ensuring Key West is not economically and socially isolated.
   Every entrepreneur can learn a few lessons from US 1. First, independent market players are stronger and
   more stable when connected to other independent market players. Second, connections are not always easy
   to establish. The idea of connecting all of the keys met resistance, and engineers had to solve many
   challenges. Third, you must be prepared to repair connections whenever they are severed. A hurricane
   destroyed the original railroad that connected the islands, but replacing it with an automobile highway was a
   major improvement. Other lessons are that benefits should outweigh costs, and that it takes time to build new
   connections: The original railroad took seven years to build. Costs of ongoing repair and maintenance have
   exceeded $1.8 billion[1] (adjusted for inflation) but produced $2.7 billion in annual economic activity for 2017.[2]
496  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

Today, no one in Florida would dream of doing without the highway.
How are businesses similar to Key West? Every business includes people who produce goods and services for
customers to purchase. In turn, businesses and those who work for them need to consume the products and
services provided by their own vendors. Finding and establishing relationships with vendors and customers, in
addition to the support of community organizations and educational resources, facilitates the exchange of
information, products, and services. The connection between a business and its vendors or its customers
makes up a network.

 12.1 Building and Connecting to Networks

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Define networking and describe its role in entrepreneurship
  · Describe networking opportunities
  · Describe local and trade organization networking opportunities
  · Identify nonprofit and governmental agencies offering networking opportunities

When you begin thinking about your new and exciting entrepreneurial venture, you may feel somewhat like
the citizens of Key West did many years ago--isolated. No matter which way you turn, you eventually come to
the end of your limited community, and what you have is not enough. You can either sit on the beach and
dream about what could be or commence working on building personal and professional connections to
broaden your scope and improve the depth of relationships with those individuals who will assist you in
becoming a successful entrepreneur. Now is the time to start building bridges and connecting yourself with
the greater business community. Networking is about building bridges not about collecting tolls.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Colonel Sanders and Building Connections

   Harland David Sanders, the founder of Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), was a successful entrepreneur who
   personally experienced and understood the value of roadways and customer access. Sanders, better
   known as "Colonel" Sanders, owned a successful Shell service station with a small restaurant. He
   perfected his recipe for fried chicken and added it to his menu. Demand from satisfied customers soon
   exceeded seating capacity. To increase customer capacity, he purchased a building across the street that
   had a larger seating area. Business was steady and profitable until the new interstate system bypassed
   his location. Sanders lost his connection to his customers and closed his business. He did not give up,
   however.
   Sanders began scouring the country for restaurants that would buy his recipe in exchange for $0.04 per
   piece of chicken sold. He reestablished a connection with an acquaintance in Salt Lake City, Utah, who

1 Alice Hopkins. "The Development of the Overseas Highway." Tequesta: The Journal of the Historical Association of Southern Florida 46 (1986):
48-58. http://digitalcollections.fiu.edu/tequesta/files/1986/86_1.pdf
2 Chris Mooney. "The Race to Save Florida's Devasted Coral Reef from Global Warming." Washington Post. June 25, 2017.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/classic-apps/the-race-to-save-floridas-devastated-coral-reefs-from-global-warming/2017/06/25/
a1bd899a-3fa9-11e7-adba-394ee67a7582_story.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                            497

became the first KFC franchisee. With immediate success in Utah, Sanders began a nationwide campaign
to connect with other successful restaurants and signed them on as franchisees. Eventually, Sanders
formed a network of restaurants across the country that sold his chicken and grew a market that could
never have been developed by one person in one location. In 2019, KFC had over 21,000 locations in 130
countries (www.kfc.com/about).

Sanders took his personal experience of losing easy customer access to his business and applied it to
building a network of franchises where customers, across the United States and on multiple continents,
could purchase his chicken. Just as tourists, residents, and businesses in Key West need roads and
bridges to connect them to their destinations and suppliers, entrepreneurs need connections and
networks to get supplies from their vendors and products to their customers.

For an entrepreneur, networking is finding and establishing relationships with business professionals with
whom you can exchange information, ideas, and products; more importantly, you can claim these networks as
trusted business colleagues. Be ready to use the networks you already have. Be intentional in seeking out
established business professionals in your local chamber of commerce or at SCORE (see the following).
Position yourself to contribute to the larger community. Be active in expanding your sphere of influence.

A good way to get started is to begin brainstorming a list of people who can help you along the
entrepreneurial path. These potential trusted advisors will be beneficial to you as you develop your idea and
start your business. In these early stages, you will encounter challenges and obstacles in many areas. Having a
"go-to" list of dependable consultants can help you find solutions, reduce mistakes, and hasten your success
in your new business. Anyone can be on that list--don't exclude anyone, no matter how unlikely it seems that
you will need their expertise. People you already know have knowledge and skills. They can be a valuable
resource.

On the other hand, you too have knowledge and skills. You too can be a valuable resource. That is why you are
starting your own business or developing a new product. Begin connecting with people who need you,
perhaps even people who need you more than you currently need them. Present yourself as the expert, not
the salesperson to be avoided at all costs. Become known as the "go-to" person: the person others will seek
out and put on their list of experts. When you become respected as the professional expert, success will follow.

We begin developing personal connections--relationships with other people--early in our lives. (Later in life,
these connections become our networks.) Typically, the first social groups we join are family, neighbors, and
schoolmates. Playing with siblings and cousins, and learning to meet new friends in the neighborhood and at
elementary school help us develop the social skills that we will need later in life when we meet and work with
others in the professional world. As you enter adulthood, social connections that you establish and nurture
become more complex and have longer-lasting benefits. You may establish some of those lifelong personal
connections during your college years or perhaps in your first "big" job.

Campus Connections

During your college years, you will have many opportunities to make connections with new people. Taking
advantage of these opportunities allows you to perfect your skills in initiating and developing new and even
lifetime connections. You can establish new friendships with roommates, classmates, social club members,
special interest groups, academic organizations, competitive and intramural athletic teams, and many others.
All of these groups not only encourage new social relationships but also foster opportunities for developing
498  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

and improving leadership skills.

Chances to meet and work with new people abound on college campuses. The diagram in Figure 12.2 shows
some of the many social networking opportunities on college campuses.

Figure 12.2 You can find many social networking opportunities through your college or university.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Your college or university is usually where you make the transition from student to professional. One method
of learning to become a professional is through membership and leadership roles in academic or professional
clubs. Leadership positions usually rotate annually. Academic clubs are formed around disciplines,
departments, or professions. Professors, alumni, or industry professionals serve as sponsors and may provide
connections to other industry professionals. Members learn the value of being active participants, discussing
relevant topics. Fundraising or other special activities provide opportunities for developing leadership and
organizational skills. Friendships and personal connections made in an academic club may become lifelong
professional connections.
Honor societies are another type of academically oriented group, established to recognize the outstanding
academic performance of students who have achieved a specific grade point average. Membership in an
honor society brings with it the prestige of membership, opportunities for leadership roles, and access to
professionals in many industries. Some honor societies offer scholarships for future studies in graduate school
or study-abroad programs, which introduce members to students from other universities and countries with
similar backgrounds and interests. Some honor societies open doors to conference memberships and
presentations, and important access to other industry professionals.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  499

Another type of collegiate organization is the special interest group. These groups may focus on social causes,
promote and advance interests in the arts or other hobbies, or encourage participation in political, religious, or
athletic events. Students from all disciplines and social backgrounds join special interest clubs. With such a
broad spectrum of members, you have the opportunity to learn from many people from multiple
backgrounds, expand your self-development, learn how to work with people who have different viewpoints,
and potentially establish firm personal relationships.

Some clubs offer members the opportunity to perform or showcase their talent in a more relaxed and
supportive atmosphere, or are centered around a personal interest. For example, a drama club for students
not majoring in theater can offer a forum for participating in musicals and plays without the rigor demanded
by the more structured academic program. Other groups that bring in nonacademic members include choral
groups, visual arts gatherings, astronomy clubs, and gaming societies. These groups provide opportunities for
the maturation and perfection of the interpersonal skills you need for success in the professional world. You
can develop key interpersonal attributes among friends and colleagues while enjoying a common activity or
interest.

Social clubs--sororities for women and fraternities for men--provide other opportunities to expand your circle
of friends, as these organizations focus on social activities. Although many social clubs concentrate strictly on
"get-together" activities, you can learn and perfect acceptable public-protocol behaviors at formal events as
well as mastering skills in organizational negotiations and compromise. A few colleges and universities are
beginning to formalize clubs for online students, including access to and membership in campus-based Greek
life. One of the first online Greek clubs is Theta Omega Gamma, founded in 2009 at the Florida Institute of
Technology.

College groups have high turnover rates in their membership and involvement. This can make it easier for you
to learn and perfect the skills necessary for establishing social and professional connections through constant
repetition of introducing yourself to new people, learning their backgrounds, and describing your own.
Learning how to introduce yourself and become acquainted with strangers is a soft skill that you can learn
more easily early in life than in later years, and knowing how to develop a personal relationship with others
will benefit you for many years to come. One unintended benefit is that mistakes can be quickly forgotten. If
you make a social blunder one semester, many in the group will soon forget your faux pas, and new members
will never be aware of it.

Perhaps the largest university club is one whose membership extends beyond graduation--the alumni
association. Membership in alumni associations is higher among students who earned an undergraduate
degree than among those with a graduate degree. Furthermore, members of the alumni association are more
dedicated and loyal to their alma mater than nonmembers. Because of their commitment to past and current
students, members of alumni associations have an automatic connection to other members. Loyalty is an
important characteristic of active members of the alumni association, so bonding with them links you to
established professionals who can help you in your new business. One way to connect with alumni is through
LinkedIn, a social network of business professionals.

The campus setting--either traditional or virtual--is one of the earliest multifaceted environments to which
you as a young adult will belong. Learning how to maneuver on the college campus and within the parameters
of university culture prepares you for your future environment.

Nontraditional and virtual students also can benefit from their college campus experience. These students
come from a variety of industry and professional backgrounds, and they are exposed to diverse operational
methods and strategies during class activities or assignments. Furthermore, becoming personally acquainted
500                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

with project team members opens opportunities for building connections that might be professionally
beneficial in the future.
Institutions of higher learning have become fundamentally self-contained communities. Each one functions
almost like a small city, with students mingling throughout the day with people at all stages of life, from
multiple backgrounds, and in various roles. It is a great place to start building a foundation of personal
contacts or enhancing your current portfolio of contacts before entering a competitive world.

   ARE YOU READY?

   What I Need and Who I Know

   Create a table with two columns. On the left, list questions or issues associated with starting a new
   business, such as: How much money do I need to start? What licenses should I get? Do I lease or buy?
   Where do I find customers? Where do I find employees? How does payroll work? What kind of insurance
   should I get?
   On the right side, write down specific answers that you already know. For questions and issues that you
   can't answer, write down the name of a person you could ask to help answer that issue. If you do not
   know someone, who might help you get to the person who can give you an answer?

Local Organizations

Every community includes groups of individuals who have something in common. People group themselves
together around shared beliefs, objectives, responsibilities, goals, or situations. Joining a local organization can
place thousands of potential connections within your reach. Before seeking acceptance into a specific group,
consider the type of group that fits your own personal and professional goals, and what you can contribute to
the group's continuity.

An open group has a fluid membership; people may freely join or separate at any given time. Open groups
tend to be informal, operate around a loose structure, and frequently focus on a personal or social cause.
Open-membership groups include activities-oriented groups such as bridge clubs, scrapbooking groups, or
photography clubs. Some open groups, such as Mothers Against Drunk Drivers (MADD) or People for the
Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), focus on a specific topic or cause.

A closed group typically has either formal or informal criteria that you must meet before you can become a
full member. Some organizations require sponsorship by a current member. Examples of closed groups
include religious organizations, homeowners' or renters' associations, community performing arts groups, or
sports groups.

Some community groups have features common to both open and closed groups. These hybrid groups have
barriers or criteria that you must meet prior to joining, but those barriers are low, and prospective members
can easily meet the criteria. Frequently, low barriers are an administrative feature to distinguish between
participants who are serious about the group's activities and those who have an impulsive interest with no
long-term commitment to the cause. Table 12.1 shows the differences among open, closed, and hybrid groups.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                  501

                                              Open, Closed, and Hybrid Groups

         Open Groups                          Closed Groups                    Hybrid Groups

· Fluid membership                            · Membership criteria/  · Low barriers to membership
· Loosely structured,                            process              · Maintain barriers to ensure members

   informal                                   · Structured               are serious
· May focus on personal/                      · Formal purpose

   social cause

Table 12.1

Groups that have a formal legal structure, an oversight board, and a professional management staff are more
effective than those groups that are impulsively formed around a good idea. Professionally organized groups
have skilled employees who set long-term goals and handle day-to-day activities. With the increase in
structure and management, costs increase. To cover employee wages and benefits along with operational
expenses of the group, many professional groups have membership dues and revenue-generating activities
that members are expected to participate in. Some professional groups are self-supporting, whereas others
are joint efforts among local and regional governments, universities, and the private sector.

One of the most successful private-public partnerships is the chamber of commerce arrangement. Local
business entities establish a chamber of commerce organization to enhance the local community while
expanding their own businesses. In some instances, the local government provides some type of monetary
support for the chamber, but the chamber is neither an agency nor a function of government. For major
community events, business members of a local chamber of commerce may provide their employees as
volunteer staff who use their professional skills to organize and plan the event's activities. The community
benefits, because a professionally managed event is held with minimal labor costs. The company receives
publicity and exposure to potential customers within the local community at nominal costs. A close working
partnership between the local chamber of commerce and government can produce outcomes that are
mutually beneficial to local businesses and community citizens.

Trade associations are formed within specific industries and concentrate their efforts on issues and topics
particular to one trade, profession, or philosophy. Functional trade associations include auto mechanics
(Automotive Maintenance Repair Association, amra.org), architects (the Association of Licensed Architects,
https://www.alatoday.org/), and marketing professionals (American Association of Advertising Agencies,
aaaa.org). Education groups, such as the Association of American Educators, focus on defining competencies
and qualifications for teachers and publicly advocating for standards and regulations that affect teachers.
Specialized groups also form associations, such as the National Association for the Education of Young
Children. Entrepreneurs who are looking for a franchise opportunity might consider an association that caters
to franchisees, such as the International Franchise Association (franchise.org) or the American Association of
Franchisees and Dealers (aafd.org). Companies interested in "going green" can join the Green Business
Network at Green America (greenamerica.org/gbn/). The American Retirement Association
(usaretirement.org) or AARP (formerly the American Association of Retired Persons, aarp.org) target retired
individuals. Whatever the profession or industry, a trade association is certain to emerge to provide standards,
training, support, and services to industry professionals and to be the industry's collective voice to legislatures
and government officials in establishing regulations, laws, and licensure qualifications.
502                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

Businesses need a steady supply of new customers to replace former customers who no longer have an active
relationship with them. The main purpose of networking groups is to help entrepreneurs gain new customers.
These groups come in all kinds and sizes. Business Network International (BNI, www.bni.com) is dedicated to
providing qualified referrals to members. BNI limits its membership to only one person per industry or
profession. Members are expected to exchange contact information regarding a qualified potential customer.

Meetup (meetup.com) is a platform where people can meet others with similar wants and interests in an
electronic or face-to-face engagement. Meetup's groups are social or professional, business or entertainment,
or relational or transactional. Anyone can start a Meetup group if one doesn't already exist for their needs or
interests. Each group's founders or members make the rules.

Whether a new entrepreneur needs a lot of support and guidance during the early stages of firm
development, or a mature organization needs new potential customers, local organizations can provide an
avenue to close connections and professionals who are committed to the local community and its businesses
and people. As with all decisions, you must assess each opportunity in terms of the cost of membership and
involvement in relation to the benefits you will receive over time.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                      503

Business Incubators

Business incubators are normally associations established by a consortium of local organizations such as a
chamber of commerce, local banks and other traditional businesses, and universities to provide
complementary support to startup businesses and those in the early stages of development. Services provided
may include office space for rent at nominal charges; simple business expertise in accounting, legal matters,
and marketing; and management support. Some incubators function as independent organizations, each with
its own board of directors, whereas others may be stand-alone units of a university program. One of the best
byproducts of being associated with business incubators is the communal contact with all the members'
connections. Business accelerators function much like business incubators. A key difference between
incubators and accelerators is equity investment. Business accelerators usually make some type of equity
investment in their members' companies. Because the financial commitment raises the stakes for accelerators,
these organizations carefully screen their prospects and select only those businesses that have a reasonable
chance of financial success. An entrepreneur who joins an accelerator can expect to receive a lot of support in
exchange for a commitment to the organization and a share of the profits. Table 12.2 illustrates the differences
between business incubators and accelerators.

                                              Business Incubators and Accelerators

   Functional Item                            Incubators                            Accelerators
Duration
Cohorts             One to five years                     Three to six months
Business model
Selection           No                                    Yes
Venture stage
Education           Rent; nonprofit                       Investment; can also be nonprofit
Mentorship
Venture locations   Noncompetitive                        Competitive, cyclical

                    Early or late                         Early

                    Ad hoc, human resources, legal        Seminars

                    Minimal, tactical                     Intense, by self and others

                    On site                               On site

Table 12.2

Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE)

The Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) is a nonprofit organization based in Herndon, Virginia. SCORE
partners with the federal Small Business Administration (SBA) and with retired executives from private
businesses to offer education, training, and mentoring to small business owners. According to the SCORE
website, it is the largest network of volunteer and expert business mentors, with around 350 chapters. Small
business owners can attend a workshop or view training videos available on the website. Templates of
financial statements and business and marketing plans are also available on the website. Perhaps the most
valuable service SCORE offers is a one-to-one mentoring program that can align a mentor with the specific
504                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

skills that the business owner needs the most.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The SCORE website includes a wealth of online resources on starting a business (https://openstax.org/l/
   52SCORE) such as online courses and regional workshops. You can also fill out a form to request a
   mentor (https://openstax.org/l/52SCOREmentor) to help you start your entrepreneurial journey.

Government Agencies

Economic stability over the long term depends on a continual supply of new companies and organizations. A
business entity will close when the owner decides to cease operations or achieves the goals of starting the
business. Sometimes a business is unable to sustain operations or is forced into closure by regulatory
agencies or licensing requirements. Regardless of why businesses close, new businesses must continually
arise to replace them and grow the economy. Governments at the federal, state, county, and municipal levels
have established agencies and programs to encourage new business development, support new businesses in
the early years of operations, and help young businesses mature to the point of self-sustainment. These
include the SBA, Small Business Development Centers, Women's Business Centers, and HUBZones. Figure 12.3
illustrates some of the government agencies that assist small businesses.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  505

Figure 12.3 Several government agencies exist to support entrepreneurs and small business owners.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Small Business Administration

One of the most popular agencies that helps businesses in the startup and early operations stages is the SBA.
The SBA was established as an agency of the US federal government in 1953. In 2012, the SBA merged with the
divisions of the Department of Commerce, the Office of the US Trade Representative, the Export-Import Bank,
the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the US Trade and Development Agency. At that time, the
leadership of the SBA became a cabinet-level position.

The purpose of the SBA at the macro level is to assist and safeguard small businesses, protect and defend a
competitive environment, and fortify the national economy. At the micro level, the SBA helps individuals "start,
build, and grow" their businesses and companies through direct counseling, educational seminars and
webinars, and public-private partnerships with institutions of higher education and foundations with similar
goals and objectives.

Some of the most important activities of the SBA revolve around finances for small businesses. The SBA
provides education in finance and money management, and guarantees loans through private lenders for
capital, inventory, and startup costs. A business must meet the SBA's qualifications for funding, but the
application and approval of the loan is handled at the local level by officers of a local bank or other SBA-
approved financial vendor.
506  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Are you looking for a lender to help you start your own business venture? The Small Business
   Administration's Lender Match page (https://openstax.org/l/52SBALendMatch) helps you find lenders.

Once a business is established and operating, ongoing activities are necessary to generate the cash flow to
sustain the business. The SBA supports the ongoing operations of small businesses by being the liaison
between small businesses and the federal government on bids and contracts. For fiscal year 2017, the federal
government purchased a total of $105 billion[3] in products from small businesses.[4] However, becoming a
vendor to the US government is not like selling to a private business or the general public. Free education and
training materials are available from the SBA to introduce new businesses to the types of products that the
government buys, the government's purchasing process for products and services, and the technical terms
the government uses.

The SBA helps small businesses to maneuver through government purchasing processes through education,
training, and support. Furthermore, the SBA has programs and funding operations that help economically
disadvantaged individuals. These programs are self-contained within the SBA. Public-private partnerships or
partnerships with universities or with other nonprofit organizations are also possible.

Small Business Development Centers (SBDCs)

Over one thousand SBDCs are funded through state grants with matching funds from the SBA.[5] Most SBDCs
are located on the campuses of local colleges or universities. Others are located in entrepreneurial hubs or are
connected with business incubator programs.[6] The coordinator of a local SBDC may be an employee of either
the university or the organization that provides the office space. SBDC coordinators provide advice and
information to small business owners at no charge because their fees and salaries are covered by the grants.
Mostly, the coordinators provide information, steer business owners to other sources of information, and
provide a context for making operational or strategic decisions.

Office of Women's Business Ownership

The Women's Business Center (WBC) is a program funded in part or in whole by the SBA to focus specifically
on helping women start and operate their own businesses.[7] Women business owners face the same
challenges that men encounter, but women normally must add the role of business owner to their list of other
personal responsibilities. Also, women have more limitations in access to capital and other financial resources
than men typically experience. The WBC can provide support and access to resources that are unique to
women. The WBC is operated through independent and educational centers in most states.

3 Small Business Administration. www.sba.gov
4 Robb Wong. "New SBA FY17 Scorecard Shows Federal Agencies Award Record Breaking $105 Billion in Small Business Contracts." US Small
Business Administration. May 22, 2018. https://www.sba.gov/blogs/new-sba-fy17-scorecard-shows-federal-agencies-award-record-
breaking-105-billion-small-business
5 America's SBDC (Small Business Development Centers). n.d. https://americassbdc.org
6 US Small Business Administration. "Find Local Assistance." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/sbdc
7 US Small Business Administration. "Office of Women's Business Ownership." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/wbo

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  507

Veteran's Business Outreach Center (VBOC)

The SBA operates twenty VBOCs that focus on helping veterans and their families start and operate a new
business.[8] A popular program of the VBOC is the Boots to Business program, which assists veterans making
the transition from the military to the owner-operator role. Another program dedicated to veterans is the
Service-Disabled Veteran-Owned (SDVO) Small Business Concern (SBC) program, administered through the
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. To qualify for the SDVO SBC program, the disabled
veteran must directly own and control, at minimum, 51 percent of the business and have input into the day-to-
day operations as well as a long-term strategy. Requirements vary according to the legal structure that is
chosen. Title 13, Section 125 of the electronic Code of Federal Regulations lists other requirements and
restrictions to be recognized as an SDVO SBC.[9]

HUBZone

A HUBZone is a geographic location that has historically experienced low employment.[10] Many are also low-
income areas because of limited transportation or educational opportunities. Through the HUBZone program,
the SBA certifies and supports HUBZone businesses in acquiring government contracts and buying
opportunities. Businesses that qualify may receive preferences in pricing. Qualifications for HUBZone
designation are explained on the SBA/Government Contracting webpage. As of 2018, the federal
government's goal is to award 3 percent of all federal contracting dollars to certified HUBZone business.

 12.2 Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand key resource needs for entrepreneurial ventures: accountant, attorney, banker/financial
      institution, insurance agent, and industry expert

  · Understand the value of developing a cross-functional team

Over the weekend of July 4, 1970, Casey Kasem started American Top 40, a radio broadcast that played songs
listed in Billboard magazine's top 100 singles. What started as a simple compilation of popular songs that were
played in ascending order of popularity ended thirty-nine years later on the July 4th weekend of 2009. When
Kasem signed off for the final time, he gave credit to those with whom he worked. "Success doesn't happen in
a vacuum. You're only as good as the people you work with and the people you work for. I've been lucky. I've
worked for and with the very best."[11]

Jay Samit, a vice chairman at Deloitte Consulting LLP, specializes in exponential technologies, a revolutionary
method of creating and manipulating information and data for learning, planning, and communicating.
Working with multiple clients who each have their own unique limitations and face a wide variety of
challenges, Samit and his colleagues at Deloitte devise tailored solutions that resolve each client's problems
while overcoming each client's constraints.

Two professionals, two eras, two industries, and two vastly different technologies, but one concept:

8 US Small Business Administration. "Office of Veteran's Business Development." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ovbd
9 Electronic Code of Federal Regulations. n.d. https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/ECFR?page=browse
10 US Small Business Administration. "Office of the HUBZone Program." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ohp
11 Cord Himmelstein. "Casey Kasem's Final Sign-Off." Halo Recognition. June 19, 2014. http://www.halorecognition.com/casey-kasems-final-
sign-off
508  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

Entrepreneurial success is sustained by those around you. The concept that teamwork leads to individual
success is evident in many other areas. All the great National Football League quarterbacks will tell you that
they depend as much on their linemen as on their receivers. Pitchers in Major League Baseball need a very
close relationship with their catchers, but the fielders are the ones who make most of the outs in the game
and can make a pitcher look very good. Surgeons need nurses and anesthesiologists, police officers need
good partners as well as dispatchers, ground troops need air support, and airline pilots need fantastic ground
crews and maintenance crews, and so on.

In reality, no one works alone. As an entrepreneur, you have the luxury of searching, soliciting, and selecting
your own team (Figure 12.4). Entrepreneurial success depends on who is included on that team, and who is
excluded from the team. In this section, we discuss advisors and cross-disciplinary teams.

Figure 12.4 Building the right team is crucial. (credit: modification of "Achievement American Analysis" by
"rawpixel"/Pixabay, CC0)

Advisor: Accountant

One of the most important decisions that a business owner will make before beginning a new venture is hiring
a good accountant (Figure 12.5). Businesses and their owners must be in sound financial health, or the
company risks being closed because of financial difficulties. Just as doctors are trained to diagnose and treat
health issues and symptoms, accountants are trained to recognize and treat symptoms and issues associated
with the financial health of a company. And just as doctors can determine the health of an infant before birth,
accountants can determine the likely financial health of a business before it begins.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  509

Figure 12.5 A professional accountant's work is an important asset to any business. (credit: "Numbers And
Finance" by "reynermedia"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

In the early stages of planning a business, the entrepreneur's personal financial history is the only financial
picture that investors, creditors, vendors, or lenders can review. Therefore, it is essential to have a
professionally prepared tax return in hand before you approach anyone about opening a new business.
Having a professional accountant prepare and file personal tax returns establishes credibility and confidence
in an aspiring business owner's financial decision making. Furthermore, when a business owner is willing to let
someone else see all of their finances, it indicates to other professionals that the owner is willing to expose a
very personal and sensitive realm--money management.

A highly skilled accountant will help any small business owner set up proper procedures that track cash
transactions and record financial activities. Accountants assist in creating a pro forma, a financial statement
that shows how much and where monies will be collected and spent in the early stages of business creation.
For an income statement, many of the figures used in a pro forma are hypothetical, a mere guess, but still are
loosely based on historical industry or market data. Documenting debt service (explained in the following text)
and other fixed expenses can be a simple task. However, projecting future sales with variable costs can clearly
become complicated. Many times, approval for a loan or a building lease will depend on reasonable and sound
projections of future sales and expenses. Too often, entrepreneurs overestimate income and underestimate
expenses. An accountant frequently brings a reality check to the entrepreneur's wishful thinking and keeps
income and expense projections credible.

Tax payments, especially payroll taxes, must be made on time to avoid large, costly penalties. Annual income
tax for both a business--whether a sole proprietor, a partnership, or a corporation--and the individuals
involved can become very complicated. Tax laws constantly change, but a good accountant will know how
these changes will affect the company and how the company should respond. Often, the accountant's fees are
lower than any penalty and fine assessed by tax authorities.

Besides tracking tax obligations, accountants can help identify trends within the financial picture. Many new
business owners focus on profitability of the company and not cash flow. However, cash flow is far more
important to the existence of a new company. Cash flow includes money collected by the business through
revenue and funding versus money disbursed by the business through expenses. In other words, cash flow
equals money in minus money out.

It's true that profitability can be affected by depreciation of assets, and an accountant can apply different
depreciation rules to reduce profits and tax liabilities. However, the business must maintain positive cash flows
to pay its weekly or monthly obligations. Although today's accounting software can easily generate cash flow
reports, the expense of paying a professional pales in comparison to the money and time a business owner
would spend in purchasing an accounting package, maintaining yearly upgrades, and learning how to run
510                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

reports.
When a small business needs to expand or make capital improvements, major repairs or improvements that
add to the life of an asset by improving its longevity, increasing its value or productivity, or extending its
usefulness, it may be necessary for the business to take out a loan. Banks expect and require the company to
have a professional accounting service prepare and file federal and state tax returns. Without the impartial eye
of a professional accountant reviewing the financial health of the company, lenders may consider the business
to be high risk and therefore would be unlikely to offer any loans. Expansion may be delayed or halted
because lenders want to know if the company has properly managed its existing business before they are
willing to finance additional operations and larger financial transactions.

Bankers will want to see not only income statements, balance sheets, and tax returns, normally for the past
three years, but also cash flow statements over the same time period. If the company is functioning as a sole
proprietor, LLC, or S-corporation (see Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues), the bank may
require all individuals with management authority or ownership to submit copies of both federal and state
individual tax returns plus personal net worth statements. Any investments outside the entrepreneurial
company will need to be disclosed as well. All of these requests from lending officers at the bank indicate that
they are looking for something. An experienced accountant will be able to interpret their requests, create
documents that provide the information they ask for, and advise the entrepreneur on how to address the
bankers' concerns.

Inventory management and debt service are other key financial areas where accountants can quickly identify
problems that need attention and then offer advice to the entrepreneur. Inventory management consists of
business operations that include managing the quantity of inventory units in stock, scheduling and
cataloguing replacement inventory, organizing shelf location for unit storage, paying for inventory received,
and processing, fulfilling, packaging, and shipping customer orders. Debt service is repayment of a loan,
including principal and interest.

Some vendors will require the same professionally prepared financial documents as bank loan officers do.
Creditworthiness, or a lender's assessment of how reliable a company is in repaying a debt, is a valuable
asset for a business. Being able to buy inventory on credit can greatly improve a company's marketing and
overall performance. However, creditors have a different concern about a company's financial health. A
vendor that sells inventory on credit may not be able to recoup a loss once the inventory is delivered to the
new business. Banks can seize a building, equipment, land, and cash deposits, but creditors are not afforded
that luxury. Therefore, creditors are skittish about releasing inventory to financially unstable businesses.
Additionally, some businesses may owe inventory or personal property tax on inventory that is in stock.

Advisor: Attorney

If hiring an attorney to keep you out of trouble is expensive, hiring one to get you out of trouble will be
exorbitant. Getting an attorney involved with a business in the very early stages, even in the idea development
stage, can be a very good investment that will save a lot of legal expenses and protect the company's income.
Areas of expertise and the ability to practice in certain areas of the law will vary among attorneys.
Entrepreneurs must first determine what legal issue they need help with. Then, they would determine the cost
of getting legal help as well as the cost of not getting legal help.

Hiring an attorney can be similar to hiring someone to do construction work on your home. Hiring a general
contractor who can do most of the work will be cheaper than hiring a general contractor who subcontracts
everything out to specialists. Some attorneys are generalists, with a practice that spans many areas in which

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  511

the entrepreneur or small business owner will need help. Other attorneys are specialists who limit their
practice to a few specific areas of expertise and refer clients with needs outside those areas to other
specialists. Generalists are frequently less expensive than specialists, who charge higher fees for their in-depth
knowledge of particular areas. In many situations, the entrepreneur or small business owner will not need a
high level of legal expertise. When in doubt about hiring an attorney, the new entrepreneur can visit with a few
members of their established network to get their input before making a decision.

One of the important questions to ask up front is how the attorney bills for services. Some may charge a flat
rate for specific services, whereas others will bill at an hourly rate. Attorneys may add any additional costs and
expenses to the client's bill. For example, when filing papers at the county courthouse to register a new
company, the attorney may charge for copying, tolls to drive to the courthouse, parking, and mailing fees in
addition to completing the actual registration papers. Knowing how the attorney calculates the bill--what fees
will be charged and what additional costs will be added--is very important in deciding which attorney to hire.

Attorneys may be associates or partners of a firm. A large firm may have several equity partners and junior
associates who are supported by paralegals. Larger firms offer a wider range of expertise and support for your
attorney, but that extra help and larger resource pool are available at a higher price. On the other hand, an
attorney who is in a stand-alone or small boutique firm may be less expensive but has fewer resources to tap
into if necessary and may be unavailable for extended periods of time when actively working for other clients.

An attorney in your specific geographic area or community could be a valuable source of uncommon
knowledge. Another consideration to think about when selecting an attorney is the location of their office.
Office location may seem trivial, but attorneys in large office buildings probably have higher fees because they
have higher office expenses. However, they are more likely to know other business professionals in their
building, and those connections may be helpful at some point. Moreover, attorneys are often keenly aware of
major developments in markets, such as real estate transactions and development, new roadways, and
regulations.

Law practices can be divided into broad categories and specific areas. If you look at the landing pages of many
of the country's prominent law schools, you will find only one commonality among all of them--they include
specialized areas in their programs. Five broad categories of law that are relevant to the entrepreneur are
administrative, civil, corporate, criminal, and family law. For the entrepreneur, corporate and family law are
probably the most important, because entrepreneurs may have family investors and personal assets at risk.
An attorney who is skilled in family law would know how to protect the entrepreneur as well as family
members if the startup business fails. If you are considering starting a business in a regulated profession, such
as electrical repair, HVAC, or childcare, you will want an attorney familiar with the state's administrative code.
Hopefully, a startup entrepreneur will not need a criminal defense lawyer. One of the first areas where you
should consult an attorney is in determining the type of business structure. Any business structure has both
legal and tax ramifications. A business attorney should help the entrepreneur select the legal structure that is
best for the business, the industry, and the entrepreneur. Each legal structure--sole proprietorship,
partnership, or corporation--has its advantages and disadvantages (see Business Structure Options: Legal,
Tax, and Risk Issues). The attorney, in collaboration with the accountant, should help advise the entrepreneur
about which legal form the business should take and why, not only for tax purposes but also for liability
protection for the entrepreneur's personal assets and for ease of operations.

Other issues may arise during the startup stage that would require legal advice. These include branding,
patents, trademark registration, and contracts. Will the entrepreneur be leasing a space or purchasing a stand-
alone building? If leasing, who is responsible for the safety and well-being of employees and for protection of
the equipment and inventory? In the excitement of getting started and making money, entrepreneurs may
512                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

consider such questions to be unimportant. However, discussing these issues and making decisions before an
adverse incident occurs can save the new business a lot of time and money. A good attorney will help keep the
focus on important issues before they become catastrophic ones.
Another volatile area for new businesses involves employees and employment law. New business owners may
also be new to management. Ignorance of employment laws can be very costly, especially if a disgruntled ex-
employee seeks protection from state and federal agencies. Formulating company and employee policies is
very important. Having an attorney help develop and use appropriate phrases will be a blessing that you will
recognize long after the attorney has cashed your check.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit the Society of Human Resource Management website with extensive resources for small business
   owners (https://openstax.org/l/52SHRMresource) on many topics related to employment law, including
   their Workplace Compliance Newsletter and articles on current news at their site.

Attorneys are professionally trained and educated to argue for their clients and to destroy the arguments of
their opponents. Having a good attorney who confronts and debunks the naive beliefs and behaviors of the
nascent entrepreneur can help that entrepreneur mature into a professional. As a new entrepreneur, you may
not find it easy to leave behind the "employee" mentality and enter the "owner" mindset. The entrepreneurial
lifestyle, responsibility, position, status, authority, and so on are foreign to the employee population.
Therefore, you may need to undergo a trial by fire. A good attorney, like a good marine drill sergeant, has to
destroy the old mindset and develop a new mindset within the new entrepreneur: It's all mine.

Although a good attorney is necessary to many aspects of a business, the entrepreneur also needs to set limits
and not allow the attorney to tread into the owner's domain. Attorneys should focus on legal issues, not
operational, strategic, or--under any circumstances--financial issues. Attorneys may be tempted to go beyond
their realm to help out a client, but in reality, they should stay within the areas of law and regulation, and out
of operational or strategic decisions. A good attorney will provide information, insight, and recommendations
for managing risks, but will not bully a client by insisting on eliminating risks. An entrepreneur should always
be ready to terminate the relationship with anyone, including an attorney, who seems to be interfering in
areas beyond their domain.

Hourly rates for experienced accountants and attorneys can be frightening. Even if you readily acknowledge
that the information and guidance provided by these two professionals is valuable, having the funds to pay for
their work in the pre-startup stage of the business can be impractical. Successful entrepreneurs are known for
solving problems, and at the very beginning of your own business, you can start solving your own business
problems. The question is: How can I get professional advice at discounted rates?

Often, young lawyers and accountants who have just completed their education or received their license to
practice will have very few clients. Likewise, those individuals who have been junior partners in larger firms
and are branching out to start their own business will have limited clients. Those two scenarios are ripe for
seeking discounted billing rates. Both the entrepreneur and the budding professional have a common need
but few, if any, paying customers. Therefore, other business professionals or small business owners whose
businesses are in the fledgling stage may be willing to offer special rates or payment terms.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  513

Advisor: Banker or Financial Institution

All banks are not the same. Entrepreneurs need to select a bank or financial institution that can meet their
current and future needs (Figure 12.6). Local banks that target a small geographic area are an excellent choice
for small, locally centered businesses. Officers of the local bank may personally know local business owners,
employees of the local businesses, and other key members of the local community. When a small business has
a financial need, officers of the company may make decisions based on the reputation of the entrepreneur and
the business. Sometimes a local bank will make loans and provide financial assistance with less scrutiny than
an entrepreneur would face at a larger bank. For the small entrepreneurial business, banking is personal.
Bankers like to see businesses in their backyard succeed.

Figure 12.6 Selecting the right financial institution for your venture will help create a path for security and
growth. (credit: "Money Coin Investment Business" by "nattanan23"/Pixabay, CC0)

Large banks with multiple branches in numerous cities, states, or countries may be a better choice for banking
services if your company will have broad geographic and financial needs. With employees, customers, and
vendors scattered over a large market, a large company is better off having a bank that mirrors that broad
reach. For example, if an entrepreneur starts a business in Hutchinson, Kansas, and banks with a local bank in
Hutchinson, that intimate relationship between the business and its employees in Hutchinson probably works
great. However, as the business grows into the Wichita and Kansas City markets, its banking services should
expand too. Likewise, expanding a business across state lines should initiate a thorough review of banking
arrangements to ensure that banking services will match the needs of the expanded business.

Large companies with multiple branches or employees over a larger area have bigger demands in banking
products and services. They will be better off with larger banks that can respond faster and more effectively to
market shifts or individual needs.

Advisor: Insurance Agent

Having insurance is a necessity for every business. Entrepreneurs, however, should not overlook the
advantages of an insurance agent's knowledge and industry insight. Insurance agents ought to be in the
entrepreneur's portfolio of industry professionals. Furthermore, insurance agents likely have other clients who
have been successful business owners for many years and may well introduce a new entrepreneur to
seasoned veterans.

The insurance industry is a trove of data regarding almost every aspect of any industry or profession. All of
that information is at the fingertips of your insurance agent. Agents can obtain information about any industry
by running liability reports according to numbers compiled by the North American Industry Classification
System (NAICS), a standard used by US federal agencies to collect, analyze, and report statistical information
514  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

about businesses[12]; the government provides a searchable database related to the codes as well
(https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/). Every business in the United States is assigned a NAICS number,
and insurance premiums are determined by the risk associated within each classification. You can obtain your
NAICS number from your federal income tax return form 1120S or 1040 Schedule C. Knowing your business
classification and the risks associated with it, your agent can assist you in reclassifying your business and
lowering your insurance premiums, a potentially big financial savings.

Advisor: Industry Expert

Studies show industry expertise and skills are vital to successfully launching and operating one's own
business. However, a lack of industry skills is not an impenetrable barrier to entrepreneurship. In fact, about
15 percent to 20 percent of successful entrepreneurs have no industry experience or have limited knowledge
about an industry before entering entrepreneurship.[13] In the service professions, the entrepreneur's lack of
skill is hardly noticeable, but technical industries have a higher success rate for entrepreneurs who already
possess the skills needed in the industry.[14] Even if you do have those skills, you are more likely to succeed if
you select industry experts who know the ins and outs of your profession (Figure 12.7).[15]

Figure 12.7 An industry expert can advise you and your team. (credit: "woman standing in front of sitting
people" by Unknown/Pexels, CC0)

With the industry professional doing the work, the new entrepreneur can focus on the business aspects of the
operation while gaining industry experience and insight through hands-on exposure. As many first-time
entrepreneurs find out in their first year, they will spend less time on the technical aspects of working in the
business and more time managing and working on the business itself. Good collaboration between a
technician and an entrepreneur increases the chances of long-term success.

12 Executive Office of the President Office of Management and Budget. North American Industry Classification System. 2017.
https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/2017NAICS/2017_NAICS_Manual.pdf
13 Dawn R. DeTienne and Gaylen N. Chandler. "The Role of Gender in Opportunity Identification." Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice 31, no. 3
(2007): 365-368.
14 Paul D. Reynolds and Richard T. Curtin. "Business Creation in the United States: Panel Study of Entrepreneurial Dynamics II Initial
Assessment." Foundations and Trends® in Entrepreneurship 4, no. 3 (2008): 155-307. https://www.academia.edu/19325466/
Business_Creation_in_the_United_States_Panel_Study_of_Entrepreneurial_Dynamics_II_Initial_Assessment
15 Jeen Wei Ong and Hishamuddin Bin Ismail. "Human Capitals Make Entrepreneur More Entrepreneurial? An Empirical Data from Small and
Medium Enterprises in Malaysia." Journal of Asia Entrepreneurship and Sustainability, 4(1), 83-105. 2008.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  515

As you begin searching for and interviewing professional advisors such as attorneys, accountants, or industry
experts to make your team (Figure 12.8), you should follow a few fundamental principles. First and most
important, you--the business owner--are the decision maker. Business owners, not members of the advisory
team, reap the benefits of good decisions and bear the cost of poor decisions. Advisors inform, explain options
and risks, share knowledge about others with similar situations and their outcomes, and make
recommendations. An advisor's role is neither to make decisions nor to "sell" one particular viewpoint.
Second, expectations and fees should be discussed before any actual work is done. Often though, a brief visit
with a professional may be conducted at no charge so that each party can determine what is needed, whether
the professional has the time and skills to meet the client's needs, and whether the client can afford the fees.

Figure 12.8 Your team should include advisors and professional service providers. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Another consideration is that all professionals have limitations. Licensed professionals such as attorneys and
accountants are experts in their respective fields, but they are not necessarily experts in general business
operations or strategy. Industry experts may be very knowledgeable in many aspects of the business, but they
too have boundaries. Last, shopping for experts to advise you on crucial matters should be based mostly on
competence and compatibility, not strictly on fees. Securing the services of a professional is a serious matter
and should be treated as such. Yet, it is a business arrangement subject to traditional market factors such as
service quality, affordability, accessibility, and change over time.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Who Am I? Who Am I Not?

   Knowing what type of person you are can help you make good career choices. Knowing what type of
   person your potential employee is can help you make a good hiring decision. Create a list of personality
   traits that you think you possess. Ask close friends, family members, instructors, or others in your life
   who will give you their input about your personality. People with all types of personalities and traits can
   be successful entrepreneurs. The difference is in how you manage yourself and what you do to
   compensate for areas of weakness.
   A reliable tool to identify certain personalities traits is the Sixteen Personality Factor Questionnaire (16PF)
   developed by Raymond B. Cattell. Visit the Sixteen Personality Factors Questionnaire site
   (https://openstax.org/l/5216PF) to take the 16PF questionnaire.
516                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

      1. What factors are reflected that you expected?
      2. What factors are revealed that you did not expect?
      3. If your results show that you are timid, what might you do to overcome that when you become an

           entrepreneur?
      4. If you tend to be a perfectionist, how might you manage the uncertainties of entrepreneurship?
      5. Which traits or skills on your list match or are similar to those listed by your acquaintances? Which

           responses do not match?

     Research the functional skills that you will need to start a business. Create a list of functional skills that
     you believe you possess. Ask close friends, family members, instructors, or others in your life who will
     give you their input about your business knowledge and skill. Then:

       · Make a list of the functional skills you need for your new business. Add your name next to the
           functional skills that you have.

       · Make a list of people you know who have different functional skills than you. Add their names next
           to the functional skills you do not have.

       · Which of your friends and acquaintances appear on both the personality and functional lists? What
           do you think this means?

Building a Cross-Disciplinary Team

Rarely does an entrepreneurial venture start or function due to the effort of only one person. "Birds of a
feather flock together" may be a popular saying, but it is a very poor organizational strategy for building a
team to start a successful business. Diversity is a key feature of successfully managed organizations.
Compatibility and collaboration are also important, as each employee is duty-bound to work with, support, and
assist other employees when necessary. Having staff with complementary skills and who get along improves
the likelihood of success for a new business.

A new restaurant provides a great example of how employees with assorted talents, expertise, and
responsibilities are assembled to make a bustling organization profitable. For a new owner, the first hire is a
manager. Hiring a good manager with experience means a larger payroll expense but produces better
financial dividends over the long term. A good manager oversees all staff as well as all operational functions
such as scheduling, buying, pricing, marketing, health code compliance, and business support functions.
Perhaps the second key hire is the chef, who is responsible for creating the menu, distinguishing the
restaurant from its competitors, and creating repeat customers who want high-quality, tasteful meals.

Front-house employees--the hosts/hostesses, servers, and bussers--play critical roles as the faces and voices
of a restaurant. The first experience in a restaurant will leave a lasting impression, so those at the front are
obliged to appear and act professional at all times. Servers, who have the most direct contact with customers,
are the sales force of the business and the liaison with the chef. Servers' incomes depend on tips and turning
tables, so it is essential for them to have tables cleared quickly and properly prepared for the next group.
Servers, therefore, rely heavily on the bussers for those important tasks. In many restaurants, bussers receive
a portion of the tips left for the servers, establishing a codependency between those two key positions.

Other positions in a restaurant are the bartender, dishwasher, custodian, payroll clerk, bookkeeper, and so on
who must perform their duties accurately and efficiently. Subpar service in any one of these functions
jeopardizes the viability of the restaurant. Every employee at each and every level is crucial, individually as well

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                                       517

as collectively.

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Make a List, Check It Twice

   Building a team is a skill that you can learn. One of the first steps is to identify what tasks need to be
   completed and what skills are necessary to complete those tasks. People in all types of leadership
   positions build teams. Whether they are in government, large businesses, individual retail stores, small
   businesses, local athletic teams, or schools, leaders go through the same process of identifying tasks and
   the skills necessary to accomplish those tasks and then searching for people with those skills.

   A key to learning is practice. You can practice building a team and then checking with people in charge of
   various organizations on how well you did. For example, select a local organization that you are
   somewhat familiar with--a local school, a community athletic league, a church, or a scout group. List the
   tasks and skills you think are needed to run the organization successfully. Then observe the organization
   in action. Make adjustments to your list. Ask to consult the manager in charge to see how well you did.
   How does your list compare with the actual operational structure? How is your list different? What did
   you overlook? How many people are doing more than one task?

   After doing this a few times, you will begin to see organizations from a functional viewpoint. This is a skill
   any entrepreneur needs to have. What does my business do? What skills are needed to do those
   activities? Which person will I select to do those activities? If my first choice declines, who will be the
   backup?

   Not only does a business need people to perform functional activities and day-to-day operations, but it
   also needs people to advise in other areas such as strategy, finances, management, staff, or legal. Should
   I have sales? Special promotions? Expand my product lines? Raise my prices? Get another investor for
   expansion? What are your long-term objectives? How will you achieve them? Having individuals you can
   talk to about your long-term goals is important. Surrounding yourself with those who can ask the right
   questions, confront you on weak areas, make you consider topics that you had not considered--all
   without judging you--is important if you have any plans to grow your business.

   Create a second list of people you know and trust, a list solely for advising purposes. Members on this list
   can be from any industry as these are strategic questions, relevant across all industries and markets.
   They will help with your business strategy and structure, not operations.

A very common organizational structure for a new venture is the flat organization, consisting of family
members, friends, or professional colleagues who take responsibility for different tasks. The bond that brings
this group together in launching this new business is unlikely to bring to the table all of the skills, talents,
personalities, perspectives, and viewpoints that can lead to long-term success. Therefore, expanding the
team's human resources beyond the founding members who also manage the business is crucial. Although
they do not have to become employees, access to them is as vital as having key personnel on your payroll.

An entrepreneur with a creative or big-picture mindset may not want to be bothered by day-to-day activities. If
that is the case, then someone else in the business needs to be the analytical, linear-thinking individual who
can process information and data to make sound decisions. After carefully considering a situation, collecting
518                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

information, and studying all relevant facts affecting the business, a problem solver can recommend what
action the entrepreneur should take, to whom should the tasks be assigned, when to implement the solution,
and how much money to dedicate to solving the problem. In other words, the problem solver becomes a lead
advisor to the entrepreneur, the manager. If the creative entrepreneur is one side of the coin, the problem
solver is the other side. When those two minds work in tandem, good things can happen.

In contrast, an entrepreneur may be a functional expert or licensed professional who is obliged to perform the
tasks personally--for example, an HVAC technician, dentist, or professional driver. In that case, a business
manager is needed to run the business side of the company. Rules, regulations, and deadlines for business
activities are beyond the functional entrepreneur's scope of interest, but they must be complied with
accurately and in a timely manner, or the business may close. Like the creative founder who hires a day-to-day
manager, a performance entrepreneur needs to hire someone dedicated to business functions.

Successful business owners keep careful track of metrics. They categorize and track expenses and analyze
profit margins, production performance improvements or declines, employee attendance, and other
measurable activities. Accurately interpreting the financial and operational performance of the company by
the numbers provides the management team the information they need to make sound decisions. Having
someone on the team with an aptitude for working with numbers is critical. The numbers must speak for
themselves. Personnel must remain inside the box when they draw conclusions from data.

However, solutions to problems are not always inside the box. Nonlinear thinking, also known as creativity, or
"thinking outside of the box," is sometimes needed to solve problems (see Creativity, Innovation, and
Invention). Creativity is the source of many new ideas, products, and processes. With companies facing shorter
times of competitive advantage, the entrepreneur needs to be constantly reinventing both self and company.

Over time, as the business grows, the entrepreneur makes the transition from owner-operator of a startup
through the small- business phase to being the owner-operator of a mature business. Entrepreneurs
eventually need to make the cognitive shift from working in a state of ambiguity to performing methodically in
a predictable environment. A business model where routine, repetitiveness, and predictability occur is more
appropriate for established businesses because it brings stability and confidence to employees, customers,
lenders, and investors alike. Using time-tested business methods and learning from previous experiences, an
entrepreneur may avoid pitfalls that could doom a startup company in the early stages.

Every organization--whether a for-profit, not-for-profit, political, religious, or social organization--relies on
revenue. For-profit businesses rely on sales as their main source of revenue. Nonprofit organizations, such as
community organizations, political groups, or religious groups, depend upon donations, contributions, gifts,
and grants. Some nonprofits, such as youth sports leagues, community performing arts groups, or scouting
groups, bring in cash through fundraisers or through ticket sales for events. Governments customarily depend
on various taxes as sources of revenue. Some local governments receive funds through block grants from their
state and federal governments. Having multiple revenue streams improves cash flow and increases the
prospects of long-term success.

Recruiting the person who will generate income for the organization should be a high priority during the
earliest stages, perhaps even before formal operations, of the business. For a salesperson, grant writer, donor
coordinator, or any other title referring to an income-generating position, a startup organization may have to
offer a sweeter-than-normal compensation package. If the person can produce revenue and generate cash
flow in excess of their total cost of employment, then he or she is worth the costs of higher commissions and
bigger bonuses.

Trying to improve short-term financial performance and increase profits by reducing a key employee's

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  519

compensation is likely to be detrimental over the long term. Losing a good sales rep may make the company
vulnerable to losing very important and profitable customers. Failing to retain an effective grant writer could
be the beginning of the demise, or at least a major downfall, for a nonprofit. Smart entrepreneurs pay their
revenue producers appropriately, even if it means paying them more than the entrepreneurs pay themselves.
As the old proverb states, "Never bite the hand that feeds you."

   WORK IT OUT

   Design the Business? Build the Product!

   Stan enjoys building wooden patio furniture. He started his craft while in high school and worked with a
   cabinet maker during his college years. For the past twenty-five years, he has been a marketing and sales
   representative and sales division manager for a restaurant equipment manufacturer. Recently, his
   company was bought by an international company, and Stan's entire division was eliminated.

   Stan was offered a new position with his current employer, but he would have to move to a new city. His
   family is against moving. His wife would have to quit her job teaching art in elementary school, his son
   does not want to miss his senior year of playing baseball, and his daughter has just started a new job at a
   nearby restaurant.

   Stan decided to start his own business making customized outdoor patio furniture. He already owns
   most of the equipment and tools needed to make the furniture. He has long-term relationships with his
   suppliers. However, his workshop in the backyard is not large enough to store raw materials or support
   an assistant. Besides, if he wants to make a living wage, he has to have a large place to handle the
   volume necessary to be successful yet safe.

   Stan is comfortable with the technical aspects of making furniture. He knows how to do marketing and
   sales, including pricing and financing. What he is not comfortable with is everything else he needs to get
   the business started. Stan does not want to spend a lot of his retirement funds, so getting started with
   minimal expense is his goal.

   What does Stan need to start his business? What type of professional help does he need and why? Who
   can help him?

 12.3 Designing a Startup Operational Plan

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify the major areas of operations management (money, methods, machines, people, and leadership)
  · Develop a checklist of operational needs

From the start, every entrepreneur needs a business plan. Your business plan will keep you focused on the
very early stages of the business, when it is easy to be distracted. A written business plan can help redirect you
back to your original idea.
Business plans can be divided into four different types: operational, strategic, tactical, and contingency. In this
520                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

section, the focus will be on the operational plan, the activities that an entrepreneur-owner absolutely needs
to do. The core business activities and how those activities interface with customers are key to a business's
long-term success. Business plans are discussed in more detail in Business Model and Plan.

Operational Business Plan

In the early 1900s, the mechanical engineer and management consultant Frederick Taylor introduced scientific
management techniques into manufacturing industries. Since then, operational planning has evolved into a
major component of successfully managing a business. An operational business plan details the what, when,
who, how long, with what, and how much of company activities. This type of plan may list specific functions:
What the activities of the business are, when those activities occur, who is responsible for various tasks, how
long each activity will occur, what tools or equipment are required, and how much time and funding are
needed.

Operational business plans should be flexible enough to allow for challenges that will occur. Some changes
must be made on a daily or even an hourly basis. Other changes may be necessary only occasionally
throughout the year. However, the purpose of the operational plan is to provide direction and guidance. This
way, everyone in the business knows their specific assignments, who is responsible for individual tasks, and
when major events occur.

Creating a table or chart in an Excel or other spreadsheet format can help your planning and scheduling.
Figure 12.9 illustrates how work station scheduling for a grocery store can be displayed in an Excel
spreadsheet. Functional activities, specific job tasks, work shifts, or work stations are listed as column
headings. Hours of operations are listed as row headings. Employees' names are entered into individual cells,
showing who is assigned to each specific task or station. The table doesn't show every position, but enough
positions are listed to give you an idea of how to use the same format for your own business.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  521

Figure 12.9 The table shows a schedule of work stations by hour. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This type of schedule displays every functional position, the hours that each position has to be covered, and
which employee is assigned to that function at what time. The manager can look at this schedule and know
that each function has been assigned to an employee during a definite time period. If the work is not being
completed, this type of schedule can help a manager make an informed decision about whether to hire more
employees. Furthermore, if a problem occurs, the manager knows which employee(s) were working at that
station when the problem occurred and can go directly to the employee(s) for information. When an employee
is unable to fulfill a shift, the manager can change the schedule quickly to ensure that every task is being
completed and every position is attended to.

Individual schedules and assigned work stations can also be displayed in a worksheet (Figure 12.10). This
allows the manager to schedule an employee for the proper number of hours per week and helps budget
payroll expenses. Employees know where they are expected to be and when they are scheduled to take lunch
or dinner breaks, and the manager knows where the employee should be. When operational questions arise,
the manager knows who was scheduled to be at the site and can go directly to that employee.
522  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

Figure 12.10 This table shows a schedule of employees by hour. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Using tools such as spreadsheets for scheduling and managing day-to-day operations brings organization and
stability to daily operations. Managers know that each task has a person assigned to it, and employees know
where they should be or what they should be doing throughout the day. Complex businesses with many
employees and many functions need more planning and structure. Businesses with very few employees can be
less structured. However, a written plan should list most tasks and activities that need to be accomplished,
who will do them, and when.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Many templates (https://openstax.org/l/52template) and spreadsheets (https://openstax.org/l/
   52spreadsheet) are available online that small employers can use to organize and schedule
   (https://openstax.org/l/52schedule) employees. Using key terms--for example, employee, schedule, work
   station, template--in popular search engines can produce multiple results.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  523

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Scheduling Sounds Simple

   Scheduling materials and parts for a fixed operation can be difficult. However, it can be even more
   challenging to coordinate your personal schedule with on-demand childcare needs near your workplace.
   Avni Patel Thompson undertook this massive challenge when she started Poppy, an on-demand
   childcare service, in 2015.

   Recruiting customers and employees for any business can be challenging, but when a company business
   model is centered around customers who have unscheduled demands and employees who want
   consistent income, the company needs a high-tech solution. Poppy was an app where parents could
   submit their request for a caregiver. The app's algorithm would then scan all available caregivers who
   were available during the window of time requested and were located reasonably nearby. After the app
   did its work, a staff member would make the final decision and confirm the caregiver with the family.

   Unfortunately, Poppy succumbed to the overall market and economic conditions plaguing the child care
   profession and closed in December 2018, but the business model is an example of one way to solve
   complex scheduling issues.

   Questions about Poppy and its scheduling procedures:

      · How is an app better suited for this type of scheduling requirements than a full-time employee?
      · What requirements are mandated for the customer? Employee? Company?
      · Will a new application of technology overcome other economic and marketing factors?
      · How reliable is the technology? What potential threats to the "established" method of scheduling

          are possible when technology is updated?

For tasks requiring attention on a monthly, quarterly, or annual basis, a simple organizer/calendar can be an
excellent tool to help organize and remind you of what needs to be done and when. Tasks that you must
complete on time throughout the year include payroll tax deposits and reports, insurance renewal
applications, permits and license renewals, employee training and recertification requirements, and account
billing to certain customers. A calendar also can help you schedule advertising and marketing activities. Some
events occur regularly each year at the same time or within a known time frame. This can help remind you
when to start your advertising and marketing campaigns.

You can plan for major maintenance and repair in advance or keep track of scheduled price increases, pay
raises, adding or removing menu items, rearranging shelving for seasonal products, and major cleaning or
maintenance activities.

As you start your business, you may need to make some adjustments to your operational plan. An
entrepreneur might overlook factors that occur regularly. Or a new entrepreneur may have considered some
factors to be minimally influential when in fact they may be significant. Entrepreneurs might give high priority
to influences that never materialize. Once the business is open, customers and competitors may not behave as
expected. Employees may have skill sets that were omitted from the written plan, or they may lack needed skill
sets. Even a well-written operational plan will most likely need to be tweaked shortly after operations start. But
524                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

if you formulate your plan correctly at the beginning, your functional operational plan should rarely need a
complete overhaul.

Control

One element that should be included in every operational plan is control. In an operational plan, a marketing
plan, an employee development plan, or any other type of plan used in business, control refers to the
measurement of outcomes and an evaluation of the activities that led to those outcomes. The control element
of a business plans answers the questions, "Have we accomplished what we wanted to accomplish?" and
"Have we met our goals within the time frame that we wanted?" Without measuring performance outcomes,
the entrepreneur does not know if the business is operating as expected, worse than expected, or better than
expected.

If a business performs better than expected, the entrepreneur must consider if the original expectations were
too low or if some other factor contributed to the better-than-expected performance. On the other hand, if the
business performed worse than expected, two reviews must be conducted. First, why are outcomes less than
expected and what can be changed to improve performance? Second, how do lower outcomes affect the
viability of the business?

Comparing actual outcomes with expected outcomes is a form of internal comparison called baselining.
Baselining is important because the entrepreneur must conduct a self-evaluation on what the business has
done versus what it can or should do. An entrepreneur can decide to adjust a business's capability after
conducting a baseline study. However, internal comparisons should be coupled with an external analysis,
called benchmarking. By comparing your business with a close competitor's or with the industry average, you
can get a better idea of how your business fits into the larger market.

Industry Benchmarks

If a basketball team scores sixty-eight points, do they win? If a baseball team scores four runs, do they win? If
a soccer team scores five goals, have they lost? The answer to all three questions is simple: We need more
information. Without knowing the other team's score, we don't know if a team has won or lost. There must be
some other score for comparison; otherwise, the points scored are meaningless.

Similarly, businesses need to compare their individual performances with some external performance
measurement. The comparison with an industry average, a leader within the industry, or a market segment is
called benchmarking. Benchmarking allows a direct comparison of your company with the collective whole of
the industry or market, or with an industry leader. By looking at several performance measurements, you can
see if your company is performing at a level that will sustain itself over the long term or if your company's
local market is atypical compared with another company's market. If the performance level of a startup
company does not match the industry average or the industry leader, that does not mean that the company is
poorly managed or cannot be profitable. Underperforming industry leaders indicates only that your company
is not the same as those leaders. Frequently, benchmarking against a local market area is better than
benchmarking against national leaders or the industry as a whole.

Operations Management

Operations management can be summed up in three words: Get it done! The foundation of operations

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  525

management is the theory of scientific management. As we have seen, Frederick Taylor developed scientific
management to introduce organization, scheduling, coordination, standardization, and cooperation among
workers into the production process. Taylor saw a production plant as a large, multifaceted organization with
many interrelated activities that should function as one large machine. The activities of each worker within one
group had to be coordinated with other workers' activities within that same group. Each worker group had to
be coordinated with other worker groups. Worker groups were clustered into larger cohorts. To keep materials
moving through the manufacturing process, activities had to be planned, scheduled, and monitored.

Whether you are working in a manufacturing environment in which raw materials are converted into finished
products or in a service environment in which customers receive experiences, these five components of
operations management--organization, scheduling, coordination, standardization, and cooperation--must be
the foundation your firm's activities. To have productive outcomes, the firm must have important inputs:
money, methods, machines, people, and leadership (Figure 12.11). If any of these essential management
elements are deficient or lacking, the company is probably functioning inefficiently and could be at a higher
risk of failure.

Figure 12.11 Money, methods, machines, people, and leadership form the foundation of operations
management. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Money

Three terms--money, cash, and currency--are often used interchangeably, but each has its own distinct
meaning and application. Money is any legal instrument that can be used in the exchange of goods and
services. Money includes paper money or coins, but it also includes checks or money orders. In developing
countries, money might be any physical item that is considered valuable to people wanting to exchange some
goods or services. Most money, though, is in the form of cash.

Cash typically refers to physical money or currency, but it also includes deposits in an account (checking,
savings, or certificate of deposit) at a financial institution. For example, customers can pay for their purchases
with paper money, coins, checks, debit cards, or credit cards. The paper money and coins are taken to the bank
for deposit. The debit card and credit card transactions are debited to the business's checking account by its
bank. The cash balance of the business increases by the amount of the deposits, regardless of the form of the
deposit. The cash balance is shown on the company's balance sheet and is the amount of money the company
has available to pay its debts and obligations.

Currency is paper money or coins printed or minted, issued, and backed by a national government. Currency is
divided into denominations or units in both paper and coin formats. With the expansion of international trade,
along with the expansive movement of people among countries, it is important for an entrepreneur to know
how global markets affect the value of money. Each national government decides what denominations of
526                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

currency to produce. The value of a national currency is determined by the ability to exchange it for another
national currency. Raw materials and supplies that originate in another country may increase in price
significantly because of a decline in value of the US dollar or an increase in value of the country of origin's
money. Likewise, raw materials and supplies may have a price decrease because of shifts in the value of
money.

Knowing and understanding how international monetary policies and activities affect a local entrepreneur can
be critical to long-term growth and survivability. You must have a clear understanding of projected costs of
materials as well as enough funds available at the right time to meet your financial obligations.

Liquidity is a measure of a company's ability to meet its immediate and short-term (i.e., due within one year)
debts and obligations. It's a way of describing how well you can cover your current liabilities using your
current assets. When a company is liquid, it can meet its financial obligations on time, typically on a very short
timeline. If the company pays its bills on time, the risk to lenders is lower, so lenders charge lower interest
rates; insurance companies may set lower premiums; and vendors may offer cash discounts for early
payments. Maintaining liquidity is vital to the success of a small business, as it may have limited access to
other financial options.

Other sources of cash include credit accounts such as a line of credit, a company credit card, accounts payable,
loans, or your own reputation and goodwill. A line of credit (LOC) is an agreement between a bank and a
depositor in which the bank makes available a maximum amount of money the depositor can borrow at any
time during the term of the loan. The borrower pays a fee during the term, whether or not there is an
outstanding balance, and also pays interest when there is a balance on the loan. All of these sources of cash
are more cumbersome and involve more planning and preparation than liquid accounts. However, these
nontraditional money sources are typically necessary for a new business owner in order to pay for business
activities before the company begins collecting money from its own paying customers. Mismanaging these
short-term debt accounts can easily become a burden on a small business. To better manage the financial
obligations of the business, the entrepreneur needs to know which financial tools are available, how to use
them, and which tool to use for which purpose. Financing is the use of money to conduct company activities.
Payment sources for business activities and resources should match the life expectancy of the resource. Long-
term debts--such as for land, buildings, equipment, and machinery--should be paid off through long-term
financial instruments that are known as secured debt. Ordinarily, a loan used to purchase long-term assets will
have a shorter life than the assets. For example, a machine that is expected to be useful for ten years should
be financed with a loan that is paid in full in less than 120 months (ten years × twelve months). The purpose of
long-term debt is to create revenue that exceeds the loan payment and interest. In this arrangement, the asset
pays for itself by generating more cash than is needed to pay the principal of the loan, interest on the balance,
costs to operate the equipment, and any additional insurance required or taxes assessed against the
equipment.

Short-term or current liabilities, such as payroll, taxes, insurance, and all other operational activities, should be
paid for through short-term cash resources. Most short-term payment obligations occur each week (payroll)
or at least each month (insurance, rent). Short-term cash resources include sales, accounts receivables, down
payments, and line of credit. Confusing long- and short-term financing strategies jeopardizes the financial
stability of the company. Mismanagement of finances could create a situation in which the company is unable
to pay its bills on time. When a company cannot pay its short-term obligations, it may not be able to oper ate
much longer.

Managing cash collected and spent is one of the two most important responsibilities of the entrepreneur. A

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  527

positive cash flow exists when cash received exceeds cash spent. A negative cash flow occurs when cash
received is less than cash disbursed. All companies and organizations will experience a negative cash flow at
some time. However, good managers will have a savings account or access to other cash in order to meet
current financial obligations. What is important, though, is to have a positive cash flow over the long term.

Paying bills is not fun, especially when you have little cash to work with. Three popular methods of paying bills
include credit, cash on delivery, and deposits on account. An entrepreneur's vendors may use all three
payment methods. Likewise, the entrepreneur can use all three to collect monies from customers.

When bills are due and the company does not have enough cash to pay the bills or the timing is inconvenient,
the company must use credit. Credit is the promise to pay later for something already acquired. Short-term
credit may come with no interest charges or fees, such as accounts payable Entrepreneurial Finance and
Accounting. Vendors will routinely allow established customers to take possession of inventory or products
without paying for them at the time of delivery. Payment for products is due on a specific day or after a
defined period of time.

Often, a vendor will offer terms of payment at the end of the billing cycle. For example, if the terms are net
thirty, purchases that a small business makes during one month are expected to be paid for in full at the end
of the next month. Payments made after the due date are subject to a penalty and interest. Sometimes a
vendor will offer an incentive to pay early, such as a 2 percent discount if the payment is made in less than
fifteen days.

Many startup businesses must make payments at the time of delivery, a form of transaction known as cash on
delivery (COD). When the delivery is made, the delivery driver or the online agent will release the product to
the customer once payment has been received. This payment method can burden a startup that does not have
liquidity. On the other hand, a startup business can reduce its losses by requiring COD payments from its new
customers, as it receives payments and has the funds to pay its own obligations.

For unique or specialized products, some vendors will require a deposit from the customer before the product
is made. This deposit reduces the financial risk to the vendor for a custom product that may be difficult to
resell if the original customer backs out of the purchase. It also provides cash to the producer, who needs to
buy raw materials to make the finished product. For the startup entrepreneur, paying for products beforehand
could strain the cash available for ongoing operations. However, if the entrepreneur's customers provide a
down payment before the product is produced, the entrepreneur secures a noninterest loan from the
customer.

All three of these payment methods are used in business transactions. Cash generated during each financial
cycle must equal to or exceed the expenses paid during each cycle. Otherwise, the company may find itself
without any money and be unable to afford to stay in business.

Methods

The study of how work is performed is called ergonomics. It involves designing, arranging, and coordinating
tools and equipment so that the movement of workers who use them is safe and efficient, and products flow
through the appropriate work stations in a timely and efficient manner.

Work methods are perhaps most important when complex machinery and equipment are involved. A
progressive movement of products from one stage to the next should reduce the employees' time and effort,
which reduces costs. Raw materials should be delivered to the location nearest where it will be used. Moving
and storing large inventories at each point of assembly is easier and more efficient than storing parts at
another location and moving them to work stations when they are needed. Timely delivery of inventory is
528  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

equally important. Delivery of materials at the moment they are needed is called the just-in-time strategy. If
component failure is detected, the point at which the part was assembled can be identified, and the deficiency
quickly corrected.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The just-in-time inventory system, developed in Japan during the 1960s and 1970s by the Toyota Motor
   Corporation, significantly changed production management. To develop a new system, Toyota took
   advantage of three crucial factors affecting post-war Japan: (1) limited resources, including cash; (2)
   value-added activities; and (3) reliance on business relationships that are mutually beneficial. They were
   able to avoid wasted investment and to effectively manage workloads. Watch this video on other
   common factors between startup entrepreneurs and Toyota (https://openstax.org/l/52FactorToyota) to
   learn more.

Service industries also apply the assembly line approach.[16] When workers become proficient at their tasks,
they can perform the minimum actions needed to complete a task without sacrificing quality.[17] The assembly
line approach has given birth to another ergonomic philosophy, lean project management.[18]

Many fast-food restaurants, such as McDonald's and Subway, use the assembly line approach to prepare food
quickly and correctly. For example, in making hamburgers, one employee selects the bun, puts the appropriate
meat patty on it, and then pushes it to the next worker, who may add onions, cheese, tomato, and lettuce
before passing the order to the next station. Once the hamburger is complete, it is passed along to the last
worker, who wraps the food and places it in a bag or on a tray.

When employees' tasks are limited to very few functions, repetition of movement makes their work quicker.
This specialization results in higher quality. Specialization allows each worker to increase productivity, improve
efficiency, and reduce mistakes. This division of labor has become a major component in Western economic
models. Adam Smith first explained it in his work The Wealth of Nations (1776), using pin makers as his
illustration. Smith theorized that reducing the number of tasks required of each pin maker would enable each
worker to improve his efficiency of motion, resulting in both uniformity in quality and higher production levels.

This increase in quality and quantity of work increases the productivity and profitability of the worker.
Collaboration among workers who work in close proximity occurs naturally. A weakness that materializes with
one worker may be canceled out by an increase in another worker's efforts. However, human labor continues
to be replaced by machinery and electronic instruments developed during the Industrial Revolution and the
modern technology revolution. Nevertheless, human labor is essential on the production line, whether in
creating or assembling products or performing services.

Machines

Beginning in the late eighteenth century, the Industrial Revolution shifted work from muscular power to
mechanical power. Ever since, humans have used machinery to perform tasks greater than what they could

16 F. Abdi, K. S. Sohrab, and S. J. Seyed Mohammad. "Gleanlean: How to Use Lean Approach in Service Industries." Journal of Services Research
6 (2006): 191-206.
17 T. Levitt. Production-Line Approach to Service. (Boston: Harvard Business School Publishing, 1972).
18 G. T. Passwater. "Industrialization of the Industry." BodyShop Business 18, no. 11 (1999): 92.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  529

achieve by themselves or using large animals. Machines provide consistency of work and higher volumes than
human workers at lower costs per unit made. However, the initial outlay of cash for machinery can be large.

For a startup entrepreneur, purchasing machinery can be a difficult, time-consuming, and complicated task.
First, one must look at the total costs of ownership (TCO), which is the comprehensive cost of owning large
capital items, including initial direct costs, operating direct costs, and indirect costs. Maintaining and repairing
operational equipment is difficult, especially when production schedules demand the machine to be
operational. Poor planning can be very costly, especially for a startup business, because your ability to produce
and deliver products on time reflects on your reliability to both your customers and your employees.

When making equipment purchase decisions, you should consider all the costs associated with the purchase
plus the machine's ability to produce income or lower costs. Such expenses include not only the purchase
price but also delivery, installation and setup, calibration, and operational expenses. You should also consider
the interest paid on the loan as part of the cost of acquiring the equipment, a factor that many new business
owners overlook, but one that a good accountant should be aware of.

Hidden costs to major purchases periodically involve certain operating costs. Too often, new business owners
focus on the purchase price, sometimes referred to as the sticker price, rather than on the total costs
associated with equipment. Major equipment may require special delivery methods and other shipping costs.
Once it is delivered to the site, it may have to be installed by skilled technicians. In some situations, the site
flooring may need reinforcing to carry the new weight load, or the electrical supply may need to be upgraded
to handle the necessary current. Local, state, or federal inspections may be required to obtain a permit to
operate the equipment. Sometimes, liability insurance policies require inspections and permits in addition to
government permits. All of these extra expenses add to the overall costs of acquiring the equipment. Many
times, these expenses are considered sunk costs, never to be recovered in resale of the equipment or in
producing more units.

Purchasing machinery and other major equipment is classified as a capital purchase or capital expense. A
capital expense is a major purchase of a functional asset that is expected to last longer than three years or
that still has financial value after being fully depreciated. Capital items, which include buildings, equipment,
machines, and furnishings, are best purchased using borrowed funds so that the business can use its cash to
pay for operational expenses, which are those associated with daily, ongoing activities of the business, such
as inventory, office supplies, wages, insurance, and utilities. When an asset is used as collateral for a debt, the
lender places a lien on the asset. The debt then becomes a secured debt, backed by the resale value of the
asset. To ease the financial burden of major purchases, depreciation, a reduction in the value of an asset, is
calculated as an expense on the income statement, which reduces taxable income and lowers taxable liability.

As a general practice, the payment schedule of a capital expense should be equal to or less than the life
expectancy of the equipment. For example, a business may purchase an offset printer that is expected to last
twenty years and then finance it through a loan to be paid off before the twenty years are up. Although having
the debt paid off before an asset is fully depreciated is ideal, in some instances terms of the loan may extend
beyond the depreciation schedule.

Machines have limits to their performance. Absolute capacity is the highest volume of units that a machine
can produce within a specified time period. Operational capacity is the number of units you can reasonably
expect to be produced within a specified time period. The difference between the two is operational reserve.
Because machines may need to be warmed up, materials loaded and unloaded, moving joints lubricated, belts
and hoses checked and repaired, or other operational functions performed, machines cannot operate at
absolute capacity for an extended length of time.
530                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

In calculating production levels, it is easy to overestimate the number of units produced. For an offset printer
to work properly, paper has to be loaded, the rollers must be inked, feeder clamps may need adjusting, and
one or two test sheets need to be printed to check for ink coverage and crispness of the image. All of these
necessary activities take time, but they actually are unproductive. Because each business will have unique
requirements and influences upon capacity, the best method is to track your own performance over time and
calculate the average. Otherwise, getting input from one of your advisors or a friendly competitor would be
sufficient for planning and budgetary purposes.

Machines cost money to operate. Improvement in efficiencies and in production volume is a major motivation
in purchasing new equipment. You should consider the increase in units produced, operational costs per unit,
decrease in waste, and improvement in quality of products. A grocery store owner who has an old freezer that
still keeps food at the required temperature may decide it is worth replacing. Buying a new freezer, with all of
the associated costs and improvements in efficiency, has no impact on the number of food items taken out of
it and sold. Only the difference in actual cost of electricity between the two units can be considered. However,
a die machine that reduces waste and improves the number of molded pieces produced per hour may be
worth the investment.

All machines break down, usually at an inconvenient time and place. Trying to repair equipment when it is
needed is like a road crew trying to fix potholes without shutting down traffic. Therefore, scheduling
production time, the amount of time that a machine is actually producing products that are to be sold (also
called up time), and down time, the time when production is not occurring due to repair, restocking inventory,
or unscheduled work, are critical areas for management. A schedule of regularly planned maintenance that
includes preventive repairs and inspections will reduce unexpected down time and equipment failures.
Scheduling repairs before they are necessary keeps equipment running efficiently and smoothly, helps reduce
costs over the long term, and allows for better management of expenses. Unexpected equipment failures not
only interrupt operations but can delay delivery of products and services to customers. This can diminish your
reliability and negatively affect customers' confidence in your trustworthiness, potentially affecting future
sales.

Every machine will become obsolete at some time and will need to be replaced. Having the latest, greatest
piece of equipment may be a temptation that your bank account cannot afford. Replacing equipment, whether
major industrial equipment that needs professional installation or office equipment that can be set up by
employees, is a critical decision. Too often, the criteria for selecting new equipment are the same criteria used
to describe the old equipment's ability. Using old job requirements for new equipment may be acceptable in
an industry that undergoes very few changes over a very long time. However, most industries change
drastically and need up-to-date equipment.

   WORK IT OUT

   Generating Interest at Home

   Going green is a popular trend today. One way in which power companies are going green is with wind-
   generated electricity. As of now, almost all wind energy programs are on a large scale, with wind farms
   consisting of hundreds of towers in rural areas. Stationing wind turbines at individual houses is currently
   impractical. Zoning restrictions limit the height of structures, costs exceed the benefits for homeowners,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                                  531

and potential sound and sight pollution are a concern for neighbors.

Those concerns apply to the current options for wind turbines. Can you think of other options that would
be beneficial, cost effective, and socially acceptable in urban, residential areas? What physical properties
would you need to consider? What type of functional capacity is needed? Can a household have more
than one type of electrical circuitry for different types of needs? Do we need a product to generate
electricity for today's household purposes? Or should we simply rethink household electrical systems
entirely?

Entrepreneurs not only create new products and services, but also redefine the problem. They may need
to make adjustments to resolve other environmental factors. For example, there was no need for paved
roads before the advent of cars. Businesses that provide gasoline and repair work for automobiles were
not necessary before the automobile became popular. The mass-produced automobile changed more
than how a product was manufactured--it changed the way people moved.

Consider what happed with Avni Patel Thompson and her childcare business Poppy (Entrepreneur in
Action: Scheduling Sounds Simple). What lessons can you learn from her experience as you look at home
wind turbines? What similarities are there between a service-oriented company and a product-oriented
company? What differences are there between the two? Do homeowners really want a new way to power
their homes? What are the similarities of purchasing a major piece of equipment for a home and for a
business? What differences are there?

Customer demands within an industry also may change significantly over time, just as a company's specific
needs may shift appreciably. To meet external customers' new wants and the company's new internal needs,
machinery with new technology and more advanced construction may be mandatory. You should plan three to
five years into the future for major purchases of equipment, machinery, tools, facilities, and skill levels. The
question is not "What do I need today?" but "What will I need five years from today?"

Trading in outdated equipment may have value that is not always recognized in financial documents. When
sales representatives of major manufacturers need to meet quotas, they may be willing to offer a very positive
financing plan to place their equipment in your business while removing a competitor's machine. But you
should avoid making the mistake of ignoring your current vendor. Your current machine supplier may be very
eager to keep customers and may offer to take your old equipment as a trade-in, which lowers the purchasing
price of new equipment. Or your current supplier may be able to offer better terms than competitors or
provide supplies as a reward for loyalty. All of these choices eventually lower both purchase and operating
costs of new equipment.

To upgrade or keep the old machinery, to buy or lease, to sell or trade in, these are just a few of the questions
that business owners contend with in making major purchases. Paying for big ticket items through vendor
financing might be easier than borrowing from traditional banks. But when making major equipment
purchases, always keep the professional sales representatives close. Their industry insight and knowledge
could be more beneficial to you than the equipment itself. People are more flexible, more knowledgeable, and
especially more valuable than machines.

People

Searching, recruiting, hiring, and supporting a workforce can be some of the most rewarding and frustrating
interactions that a new business owner deals with (see the discussion on human resources in Fundamentals of
532  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

Resource Planning for more information on hiring the right people for a business). Selecting the right people
at the beginning can be the difference between succeeding or failing in the early years of a business. Many
experienced business owners will say that waiting to hire the right person is better than hiring the wrong
person now.

For the new entrepreneur, hiring people you know is appealing because it is easy, they are typically very
amenable in the startup stages, and they share in the excitement of the new business. Nepotism is the hiring
of family members and close friends, usually based on their relationship to the entrepreneur rather than on
their ability to perform the job. Spousal support and involvement are important in the early stages of a
business. Spouses routinely become employees of the new business. Many times, the wife is an unpaid
employee if her husband starts the new company.[19] Her commitment may vary from a sporadic involvement
to a few hours per month or per week. Women entrepreneurs, however, are less likely to have their husbands
participate in the business, especially if the husband is unpaid.[20],[21],[22]

Hiring other family members or friends because of their availability and personal commitment is enticing. Yet
hiring family and friends just because they are willing and available can backfire and may produce more long-
term harm than good. Sometimes hiring people close to you may discourage qualified candidates from
seriously pursuing employment with your new business. Seeing that previous hiring decisions were based
upon personal relationships is a discouragement to skilled personnel. Terminating employment of a family
member can be truly difficult, especially if that family member is an immediate family member such as parent,
spouse, child, or sibling. Difficulties within the family and the business are possible if the situation occurs.
Moreover, failing to terminate a family member for cause will predictably destroy morale among nonfamily
employees, especially skilled employees.

As a business is getting started, having someone is sometimes better than having no one. At other times,
having no one is better than having the wrong one. Eventually, however, the ability to do a job supersedes
who the employee is. Furthermore, traditional employees hired from the marketplace eventually will resent
seeing more favoritism and leniency granted to family members than to nonfamily members. There is a stark
difference between the integration of family and non-family members in a startup environment. The career
path is usually short, with favoritism towards family members or longtime friends.[23] A delicate balance
between family and nonfamily employees is difficulty to achieve, and new entrepreneurs do not need the
additional distractions caused by rifts between family and nonfamily staff members.

Friends from previous employment, college, high school, or the old neighborhood are also popular sources for
employees. In the early stages, the entrepreneur has so many issues to tackle and tasks to complete that
hiring people they know seems like an easy solution. People build personal relationships through social and
personal interactions, outside the needs of the new business. They establish friendships along personal
commonalities such as attending the same school or being in the same club or on the same team, not along
the subordinate-supervisor spectrum. A sure way to end a good friendship is to hire a friend who is
unqualified for the job and place them in a supervisory role. Hiring a friend as a subordinate could lead to a
confrontation that could cost the new entrepreneur the support of friends and family.

19 B. Ndemo and F. W. Maina. "Women Entrepreneurs and Strategic Decision Making." Management Decisions 45 (2007): 118-130.
20 J. Kirkwood. "Spousal Roles on Motivations for Entrepreneurship: A Qualitative Study in New Zealand." Journal of Family Economics 30
(2009): 372-385.
21 L. Philipps. "Silent Partners: The Role of Unpaid Market Labor in Families." Feminist Economic 14, no. 2 (2008): 37-57.
22 B. R. Rowe and G. Hong. "The Role of Wives in Family Businesses: The Paid and Unpaid Work of Women." Family Business Review 13 (2000):
1-13.
23 Dan Mcconaughy. "Family CEOs vs. Nonfamily CEOs in the Family-Controlled Firm: An Examination of the Level and Sensitivity of Pay to
Performance." Family Business Review 13(2): 121-131. April 2004.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  533

Every new owner must be willing to move past the startup phase and into the growth stage, where skills
become more important than personal relationships. This natural progression in business maturity requires
skilled workers to perform their tasks effectively. Those skills come at a price that may be difficult to match in
the early stages of the business, but in the long run, skilled workers will produce more revenue than it costs to
employ them. Also, customers expect more from established businesses than they do from an initial startup
business.

Entrepreneurs must hire employees who complement them, not only in skills but also in personalities. In all of
its various phases--from inception through startup, growth, and expansion--every business faces situations
and obstacles that require an assortment of skills and talents to resolve. Some situations demand a strong,
direct, or even confrontational approach, which can be comfortable for an extrovert. Other situations may
need to be handled more softly and indirectly. An introverted employee who naturally is slow to react may take
a passive approach that would be more appropriate in some settings.

A small business can strengthen its staff by hiring people with an assortment of backgrounds and experiences.
The collective experiences of the whole staff benefit the business in ways that may not always be easily
identifiable. Employees who fit together make a nice place to work and an enjoyable experience for customers.

Sales Force

In Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team, the sales rep was discussed in the context of the value and
importance of generating revenue and cash flow for the business. In this section, the discussion will be
focused on the sales force as a component of the personnel working in a for-profit business. However,
nonprofit organizations that are also dependent upon sales revenue, as discussed earlier, could apply the
concepts as described as well.

Decisions involving a sales force may be some of the most critical decisions made, perhaps even more
important than organizational structure and tax status. The sales force triggers the activities that generate
revenue, which brings the business to life and sustains it. Without the sales spark, the business becomes a
lifeless organization doomed to closure.

A sales force must fit within the overall operational and marketing strategy of the business. The product must
be fully developed, its benefits to the customers clearly defined, and the primary target market selected before
a sales force is needed. Furthermore, company goals of minimum production levels must be established, and a
target revenue high enough to cover expenses needs to be calculated. It is imperative that each of these goals
is patently understood and achievable for both the sales force and the company before the sales force is
assembled.

The first consideration is identifying the stage of the company. Some entrepreneurs have a true startup
business beginning from scratch, whereas others enter entrepreneurship through the purchase of an existing
business with established customers and cash flow. The organization, structure, and role of the sales force will
depend upon whether the business is in the startup, growth, mature, or decline stage). As the business
progresses through each stage, requirements and abilities of the company change as does the external
environment of the market.

Deciding whether to self-perform sales or outsource the sales function should be done very carefully and
should include research into the tax implications and benefits of using employees versus independent
contractors.[24] Self-performing involves the employees doing most of the work in a business. Outsourcing is
the hiring of an outside company or third party to perform a specific task, job, or process, or to manufacture
goods. Each option has benefits and limitations. The entrepreneur must consider many factors, ranging from
534  Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

financial strength to market knowledge to sales support capabilities. Hiring sales personnel as employees
means the entrepreneur must use time and money to recruit, hire, train, supply with equipment and office
materials, and regularly pay the sales force. Outsourcing the sales function to independent contractors may be
a viable option, as the entrepreneur would have minimal upfront investment and they would be paid a
commission only when they make a sale. Outsourcing is a preferred selection for businesses that are
financially straining under cash flow, while self-performing sales is preferred for established, growing
companies.[25],[26]

Pay is always a touchy topic. Determining a person's compensation and income gives the entrepreneur a great
deal of power and control over the sales force. It is a very important responsibility that ought to be handled
with great care. Issues regarding pay affect not only the employees' or contractors' livelihood, but also the
company's financial health and reputation. Furthermore, there are numerous laws and regulations, at both
federal and state levels, that place the burden of doing it right upon the employer.

Sales force personnel who are employees must be paid with regular wages. Sometimes, a commission or
bonus is paid if sales quotas are met. Regular wages, along with employer-matching payroll taxes and
employee benefits, increase fixed expenses to the business. This arrangement may not be sustainable for a
startup business. Yet the entrepreneur-employer can benefit from this arrangement by retaining control over
employees' schedules and routines, earning loyalty from staff, and receiving immediate market feedback from
the employee.

Outsourced or independent contractor sales reps are paid on commission. This arrangement adds a variable
expense to the business, an expense that should only be recognized after a sale is made. In most situations
involving outsourced independent contractors, the employer is not responsible for payroll taxes. A word of
caution, though, to all beginning entrepreneurs: Determining whether someone is an employee or an
independent contractor can become complicated. The burden of doing it right is on the employer. And not
doing it correctly can add significant expenses to the business in the form of fines and penalties.

An important factor to contemplate when deciding what type of sales force to have is knowing your position in
the market and your market's characteristics (Figure 12.12). If you are selling to other businesses, business to
business, you will have to understand their decision-making processes and buying criteria if you expect to
make any sales. On the other hand, selling direct to the consumer, business to customer, has a wholly
different marketing strategy. For the nonmarketing entrepreneur, learning about marketing basics ought to
be placed on the "to do" list so that conversations with sales force personnel will be productive.

24 C. Stephen Tobin, The Tobin Firm. "Understanding the Differences between Independent Contractors and Employees." Greater Houston
Builders Association (GHBA). June 23, 2016. https://www.ghba.org/understanding-the-differences-between-independent-contractors-and-
employees/
25 P. M. Madhani. "Managing Sales Force Compensation: The Strategic Choice between Direct Sales Force and Independent Reps."
Compensation & Benefits Review 44, no. 2 (2012): 86-99.
26 P. M. Madhani. "Managing Sales Compensation: A Sales Force Configuration Approach." Compensation & Benefits Review 45, no. 2 (2013):
105-114.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  535

Figure 12.12 (a) In a business-to-business transaction, a farmer may sell his produce to a grocery store that
in turn processes the food for consumer sale. (b) In a business-to-customer transaction, the producer sells his
wares directly to consumers. (credit (a): modification of "spectacular salad bar at wholefoods HQ in Austin" by
Kevin Krejci/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit (b): modification of "Honey" by Phil Whitehouse/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

An additional market consideration is the sales territory. If you define territories by geographic markers, does
each territory have the same potential number of customers? What is the variance in size and the distance
from the home office? A similar set of questions arises if the sales force is established along product lines.
How are the product lines alike? How are they different? When sketching out the sales force organization and
responsibilities, it would be highly advantageous to receive input from potential sales reps or more
experienced entrepreneurs who already know how to setup this division of your business.

Agreements made with the sales force must be honored, so make any agreement only after very carefully
thinking through scenarios and obtaining insight from trusted advisors. The reputation of the business with
employees and customers alike is at stake when employers do not honor agreements with employees,
especially those employees who are the face and voice of the business to the market. If a sales rep, employee,
or independent contractor decides to separate from your business, they could take their customers' business
with them to their next place of employment. Although you could take legal action against a former employee
who does this, the bottom line is that you have lost a sales rep and a customer. Avoiding that situation is best
for everyone, especially you, the entrepreneur.

Getting the right sales people in place is critical. Having them work in a positive and effective environment is a
necessity that cannot be ignored.

Leadership

Terms commonly associated with a leadership position include owner, manager, supervisor, team lead, leader,
and boss. Many of these terms are used interchangeably, even though they have some minor differences in
meaning, but normally one person will function as both leader and manager in a small business. Some
entrepreneurs may be able to switch between these two roles flawlessly and fluidly, so that their followers and
even they themselves are unaware that the roles are being filled simultaneously. Nevertheless, some traits and
behaviors are associated more closely with leadership than with management.

A key difference between leaders and managers is their role in initiating action. Management is typically
concerned with administering and directing an organization's activities. This includes planning, scheduling,
536                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

coordinating, overseeing, and inspecting tasks performed by staff. The manager ensures that employees who
have been hired to perform duties perform those duties as expected and at a level of quality and quantity
acceptable.

A leader, on the other hand, instills within others a desire to perform. This is more of an internal motivation, a
psychological approach, which the leader develops via words and actions. Like the results of the manager's
approach, the results of motivation will be evident in the employees' performance. The difference lies within
the minds and souls of employees.

Employees will work for their manager because they are obligated to on the basis of assigned roles and
positions of authority. Employees will work for a leader because they want to achieve the same goals and
accomplish tasks to satisfy themselves as well as their leader.

You can find many lists that describe either characteristics or qualities of a good leader. Only a few have been
included here. Descriptions of good leadership can be divided into the following categories: personality,
competencies, locus of control, and style.

Personality describes the characteristics of a person as shown by their actions and words. Effective leaders
typically are easy to get along with, have a positive attitude, engage others, and display self-confidence in their
skills. When entrepreneurs begin looking for employees, working very closely together necessitates that they
get along and enjoy each other's company.

Working for someone who does not know what they are doing can be very difficult, if not impossible.
Therefore, good leaders know what their competencies are and are very good at what they do. Employees as
well as competitors and regulators recognize high job-performance skills. Sometimes, a very skilled leader
becomes an industry expert with a reputation throughout the industry and gives training at conventions,
conferences, and trade shows. Good leaders are also keenly aware of the skills they lack and readily admit
their incompetence in those areas. Hiring a skilled employee who compensates for your shortcomings is a
high priority.

Locus of control is the belief that you have or do not have control over events that occur in your life. If you
have an internal locus of control, you believe you have significant control and influence over events that occur
in your life. An external locus of control--the opposing view--means you believe you have very little control, if
any, over events that occur in your daily life. Effective leaders have an internal locus of control and feel certain
that they influence and control events, situations, and people in their lives and, specifically, in their business.
When crises arise, effective leaders take charge and begin making decisions to get control of events.
Employees, customers, and others connected to your business will rally around you if they are confident that
you can take control of the situation and directly deal with the challenges.

The three common leadership styles are autocratic, democratic, and laissez-faire. Each of these approaches to
leadership is effective but can also be ineffective. The approach that works is best determined by the industry,
structure, environment, and requirements of the job.

Autocratic leaders make decisions by themselves and view employees as subordinates who must follow
instructions without hesitating or questioning. Autocratic leaders are necessary in situations where decisions
are needed quickly, the leader is highly trained and skilled in the work requirements, and the outcomes can be
very serious. Democratic leaders engage their staff and seek input before making decisions. This approach
works well if the organization or industry is complex, many different departments or employees are affected
by the decisions, and a broad range of information is needed to make good decisions. Laissez-faire leadership
allows staff to work independently, mostly without supervision or direct input from the leader. This approach
works best when the employees are highly educated and skilled, tasks among employees are not closely

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                                                              537

interrelated, and staff are self-motivated.

Leadership has been studied for many centuries, and the debate continues. You can find examples of good
and bad leadership in many organizations including the military, sports, government, and business.
Leadership traits are like hands in a poker game--they are all good and bad. The difference is the situation.
For an entrepreneur, knowing the industry, the market, the competitive environment, the customer base, and
the employee pool are starters for determining which leadership traits and style would be effective. If you
decide you are not matched to the environment or situation, then you could engage someone who does
possess the traits and skills that better match your current needs.

Operational Needs

When starting your business, the first question you need to ask is whether anyone wants to buy your product
or service. Creating a new product or service is easy. In fact, 70 percent to over 95 percent of new products
introduced every year are classified as failures.[27] With more than 30,000 new products introduced every year,
you could reasonable guess that between 21,000 and 27,000 are failures.[28] On the contrary, only 5 percent to
30 percent of new products are successful. So the question is valid: Will anyone buy my product or service?

With such a low success rate, you will need to conduct careful research and small trial runs to determine the
viability of your new products. You need to know not only whether anyone will buy your products but whether
customers will pay your price, so that the business can make a profit, or at least break even. You need to ask
these two very important questions up front, because if the answer to either one is "No," you have no need to
do anything else.

A second series of questions that you need to address focus on the location of the company's operations.
Where will you locate your business? Will you rent or buy a building or facility? Does your facility need to have
easy access in a high-traffic area? Or can it be in a quieter area, where costs are lower? In addition to access
and costs, will your business be located within a competitor's influence? It would be unfortunate if you
negated all the positive factors of your great product and viable business plan by selecting the wrong location.

Besides deciding on a proper location, you also need to consider the size of your facility. Selecting a structure
that is too small from the very beginning may handicap any growth in the early stages of your business.
Having to move to a larger facility soon after beginning operations could be detrimental to your operations.
On the other hand, selecting a facility that is too large puts pressure on cash flow, as you will pay rent or a
mortgage for an unproductive building space. Finding the balance between "big enough to grow into" and
"small enough to afford with low sales" is a predicament faced by many business owners, whether new
entrepreneurs or seasoned veterans.

You will need to make similar decisions about furniture, equipment, and furnishings. These items are available
for purchase or lease. Sometimes a lease is better, as the initial payments may be lower but over time, buying
equipment and furniture can help improve cash flow once the items are paid for. However, deciding on how
much, what quality, and what size can be difficult. Good equipment sales representatives can be a big help in
making equipment decisions.

To get started, you will need to determine the proper inventory levels. How long is the shelf-life of your
inventory? Some products have a long shelf-life, whereas others may perish quickly. Ask yourself "How much

27 M. Emmer. "95 Percent of New Products Fail. Here Are 6 Steps to Make Sure Yours Don't." Inc. July 6, 2018. https://www.inc.com/marc-
emmer/95-percent-of-new-products-fail-here-are-6-steps-to-make-sure-yours-dont.html
28 J. Schneider and J. Hall. "Why Most Product Launches Fail." Harvard Business Review. April 1, 2011. https://hbr.org/2011/04/why-most-
product-launches-fail
538                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

do I need?" and "When will I need it?"

Before beginning a business, you may need licenses and permits. Buildings must be inspected and approved
prior to occupation for business activities. Building permits may require electrical, plumbing, HVAC, and
structural inspections of building systems and physical features. Accounts for water, gas, and trash pickup
must be made prior to occupying a facility. Table 12.3 summarizes the operational needs you should consider
when launching a venture.

            Checklist of Operational Needs

 Item 1     Determine the legal organization of your business for tax purposes (sole proprietorship,
            partnership, or corporation). Select the legal structure of your business for operations and
            management control [limited liability company (LLC), general partnership or limited
            partnership, C-corporation, or S-corporation].

 Item 2     Decide on a name for your company. The company name becomes its official legal name for
            federal and state purposes. A corporate name can be anything that is currently not in use by
            another company. A trade name may be different from the official name. The trade name
            should reflect the product or industry.

 Item 3     You and any other principals of your business write and approve articles of incorporation,
            bylaws, or management agreements.

 Item 4     File organizational papers with the secretary of state (SOS) or its corresponding office in the
            state in which the company is founded. The SOS returns the registration or charter documents
            to the company.

 Item 5 You and other principals make cash payments to the company for starting the bank account.

 Item 6     Obtain a federal employers identification number (FEIN) from the Internal Revenue Service.
            This is the company's federal tax number for income and payroll taxes and filings.

 Item 7     Obtain a state employer's identification number from your state's employment commission.
            This is the company's state tax number for filing unemployment and sales tax reports and
            payments.

 Item 8     Be sure your trade name or assumed name certificate is filed and approved by the appropriate
            county and state offices if it is different from the corporate name.

Table 12.3

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations                                                                 539

                                              Checklist of Operational Needs

 Item 9   Secure your business phone number, website, email, and domain name. Order your business
          cards.

 Item 10  Open a bank checking account with the appropriate corporate and trade name, authorized
          signers on the signature card, and all other documents that your bank requires to open a
          business account. Order debit cards or credit cards as necessary. Deposit your startup funds.
          Set up and test your business deposit processes.

 Item 11 Both you and your officers and partners sign agreements regarding the business.

 Item 12  Buy or lease your office space. Your local or city government will grant you a certificate of
          occupancy to occupy the building. You may need additional inspections before final approval:
          building, fire, health, and plumbing.

 Item 13 Open utilities, water, electric, gas, garbage, and phone accounts.

 Item 14  Post required notices in a prominent place according to regulations. Common locations are
          near the timeclock, break rooms, front cash register, or other public location.

 Item 15  Apply for and post as required your license for business, either by federal, state, county, or
          municipal government.

 Item 16  Apply for and post as required your license and permits for employees or specific types of
          products or services.

 Item 17  Obtain insurance for your building, liability for business, and worker's insurance. Some states
          allow businesses to exempt themselves from workers' compensation with proper notice to
          employees.

 Item 18 Order and install furniture, office equipment, shelving, and so on.

 Item 19 Order your inventory and make your product list with pricing, price sheets, or menu boards.

 Item 20  Recruit and hire your employees. Training and certification may be required for specific
          functions such as bartenders, cooks, drivers, forklift operators, or first aid personnel. Be sure
          employees' training in specific job functions is completed before opening. The first day of
          operations is typically a low-key event to ensure that everything is working as planned and
          that your staff know their roles and responsibilities. This gives you time to correct any
          weaknesses or shortcomings before the general public is aware that your business is open.

Table 12.3
Set the grand opening several days to a few weeks after the actual opening of business. Invited guests may
540                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

include investors, city officials, family members, special customers, former employers, business neighbors, and
competitors.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Forbes magazine has various resources such as this step-by-step guide for entrepreneurs
   (https://openstax.org/l/52StepEntrepr2) and this list of eight steps for entrepreneurs
   (https://openstax.org/l/52StepEntrepr3) on starting a new business. The federal SBA list of steps
   (https://openstax.org/l/52SBAsteps) is also available. Review each list. Which one best matches your
   entrepreneurial situation?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  541

     Key Terms

absolute capacity highest volume of units that a machine can produce within a specified time period
baselining internal comparison of actual outcomes with expected outcomes
benchmarking comparing one's own company's performance with an industry average, a leader within the

     industry, or a market segment
business accelerator organization formed by an alliance of business professionals who assist entrepreneurs

     in their startup or early stage businesses in exchange for an equity investment in the entrepreneur's
     company
business incubator organization formed by a consortium of established professionals or organizations
     assisting startup or early stage businesses that provides office space, financial support, technical support,
     or advisors whose specialized skills in management and marketing complement the technical talents of
     the entrepreneur
capital expense major purchase of a functional asset that is expected to last longer than three years or that
     still has financial value after being fully depreciated
capital improvements major repairs or improvements that add to the life of an asset by improving its
     longevity, increasing its value or productivity, or extending its usefulness
cash flow money collected by the business through revenue and funding versus money disbursed by the
     business through expenses
closed group formal, structured group of individuals who have a strict process or specific criteria that
     applicants must meet before being accepted as members
creditworthiness lender's assessment of how reliable a company is in repaying a debt
debt service repayment of a loan, including principal and interest
down time time when production is not occurring due to repair, restocking inventory, or unscheduled work
ergonomics study of how work is performed
flat organization organizational structure where owners, executives, or key decision makers interact directly
     with staff at all levels, with very few if any mid-level managers
hybrid group group of individuals who have a loose and flexible set of criteria for membership and function
     within a very broad set of guidelines; certain criteria may be required of regular members, but guests are
     frequently accepted with no long-term commitment expected
inventory management business operations that include managing the quantity of inventory units in stock,
     scheduling and cataloguing replacement inventory, organizing shelf location for unit storage, paying for
     inventory received, and processing, fulfilling, packaging, and shipping customer orders
line of credit (LOC) agreement between a bank and a depositor in which the bank makes available a
     maximum amount of money the depositor can borrow at any time during the term of the loan; the
     borrower pays a fee during the term, whether or not there is an outstanding balance, and also pays
     interest when there is a balance on the loan
liquidity measure of a company's ability to cover its immediate and short-term (i.e., due within one year)
     debts and obligations
nepotism hiring family and close friends because of personal relationships rather than for their skill sets
networking process of establishing and maintaining bilateral relationship with other people to exchange
     information, ideas, products or services, and money
North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) standard used by US federal agencies to collect,
     analyze, and report statistical information about businesses
open group informal, loosely organized group of individuals who have no formal process for joining or
542                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

     leaving the group, and who focus on a specific activity or social cause
operational capacity number of units that can reasonably be expected to be produced within a specified

     time period
operational expenses expenses associated with daily, ongoing activities of the business, such as inventory,

     office supplies, wages, insurance, and utilities
operational reserve difference in unit capacity between absolute capacity and operational capacity
outsourcing hiring an outside company or third party to perform a specific task, job, or process, or to

     manufacture goods
pro forma financial statement that shows how much and where monies will be collected and spent in the

     early stages of business creation
production time amount of time that a machine is actually producing products that are to be sold; also

     called up time
self-performing when employees do most of the work in a business
total cost of ownership comprehensive cost of owning large capital items, including initial direct costs,

     operating direct costs, and indirect costs
trade association group of companies or employees of companies in a specific industry, business structure,

     or social cause

     Summary

12.1 Building and Connecting to Networks
Entrepreneurial networking is interacting with other people who have a common interest that eventually leads
to the exchange of goods and services for payment. You must be comfortable approaching, talking to, and
working with other individuals in order to build the circle of associates, colleagues, and professionals that you
will need to start and operate your business. Likewise, you must be willing to offer your expert knowledge and
professional skills to others. A good networker supports others in the community through sharing information
and passing along personal introductions to expand everyone's networks.

People do business with those they know and trust. Connecting with people in face-to-face meetings through
group membership is valuable but so is the power of social media avenues dedicated to professional
connections, exchange of information, and support, such as LinkedIn. Networking is not easy or free. Some of
the costs other than money include time, fear, and dedication. Because entrepreneurs are willing to invest the
money, spend the time, take the risks, and stay with it, economic success for communities and individuals is
possible.

12.2 Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team
The idea that entrepreneurs are isolated loners and solo performers in the market, doing everything
themselves, having absolute self-reliance, is a myth. Successful entrepreneurs quickly seek outside advice, rely
on professionals in supporting areas, and are very good at establishing and maintaining personal
relationships with key individuals. Perhaps their essential skill is their ability to identify, connect, and trust
those individuals who can help them succeed in their personal entrepreneurial journey.

Whatever the entrepreneur can do best is what he or she should focus on doing. Other required tasks can be
assigned to employees, service providers, or consultants. However, it is very important that the functions
having a direct effect on customers and sales are performed proficiently, because that is what generates
revenue for the company. Entrepreneurs must assess their own skillset and willingness to execute tasks, then
identify employees and outside professionals to fill in any gaps.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  543

12.3 Designing a Startup Operational Plan

Success is best defined as achieving what you want. Without some kind of plan, you can never be successful.
Whether they are entrepreneurial owners or management employees, business managers need to have a
written plan so that everyone can be certain of what tasks are needed, who is assigned those tasks, and when
those tasks are scheduled. Recording and tracking financials is imperative in any business. Knowing where
money is coming from, to whom it was sent, how much, and why are crucial to being a responsible business
professional.

Without a business plan that encompasses all major aspects of your business, you may find yourself without a
business. If that happens, you may very well ask, "How did I end up here?" Unfortunately, the answer is likely
to be, "I don't know." On the other hand, a successful business professional can look back and say, "I did this,
and this is how I did it."

     Review Questions

1. What is "networking"?
2. What types of networks are created in a business relationship?
3. What types of organizations on college campuses can provide opportunities for building social networks?
4. What are some opportunities for you to develop the skills you need to establish personal relationships with
people that you do not know?
5. What is most likely the largest social group connected with a university? Why is being a member of this
group valuable?
6. How do government agencies at all levels support entrepreneurship?
7. Who selects the entrepreneur's team? Why is this important?
8. Why is selecting an accountant a critical decision?
9. For the startup entrepreneur, what finances are considered relevant?
10. What are some differences between large banks and small banks as they relate to an entrepreneurial
startup business?
11. What resources do insurance agents have to gain industry specific information, especially about liability,
operations, and challenges?
12. What relationships are possible for sales reps and small, startup businesses? What are the benefits to
each?
13. Why is a functional or operational business plan necessary?
14. Many operational business plans provide some very specific steps to take and sometimes are very detailed.
What are some situations in which rigid schedules can be a hindrance or a deterrent to effective operations?
15. What simple tools can an entrepreneur use to get organized and do what is necessary throughout the
month or year?
16. What is benchmarking? Why is it important? What are some limitations of benchmarking?
544                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

17. What is cash flow?

18. What is credit? What are some "instruments" of debt?

19. What are some differences between "absolute capacity" and "operational capacity"? Why do they need to
be distinguished?

20. Explain nepotism. Why might it beneficial to an entrepreneur? Why may nepotism be detrimental to an
entrepreneur?

     Discussion Questions

1. How are social connections made in early life the same as those made on the college campus? How are they
different?

2. What are some benefits of professional associations that are not available from government agencies or
departments?

3. How is the role of government agencies with regard to entrepreneurship different from the roles of industry
and trade associations?

4. How does the SBA help aspiring entrepreneurs?

5. Why is it important for government programs to offer grants to organizations, both public and private, to
educate and assist entrepreneurs at no charge?

6. What are some risks associated with surrounding yourself with others who are similar to you in
background? Industry experience? Education? Age? Personality? Ability to process information?

7. If the figures on a pro forma are hypothetical, then why go through the exercise of creating a document
with fake numbers?

8. What are some disadvantages of having licensed professionals such as accountants and attorneys offering
advice to an entrepreneur?

9. A young, very creative, artistic woman wants to start her own graphic design business. If she is out of the
office looking for new clients, she is not producing any work that generates income. What are her options?

10. What can happen if a new business does not have any kind of business plan? What if the business plan that
was originally written is not effective after the business starts?

11. Why are schedules important? If the new business owner keeps a schedule only in their head and does not
write it down, what might be some weaknesses of that idea?

12. Why is benchmarking relevant? What are some conditions in which benchmarking against national figures
would be less accurate? How would you find information regarding benchmarking?

13. Why is cash flow more important than profit? If a company does not have enough cash, what are possible
ways for it to get more cash?

14. Why is money management so important to a business? What are the consequences if money is
mismanaged?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  545

15. When is the assembly-line approach appropriate in service-oriented businesses? What are the benefits of
using the assembly-line approach in this type of work?
16. How does the term "division of labor" apply to the concepts of "jack of all trades" and "specialist"?
17. What is the difference between capital expenses and operational expenses? What type of financing should
be used for capital expenses? Operational expenses? Why?
18. Why should hiring the right people take precedence over buying the right equipment?
19. How do the needs of a small business and its founder change from the startup stage to the growth stage?

     Case Questions

1. Smart phones are everywhere today. You probably have one nearby right now. However, access to landline
phone service has not been complete for very long, and wireless service is not as widespread as many people
might think. The first phone lines (landlines) connected Boston and Somerville, Massachusetts in 1877. The last
town in the United States to receive landline service was Mink, Louisiana, a small community 100 miles south
of Shreveport, which received landline service in early 2005. Check any major US wireless carrier, and its maps
have gaps in service. Building networks of any kind takes planning, money, and time.

    A. What are some similarities between an entrepreneur starting a new business in a new profession in a
          new market and a telephone service network?

    B. How are the requirements for a telephone network infrastructure like those for a new entrepreneur?
    C. What are some estimated costs, not necessarily monetary ones?
    D. What are some benefits to an entrepreneur who enters a market with established networks?
    E. How do established networks save the entrepreneur valuable money and time?
    F. With limited resources, what criteria should an entrepreneur use to determine priorities of spending

          time, effort, and money in developing networks?
    G. Does each criterion have equal weight? Why or why not?
546                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

2. The Internet Association (IA, https://internetassociation.org/) was founded in 2012 as a trade association
devoted to Internet-based companies. Founding companies included Google, Amazon, eBay, and Facebook.
These Internet-based companies founded this new trade group because they did not have a voice in
Washington, DC, with respect to potential regulations and laws. The IA has synergy--more influence as a
group than each company would have individually.

    A. What prompted the formation of the IA?
    B. Was it for marketing purposes?
    C. Management support?
    D. Industry advancement?
    E. Regulatory influence?
    F. What are some secondary purposes for the IA?
    G. How might the original purpose of the organization shift as the industry matures?
    H. Will small companies enjoy the same benefits of the larger founding organization?
    I. Any new venture involves substantial risks and costs. How might a new Internet startup benefit from

          joining the IA?
    J. How else do the large corporations benefit besides having a say in the political discussion in

          Washington, DC?
    K. What time commitment should a new business make before expecting any positive return on investing

          time and money in a trade association?
    L. If joining the IA requires a membership fee, what determinants should you use to place a value on the

          amount spent for dues?
    M. What benefits of a trade association may be not easily linked to membership expenses?

3. In 1989, the new NFL owner of the Dallas Cowboys, Jerry Jones, fired the legendary coach Tom Landry and
hired one of his former college football teammates, Jimmy Johnson, as the new head coach. Johnson faced the
same problems that a new entrepreneur has: Who should be on my leadership team? What should be their
responsibility? Out of twelve key coaching positions, Johnson kept only three coaches from Landry's staff in
the same positions and moved one coach to a different position. Within four years (1993), the Dallas Cowboys,
under head coach Jimmy Johnson, won Super Bowl XXVII with six of the original coaches Johnson hired his first
year still in the same positions.

    A. How is a startup similar to an existing organization that needs to be turned around? How are they
          different?

    B. What are some reasons to surround yourself with others instead of taking the attitude that "I can do it
          myself?"

    C. For any leader, what are some reasons that skills in identifying and recruiting key people are more
          important than technical skills?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  547

4. Every four years, the United States elects a president. Although the incumbent might be reelected, the
United States is guaranteed to have a new president at least every eight years. On winning the election, the
new president must identify candidates for cabinet positions. Some potential candidates decline the invitation
and voluntarily withdraw themselves from consideration. Those who accept the invitation are put through an
intensive screening process. The president then submits cabinet-level nominees to the US Senate for
confirmation. As in any close group, recruiting and selecting individuals to join the presidential cabinet is
critical for the president to achieve any objectives or goals.

    A. What kind of experience is beneficial to members of a board of directors for a local performing arts
          group? Should they be experienced in industry? Government? Fundraising? Management? Marketing?
          The arts?

    B. Besides experience, what other type of backgrounds should be considered? What about board
          members' ages? Education? Gender? Residency? Financial Status? Connections to local or regional
          major employers?

    C. What can a new entrepreneur learn from an executive director of a nonprofit about selecting
          candidates to build a winning team? How important is it that some candidates decline to join the
          board? How long should members be on the board?

    D. How important is diversity in building a winning team? What skills must the entrepreneur perfect?
          What skills can be learned and developed later by the entrepreneur? Why is a variety of backgrounds,
          in the technical field and outside of the industry, important?

    E. Who is the actual team leader? (1) Entrepreneur? (2) Strongest personality? (3) Smartest? (4) Most
          technically skilled? (5) Financier? (6) Most experienced in management?

5. Narciso Gómez has worked in the service department at an auto dealership for about twenty-five years and
has served as the service manager for the past seven years. He is qualified for retirement through the
dealership but wants to open his own business. He is looking at buying a franchise, either a Jiffy Lube quick oil-
change franchise that is for sale or a new SuperGlass Windshield Repair franchise. Both are automotive service
and repair related, where he has plenty of experience.

    A. Besides his technical skills, what does Narciso need to consider before purchasing a franchise
          business?

    B. How might the estimated volume of work required to generate enough sales to cover his financial
          obligations affect his decision?

    C. The Jiffy Lube business model requires a four-bay facility. What does Narciso need to calculate in
          developing his business plan?

    D. The SuperGlass Windshield Repair is an on-site repair model whereby the technicians drive to the
          vehicle's location for work. What should Narciso's main concerns be in developing a business plan for
          this business model?
548                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

6. Han Jia-ying was an office manager for a construction company until she decided to be a stay-at-home
mother with her kids. Her former employer has called her to take over some administrative work at home,
such as payroll processing, payroll tax filings, bookkeeping, and other general administrative work. Her
employer has said that some of his customers probably could employ her for their general administrative
tasks.

    A. If she works from home, what type of scheduling issues does Jia-ying face? What might be some
          interruptions to her ability to meet specific deadlines, such as processing paychecks each week?

    B. If Jia-ying needs additional help, what options does she have? Would she be wise to hire an employee
          or seek some support from someone else? Who might that be? What problems might Jia-ying
          encounter when seeking a nonregular employee?

    C. Jia-ying will need new office equipment, including a new computer, a new scanner/printer, phone
          service, Internet connections, and so on. However, she is not tech savvy. How might she best manage
          working from home by herself, especially is something goes wrong or does not work?

     Suggested Resources

12.1 Building and Connecting to Networks
Association of Chamber of Commerce Executives: acce.org
BNI: Business Network International: https://www.bni.com
HUBZone: https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ohp
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE): https://www.score.org
Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov
Small Business Development Centers: https://www.sba.gov/sbdc
Women's Business Centers: https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/wbo
Veteran's Business Outreach Centers (VBOC): https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ovbd

12.2 Building the Entrepreneurial Dream Team
Traits: Personality and Instinct
Cattell's 16PF: https://openpsychometrics.org/tests/16PF.php
Kolbe Conation Index: http://www.kolbe.com
Typical Traits & Characteristics of Entrepreneurs:
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/typical-traits-characteristics-entrepreneurs-18325.html
Good Characteristics of an Entrepreneur:
https://smallbusiness.chron.com/good-characteristics-entrepreneur-18385.html
Attorney: State Bar Associations for attorneys in specific states:
New York: http://www.nysba.org
California: http://www.calbar.ca.gov
Texas: https://www.texasbar.com
Florida: https://www.floridabar.org

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations  549

Accountant: National Association of State Boards of Accountancy (All fifty states Accountancy Boards are here
  with active links): https://www.nasba.org

Team Building Activities:
Three Teambuilding Exercises: http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/224212
Seven Team Building Ideas: http://www.entrepreneur.com/article/330594
Success Factors for Entrepreneurs:
Fifteen Entrepreneurial Key Success Factors:
http://www.entrepreneurshipinabox.com/852/entrepreneurial-success-factors/
Ten Qualities of Successful Entrepreneur:
https://www.under30ceo.com/10-qualities-of-a-successful-entrepreneur/

12.3 Designing a Startup Operational Plan
American Customer Satisfaction Index: https://www.theacsi.org/
North American Industry Classification System: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/
US Census Bureau: https://www.census.gov/
US government contracts: https://www.sba.gov/federal-contracting/contracting-guide/basic-requirements
US Department of Commerce Homepage: https://www.commerce.gov/
US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis: https://www.bea.gov/
US Department of Labor Homepage: https://www.dol.gov/
US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/bls/blswage.htm
Yahoo Finance: https://finance.yahoo.com/
Scheduling programs and templates:
https://getsling.com/blog/category/scheduling/
https://wheniwork.com/features
https://schedulebuilder.org/
Employer hiring costs of employee: https://gusto.com/tools/employer-tax-calculator
Payroll program: https://onpay.com/payroll-calculator-tax-rates
550                                                                               Chapter 12 Building Networks and Foundations

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    13

              Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Figure 13.1 Focusing time and energy on planning a business can help an entrepreneur avoid or minimize
legal issues. (credit: modification of "hammer books law court lawyer" by "succo"/Pixabay, CC0)

 Chapter Outline

        13.1 Business Structures: Overview of Legal and Tax Considerations
        13.2 Corporations
        13.3 Partnerships and Joint Ventures
        13.4 Limited Liability Companies
        13.5 Sole Proprietorships
        13.6 Additional Considerations: Capital Acquisition, Business Domicile, and Technology
        13.7 Mitigating and Managing Risks

      Introduction

   Entrepreneurial businesses are the heart of the US economy. Small businesses--those with fewer than 500
   workers--employ almost one-half of the US workforce (47 percent according to the US Census Bureau's
   Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs)[1] and are responsible for offering thousands of new products and services
   each year. The information in this chapter can help entrepreneurs successfully start and operate a business.
   Startups function best when the owners have a strong understanding of the legal aspects of entrepreneurship.
   Important legal issues such as business structure (entity selection), incorporation process, taxation, capital
   acquisition, and employment policies require that entrepreneurs obtain good advice and make sound
   decisions before they commence operations. They must make additional decisions that relate to the role of the
   business in the community, which is a key component of corporate social responsibility. The combination of
   good advice and sound decisions will help entrepreneurs successfully navigate a complex matrix of
   considerations.

   1 US Census Bureau. Annual Survey of Entrepreneurs (ASE). 2016. https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/ase.html
552  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

 13.1 Business Structures: Overview of Legal and Tax Considerations

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Understand why a business's purpose is an important role in the initial business structure decision
  · Identify major types of business structures (corporation, LLC, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint

      venture)
  · Distinguish between for-profit and not-for-profit purposes and structures

The structure of a new business creates the legal, tax, and operational environment in which the business will
function. In order to choose a business structure, entrepreneurs need to have a clear understanding of the
type of business they seek to establish, the purpose of the business, the location of the business, and how the
business plans on operating.

For example, a business that plans to qualify as a nonprofit--Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code--will
be treated differently from a business that aims to earn a profit and distribute the profits to its owners.
Therefore, the first step in any entrepreneurial endeavor is to establish the nature and purpose of the business
(Figure 13.2).

Figure 13.2 There are several basic business structures: sole proprietorships, partnerships, corporations,
and hybrid forms. Partnerships may be structured as a general partnership (GP), a limited partnership (LP), or
a limited liability partnership (LLP). Hybrids are usually formed as a limited liability company (LLC) or a joint
venture (JV). The designations of "C" and "S" corporations refer to which chapter of the Internal Revenue Code
they appear in; B corporations are structured to meet standards of serving certain social purposes.
(attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

One of the most important initial decisions an entrepreneur must make, from a legal perspective, is the legal

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  553

organization of a business, called the business structure or entity selection. The choices are varied, with
several basic entities, each with several variations, resulting in multiple permutations.

Many business ventures, regardless of humble beginnings, may have the potential to evolve into significantly
larger business ventures. This is what makes the initial decisions so important. The founders should think
through every step of business development, beyond the inception or formation, and consider the possible
paths of the business. How an entrepreneur organizes the business, or which business structure they choose,
will have a significant impact on both the entrepreneur and the business.

Business structure options include traditional choices such as corporations, partnerships, and sole
proprietorships, and hybrid entities such as limited liability companies (LLCs), limited liability partnerships
(LLPs), and joint ventures (JVs). Each structure carries different requirements to set up, different requirements
to fulfill (such as taxes and government filings), and varying ownership risks and protections. Entrepreneurs
should consider these factors as well as the expected business growth in selecting a structure, while being
aware that the structure can and should change as the business venture grows.

For example, if you think you want to share authority, responsibilities, and obligations with other people, your
best choice would likely be a partnership, in which other people contribute money and help manage the
business. Alternatively, if you prefer to manage the business yourself, a better choice for you might be a
single-member LLC, assuming you can borrow money from a lender if needed. Conversely, if you think your
idea is so popular that you may grow rapidly and want the ability to raise capital by selling interests in your
business through equity or debt, then a corporation would be your best choice. You should obtain legal and
tax advice about your structure.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Becoming an Informed Entrepreneur

   If you are an entrepreneur with an idea for a startup, ask yourself if you are ready to make important
   decisions. How much do you know about taxation, incorporation, or liability? If you don't know at least
   some of the basics, you may have to depend on a lot of advice from accountants and attorneys, and that
   is very expensive. If you spend too much money on advice, you have too little left for something else
   such as advertising and marketing.

Establishing a Business Purpose

A clear understanding of the business purpose helps direct the entrepreneur toward the most appropriate
business structure. The business purpose is the reason the entrepreneur forms the company and determines
who benefits from it, whether it is the entrepreneur, customers, or some other entity. (The business purpose is
different from a business mission or vision.) Drafting the expectations of the entrepreneur and how the
business will operate, with a careful analysis of how the business will generate cash flows, realize profits, and
to whom the business will owe its primary obligations, is the start of determining the appropriate business
structure. A written business plan (see Business Model and Plan) will help the entrepreneur develop the best
legal structure in which the business is to operate because the legal structure of the business should be tied to
the nature of the business.

Once the entrepreneur is clear on the nature and purpose of the business, consideration of the business
554                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

structure follows. The first consideration is whether the entity is being created to produce a profit for its
owners or shareholders, or whether it will be structured as a not-for-profit entity. A second factor is the state
of incorporation, as state law defines each business's creation, with different states permitting different types
of entities and various legal protections. Additional considerations include how the structure facilitates
bringing in new investors, allows the owners to transfer profits out of the business, and supports a potential
subsequent sale of the entity. Taxation is also a crucial aspect of business success, and the business structure
or entity directly affects how it is taxed.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Drafting a Business Purpose

   Can you write an outline of a business purpose? Try this: Your university's tutoring center is crowded,
   and those students who need extra help are struggling to find it. You have decided to start a new
   company to match those students with student tutors at your university. Who determines how much a
   tutor can charge? Is it a set price, a surge pricing model like Uber, or is it up to the tutor? How much of a
   profit do you make? In essence, you must determine the purpose of your business. Read this IRS article
   about shared-economy businesses (https://openstax.org/l/52IRSsharedbus) to learn more.

For-Profit versus Not-for-Profit Businesses

Owners form businesses for one of two purposes: to make a profit or to further a social cause without taking a
profit. In either case, there are multiple options in terms of how a business is structured. Each structure carries
its own tax consequences determined by the owners' financial requirements and how the owners want to
distribute profits. The structure, in turn, determines the appropriate income tax return form to file.

Characteristics of For-Profit Businesses

A for-profit business is designed to create profits that are distributed to the owners. There are multiple entity
structures used in for-profit business entities including corporations, LLCs, partnerships, and sole
proprietorships. Many for-profit business owners seek some form of limited liability, and thus form a
corporation or an LLC, each of which carries with it specific legal attributes. Additionally, for-profit business
entities are subject to a variety of local, state, and federal taxes and filings. Liability and tax issues will be
discussed later in this chapter.

For-profit businesses are commercial entities that generally earn revenue through the sales of products or
services, whereas nonprofits are organized for social purposes. Nonprofits are allowed to provide assets or
income to individuals only as fair compensation for their services. For-profit businesses can be either privately
owned (such as an LLC) or publicly owned and traded (such as a corporation). Publicly held and traded
corporations sell stock or interests, and must abide by special rules to protect shareholders, whereas privately
owned businesses may be less regulated. Regulations may vary by state and by type of incorporation.

Characteristics of Not-for-Profit Organizations

A not-for-profit organization (NFPO) is usually dedicated to serve the public interest, further a particular

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                                               555

social cause, or advocate for a common shared interest. They must follow particular regulations regarding
eligibility, government lobbying, and tax-deductible contributions. In financial terms, a not-for-profit
organization uses its surplus revenues to achieve its ultimate objective, rather than distributing its income to
the organization's shareholders, partners, or members. Common examples of not-for-profits include
educational organizations such as schools, colleges, and universities; public charities such as the United Way;
religious organizations such as places of worship; foundations; trade organizations; and issue-advocacy
groups. Other organizations also considered NFPOs include nongovernmental organizations, civil society
organizations, foundations that provide funding for various activities, and private voluntary organizations.[2]

Nonprofits are usually tax-exempt as categorized by the US Internal Revenue Service (IRS), meaning they do
not pay income tax on the money they receive for their organization. These types of organizations are created
under state law (but also subject to federal and local laws) and are typically created for the common good.

To operate as a not-for-profit business, most states require that the entrepreneur create a corporation that
has the specific purpose of acting in the public interest. This type of corporation does not have owners but has
directors charged with running the organization for the public good, subject to bylaws. Some states only
require a minimum of one director, whereas other states may require three or more directors. This is an
important consideration for an entrepreneur because the nonprofit corporation will need the approval of all of
the directors, and not just one person for its creation. Careful vetting of the directors is the best policy of any
entrepreneur since directors have a duty to the corporation.

Because state laws vary, a not-for-profit corporation created for the common good in one state needs
permission from another state to operate in that state. The permission is typically an approval from the other
state's secretary of state memorialized in the form of official documents or permits. When operating in
different states, the entrepreneur needs to make sure that the business follows all laws, rules, and regulations
for each state.

Another issue to consider is the creation of a not-for-profit business organization for a particular purpose. One
example of a special-purpose organization is an alumni organization, usually incorporated as a 501(c)(3)
nonprofit, which incorporates to raise money for a college or university for a specific reason, such as student
scholarships. Alternatively, a booster club may incorporate to receive donations for a single function, such as
the women's soccer team. These organizations may need additional approvals prior to the creation or start of
operations, depending upon state and local legal requirements. Each state typically has different
requirements; depending on the federal tax regulation under which the entrepreneur is attempting to qualify,
there may be additional federal regulations. This is why the entrepreneur needs to fully understand the
purpose of the business they are starting and the legal operating environment before selecting the business
structure. While NFPOs play an important role, most entrepreneurs form for-profit businesses; therefore, the
remainder of this chapter will focus primarily on for-profit business entities.

2 International Center for Not-for-Profit Law (ICNL). "What Is the Difference between `Non-Profit' and `Not-for-Profit'?" 2013.
http://www.icnl.org/contact/faq/index.html#difference
556  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Determining the Purpose of Your Business--Profit versus Non-Profit, or a Little of Both?

     The Approach Used by Gravity Payments' Entrepreneur Dan Price

   Figure 13.3 Gravity Payments has led the way in exploring how employee and C-level salaries function
   for the company in terms of profits, living wages, and ethical considerations related to those issues.
   (credit: modification of photo provided by Gravity Payments)

   Sometimes, a business may be a for-profit company yet act in a way that some may think exhibits a not-
   for-profit philosophy. Most startups must address their business purpose. In other words, is the primary
   purpose of the business to enrich the owners or is it to spread the benefits of success to the workers?
   The history of Gravity Payments (Figure 13.3) illustrates this issue.
   In 2011, an employee earning $35,000 a year told his boss at Gravity Payments, a credit-card payment
   business, that his earnings were not sufficient for a decent life in expensive Seattle. The boss, Dan Price,
   who cofounded the company in 2004, was somewhat surprised, as he had always taken pride in treating
   employees well. Nevertheless, he decided his employee was right. For the next three years, Gravity gave
   every employee a 20 percent annual raise. Still, profit continued to outgrow wages, so Price announced
   that over the next three years, Gravity would phase in a minimum salary of $70,000 for all employees. He
   reduced his own salary from $1 million to $70,000 to demonstrate the point and help fund the company-
   wide salary increase. The following week, 5,000 people applied for jobs at Gravity, including a Yahoo
   executive who took a pay cut to transfer to a company she considered fun and meaningful to work for.
   Price recognized that low starting salaries were antithetical to his values and to what he felt was a large
   part of his business purpose. A majority of the initial cost of his approach to employee salaries was
   absorbed by making less profit, yet revenue continues to grow at Gravity, along with the customer base
   and the workforce. Price believes that managers should measure purpose, impact, and service as much

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                        557

as profit.

  · Do you think an entrepreneur can successfully operate a for-profit business while paying its workers
      substantially more than the competition?

 13.2 Corporations

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between C Corporations, S Corporations, and B Corporations
  · Distinguish between privately and publicly held corporations
  · Explain how corporations are taxed

A corporation is a complex business structure created by filing the appropriate documents with the state of
incorporation (Figure 13.4). They are created when the original incorporators (owners) file a formal document
called the articles of incorporation, or other similar documentation, with a state agency, often the secretary of
state's office or the state division of corporations. Corporations operate as a separate legal entity apart from
the owners. The owners are called shareholders and can be individuals, other domestic or foreign
corporations, LLCs, partnerships, and other legal entities. Corporations may be for-profit or not-for-profit, as
discussed previously.
558  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Figure 13.4 This is a sample short form of the document that is filed with the Secretary of State's Office to
form a corporation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Incorporating a company means that the corporation operates as an entity that has some of the same rights
as an individual. For example, individuals and corporations can sue and be sued, and corporations have the
rights to own property, to enter into and enforce contracts, to make charitable and political donations, to
borrow and lend money, and to operate a business as if the corporation were an individual. Most states
require a corporation to be registered in that state in order to conduct business operations and to enter into
and defend lawsuits in that state, especially if the business was incorporated in a different state. Registration is
not the same as forming the initial corporation; it is simply the process of filing informational documents by
entities that have already been incorporated in another state. States also tax the operations or sales a
corporation makes in the state in which it has certain operations.

Overview of Corporations

Corporations are the only type of entity that the law allows to sell shares of stock. No other entity, like an LLC
or a partnership, may do so. Those individuals or other entities that buy stock become shareholders and own

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  559

the corporation. Some corporations have millions of shareholders, and others have as few as one. State
incorporation laws vary: Some require at least three shareholders, but others allow a one-owner business to
incorporate. Thus, an entrepreneur may start a company as the sole owner of the company and later
incorporate and sell shares of stock or bonds to other investors in the company.

Corporations sell, or issue, stock to raise capital, or money, to operate their businesses. The holder of a share
of stock (a shareholder) purchases a piece of the corporation and has a claim to a part of its assets and
earnings. In other words, a shareholder is now an owner of the corporation. Thus, a share of stock (also called
equity) is a type of security that signifies proportionate ownership in the issuing corporation. Stocks are
bought and sold predominantly on stock exchanges, although there can also be a private sale between a seller
and a buyer. These transactions have to conform to a very complex set of laws and government regulations
(e.g., the Federal Securities Acts of 1933/34), which are meant to protect investors.

Use of a corporation allows the entrepreneur to shield themselves, and other owners, from personal liability
for most legal and financial obligations. The benefit of limited liability is one of the primary reasons
entrepreneurs incorporate. However, the administration of a corporation requires more formality than other
types of entities, such as sole proprietorships and partnerships. A corporation must follow the rules for such
entities. The requirements include maintaining bylaws, holding annual shareholder and director meetings,
keeping minutes of shareholder and director major decisions, ensuring that officers and directors sign
documents in the name of the corporation, and importantly, maintain separate bank accounts from their
owners and keep detailed financial and corporate records. A failure to follow the rules could lead to the loss of
limited liability, known as "piercing the corporate veil."

   WORK IT OUT

   Piercing the Corporate Veil of Limited Liability

   As we have discussed, entrepreneurs should generally form a separate legal entity to limit personal
   liability arising from business obligations, such as contracts. Incorporating or organizing as an LLC can
   limit owners' personal liability to the extent of their investments. This liability shield is not without
   exception, however: in particular, a situation called "piercing the corporate veil." A recent 2018 case
   example (Woodruff Construction, LLC v. Clark, No. 17-1422 [Iowa Ct. App. Aug. 15, 2018]) demonstrates
   this point.

   Factual Overview: The defendant was the sole owner of a corporation and entered into a contract to
   remove sludge for the plaintiff at a waste treatment facility. The defendant never completed the work.
   The plaintiff sued and won a $400,000 judgment against the corporation for breach of contract. However,
   the plaintiff was not able to collect from the corporation due to insufficient assets. The plaintiff then
   asked the court to pierce the veil of the corporation, which would allow recovery from the corporate
   owner's personal finances.

   Piercing the Veil: Evidence showed that although the defendant kept a separate bank account for the
   corporation, he had commingled its funds with his personal finances, which is a distinct violation of
   fiduciary duty. He used the bank accounts for the corporation interchangeably with other bank accounts.
   Furthermore, the defendant did not follow required corporate formalities because he had no bylaws or
560  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

   resolutions, no voting records, and no documentation of or minutes from shareholder meetings.
   Finding: The court allowed the plaintiff to pierce the corporate veil. This means that the defendant, the
   sole owner of the corporation, had to pay over $400,000 out of his personal funds. (Note: Although it is
   true that LLCs have fewer formal requirements, this case would likely have had the same result if the
   owner were an LLC because the rules are essentially the same for piercing the veil of limited liability.)
   Critical Thinking:

      · How can you protect yourself from this happening to you?

Most corporations use a three-part (or tripartite) approach to ownership and management (Figure 13.5). After
the corporation is created and operations start, the shareholders typically elect a board of directors, and the
board has oversight responsibilities for the operations of the company. The board then appoints officers who
are responsible for the day-to-day operations of the corporation.

Figure 13.5 In a tripartite approach, three groups are involved in owning and managing a corporation.
Shareholders elect directors who appoint officers. Shareholders are owners, and directors/officers may be,
and typically are, shareholders. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

For small organizations, state law allows shareholders to directly manage a company without using a board of
directors. This type of corporation is a closed corporation or a closely held corporation, and is common for
entrepreneurial startups. State incorporation law, coupled with federal tax law under the IRS, regulates the
formation and operation of a closely held corporation. The basic rules state that, generally, a closely held
corporation is a corporation that has more than 50 percent of the value of its outstanding stock owned
(directly or indirectly) by five or fewer individuals at any time during the last half of the tax year.[3]

3 US Internal Revenue Service. Publication 542 Corporations. n.d. https://www.irs.gov/faqs/small-business-self-employed-other-business/
entities/entities-5

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  561

C Corporations, S Corporations, and B Corporations

The categorization of corporations as either C corporations or S corporations is largely a tax distinction. An S
corporation is a "pass-through" entity, where shareholders report and claim the business's profits as their
own and pay personal income taxes on it. Alternatively, the government taxes a C corporation at the
corporate level, and then levies taxes again on the owners' personal income tax returns if corporate income is
distributed to the shareholders as dividends.

Conversely, the distinction between B corporations and C or S corporations is not one based on taxes at all,
but rather on purpose and approach. A certified B corporation is a business that meets a very high standard
of social and environmental performance, public transparency, and accountability to balance profit with social
purpose. B corporations can also be C corporations or S corporations. Figure 13.6 summarizes these types of
corporations.

The Unique Nature of B Corporations and/or Benefit Corporations

A new form of nontraditional, for-profit corporation is the benefit corporation, which may or may not also be a
B corporation. While B corporations and benefit corporations share some common goals, B corporations go
through a certification process. Becoming a certified B corporation is a formal process that involves
compliance with various standards and an audit of this compliance (managed by the B corporation
organization).[4] The essence of these new B corporations is that "they recognize the imperative to do no harm
and create positive impact throughout the value chain."[5] According to the B corporation organization, these
certified businesses are legally required to consider the impact of their decisions on their workers, customers,
suppliers, community, and the environment. As of 2019, there are approximately 3,000 certified B corporations
in sixty-five countries, covering 150 different industries.[6] The B corporation certification is somewhat like a
seal of approval for businesses voluntarily trying to be socially responsible. A benefit corporation is a
corporation recognized by a governmental agency under state law (about thirty states now recognize benefit
corporations with legal requirements of higher purpose, accountability, and transparency) but does not carry
the certification of a B corporation. However, in terms of purpose as related to corporate social responsibility,
the two entities are very similar.

The benefit corporation's objective is directed toward maximization of benefits for all stakeholders, meaning
that the company benefits any person with an interest or concern in the business. It does not only maximize
stockholder profits. Maximization of stakeholder benefits is directed through the corporate charter of a benefit
corporation. The state of incorporation directs how benefit corporations are created, but generally, this "new
governance model broadens the perspective of traditional corporate law by incorporating concepts of
purpose, accountability, and transparency with respect to all corporate stakeholders, not just stockholders."[7]
This means that the use of this type of business structure needs to be carefully considered by the
entrepreneur because the responsibility of the business will include consideration of the stakeholders outlined
in the corporate charter, not just the profit maximization for the shareholders.

4 Certified B Corporations. n.d. https://bcorporation.net/
5 Network for Business Innovation and Sustainability. "B Corporations, Benefit Corporations, and Social Purpose Corporations: Launching a
New Era of Impact-Driven Companies." October 2012. http://nbis.org/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/
ImpactDrivenCompanies_NBIS_Whitepaper_Oct2012.pdf
6 Certified B Corporations. n.d. https://bcorporation.net/
7 Morris, Nichols, Arsht, and Tunnel. The Public Benefit Corporation Guidebook. n.d. http://news.mnat.com/rv/
ff00272e4c8b3699806e25d24c48a286df5bf926
562  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Figure 13.6 C corporations, S corporations, and B corporations are all types of for-profit corporations, in
contrast to a not-for-profit corporation. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0
license)

   ARE YOU READY?
   B Corporation Certification

   The B corporation website explains the process for becoming a B corporation. This involves three specific
   steps: Verified Performance, Legal Accountability, and Public Transparency. Go to
   https://bcorporation.net/about-b-corps and read about B corporations to learn what requirements they
   need to meet to be allowed to display the following B corporation logo shown in Figure 13.7.

   Figure 13.7 In order to become a certified B corporation, a company must go through an external
   audit of compliance with each of the requirements of the B corporation. (credit: modification of "Runa B
   Corp Label" by "Lelepanne"/Wikimedia Commons, CC0)

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                                               563

Privately Held versus Publicly Held Corporations

Terminology relating to whether a company is publicly or privately owned can sometimes be confusing. For
example, large corporations such as Exxon or Amazon are private corporations, but their stock is publicly held.
This means that any member of the investing public can own stock in the corporation. A true public
corporation is, in reality, a quasi-governmental entity, an entity owned or sponsored by the government.
Government-owned corporations include the US Postal Service, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting,
AmeriCorps, and Amtrak. Government-sponsored corporations include Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae,
mortgage-related entities. A privately held corporation, common in Europe, is a company that does not allow
members of the investing public to own stock. The founder's family or friends, or perhaps a private group of
investors such as a venture capital firm, may hold it. Examples include Facebook before it went public in 2012,
or Cargill or Mars.

Publicly Traded Corporations

A publicly held corporation is, as described, an entity in which members of the investing public own the
stock. A term commonly applied to such corporations is a publicly traded corporation, meaning that the stock
can be bought and sold in the public marketplace, such as the New York Stock Exchange. A publicly traded
corporation has more access to investors and thus more capital, but it must operate under a formal set of
rules established by the Securities and Exchange Commission and Congress, assuming the shares are sold
publicly in the United States. Audits of publicly traded companies also have to follow the rules of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). "The PCAOB oversees the audits of public companies and
broker-dealers in order to protect investors and the public interest by promoting informative, accurate, and
independent audit reports."[8] Following the SEC and PCAOB rules emphasizes investor protection but can be
complex, as it increases both startup and operating costs for the venture due to increased regulation and
reporting.

A publicly traded company is required to have a board of directors with a dual mandate to both consult with
management regarding the strategic direction of the company and oversee company performance. The board
of directors does not manage the company, and the members are separate from management.[9] The board
will have numerous committees to assist in its functionality, and one of the committees is the audit committee.
The audit committee of a publicly traded company must hire an outside auditor approved by the PCAOB to
audit the books of the publicly traded company. Further, the chief executive office and chief financial officer of
the publicly traded company must sign a certification of earnings report, guaranteeing their truthfulness. The
rules and regulations with which compliance is required are more demanding for a publicly traded company
than for a privately held or closely held company.

Closely Held Corporations

A closely held corporation, also known as a close corporation, is the same as a privately held corporation for
the purposes of securities laws. However, the concept has a secondary meaning related to management
structure. A close corporation is also a management structure for a corporation that is often selected by small
companies that use the less-formal management style of a general partnership yet retain the limited liability
of a corporation. In essence, there are fewer formalities for a close corporation, and it allows greater control
for the small group of shareholders.

8 PCAOB. "Protecting Investors Through Audit Oversight." n.d. https://pcaobus.org/
9 Stanford Business Graduate School: Corporate Governance Research Initiative. Board of Directors, Duties and Liabilities. n.d.
https://www.gsb.stanford.edu/sites/gsb/files/publication-pdf/cgri-quick-guide-03-board-directors-duties-liabilities.pdf
564  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

A close corporation is required to have an annual shareholder meeting and keep corporate minutes. All of this
detail is required to be recorded in the corporate records, even if there is just one shareholder. Sole
proprietors using a corporation as a business structure must follow the rules regarding corporations in the
state in which they were incorporated. Some states may even dissolve a corporation that does not have an
annual meeting or keep proper corporate records. When a corporation is dissolved, the shareholders become
personally liable for corporate debts, and shareholders' limited liability is lost. Managing a closely held
company requires the entrepreneur to follow state guidelines while operating the corporation accordingly.

The shares of a closely held corporation are not traded on the open market and typically have just a few
shareholders. Closely held corporations have fewer reporting requirements than publicly traded companies
and typically are not required to have audited financial statements, unless the corporate charter says
otherwise. Audited financial statements are costly and are required for publicly traded companies. The audited
financial statements help investors buying and selling stock in the stock market value shares and are not
necessarily needed for a closely held corporation. However, it is difficult to value a closely held corporation
because there is no ready market for the ownership shares.

Not-for-Profit Corporations

Nonprofit corporations are created in one a state but may operate or solicit donations in other states. A
nonprofit corporation operating or soliciting donations in multiple states needs to register to operate as a
nonprofit corporation in every state in which it operates.

Not-for-profit corporations are organized in a similar fashion to for-profit corporations, with a board of
directors and officers, but they have no shareholders, stock, or owners. The stakeholders of a non-for-profit
corporation play an important role, monitoring overhead and allocation of funds. Since most of the funds are
donations and are tax deductible, public watchdogs may monitor the financial statements of federally tax-
exempt organizations. The fact that the Internet provides easy access to financial data related to federally tax-
exempt nonprofits provides watchdog organizations easy access to financial data and the ability to analyze the
operations and compensation for the nonprofit's organizers and employees.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Bombas: Achieving Profit and Nonprofit Goals

   In a 2017 interview with Robin Roberts of ABC News, Bombas socks (Figure 13.8) co-founder David Heath
   said: "Back in 2011, I came across a quote on Facebook that said...that socks were the number one most
   requested clothing item in homeless shelters."[10] So he decided to start a new company that was an
   overnight success, boosted by an appearance on Shark Tank in 2014. He created his company, Bombas,
   with co-founding entrepreneur Randy Goldberg. They founded their company with the goal of giving
   back to the community by donating socks to the homeless, with its actual product idea as a secondary
   goal.[11] They have donated over 25 million items through more than 2,500 partners across the country.[12]

10 ABC News. "Q&A: Entrepreneurs behind the Socks Company Bombas Share Their Career Advice." August 2, 2017. https://abcnews.go.com/
Business/qa-entrepreneurs-socks-company-bombas-share-career-advice/story?id=48954057
11 Mara Leighton. "B Corps Are Businesses Committed to Using Their Profit for Good--These 12 Are Making Some Truly Great Products."
Business Insider. June 6, 2019. https://www.businessinsider.com/b-corp-charitable-business-2018-8?IR=T&r=US
12 Bombas. "Giving Back." n.d. https://bombas.com/pages/giving-back

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                                                   565

   Figure 13.8 This is a pair of Bombas socks. (credit: modification of "Bombas Socks" by Tony Webster/
   Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

   Bombas is now a successful sock company that uses a business entity as a way to address the shortage
   of sock donations in homeless shelters. Heath and Goldberg spent two years inventing pairs of high-
   quality socks with extras such as reinforced foot beds and anti-blister tabs, coupled with contoured
   seaming. For these entrepreneurs though, it was not just about sock technology, it was about doing
   something meaningful at the same time--a combination of profit and nonprofit goals. Therefore, they
   made a commitment to those in need, and since 2013, the company has donated more than 10 million
   pairs of socks to homeless shelters, due to their buy one, give one model of marketing socks.
   The socks that Bombas donates to the homeless are not cheap throw-away token socks. Rather, they
   have been designed for their homeless wearers, for example, with antimicrobial treatment to prevent
   bacteria if they cannot be washed as frequently and reinforced seams for durability, since the homeless
   do not have the money to keep buying new ones.[13]
   In essence, the company makes customers, and the company partners with the homeless.

      · Is Bombas really paying for this project to help the homeless or is the customer?
      · Is Bombas just facilitating the good idea and customers are paying for it, or do you think Bombas is

          also contributing some of its profit?

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Go to the Bombas website (https://openstax.org/l/52Bombas) to watch the video that explains what they
   do as part of their B corporation commitment.

13 Mara Leighton. "B Corps Are Businesses Committed to Using Their Profit for Good--These 12 Are Making Some Truly Great Products."
Business Insider. June 6, 2019. https://www.businessinsider.com/b-corp-charitable-business-2018-8?IR=T&r=US
566  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Overview of Corporate Taxation

All for-profit corporations are subject to income tax at the federal level, and usually at the state level as well.
Regardless of tax elections, both C- and S corporations are subject to taxation.

Tax planning is a major issue for most corporations and may explain some key decisions, such as where they
are located. That could involve decisions about which state the corporate headquarters are in, or even in which
nation the headquarters are located. This is because tax laws may vary significantly by both state and nation.

The current federal income tax rate for corporations in 2019 is 21 percent, down drastically from 35 percent,
which was the rate prior to 2018. Many states add a state-level income tax, ranging from 2 percent to 12
percent, while some states such as Texas do not have a corporate income tax in an effort to attract
corporations to the state.[14]

Taxation of C Corporations

C corporations pay corporate income taxes on profits made. Individual shareholders are also subject to
personal income taxes on any dividends they receive. Most attorneys and accountants refer to this concept as
the double taxation disadvantage. However, the historical tax disadvantage has been recently reduced
because of the decrease in the income tax rate paid by C corporations by the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.[15] This
decrease, in turn, reduces the double tax disadvantage. Further, the ability to retain and reinvest profits in the
company at a lower corporate tax rate is an advantage.

A C corporation does come with a degree of added formality, or as some may refer to it, red tape. According to
most states' corporation laws, as well as federal tax and securities laws, the corporation must have company
bylaws and must file annual reports, financial disclosure reports, and financial statements. They must hold at
least one meeting each year for shareholders and directors where minutes are taken and maintained to
display transparency. A C corporation must also keep voting records of the company's directors and a list of
the owners' names and ownership percentages.

Despite the tax implications, the C corporation structure is the only one that makes sense for most large US
businesses because it allows for the wide-scale sale of a large amount of stock to the general investing public
without limits. A C corporation can have an unlimited number of shareholders that are individuals or other
business entities, and are either US citizens or foreign nationals.

Taxation of S Corporations

As previously discussed, the S corporation is a corporate entity in which the firm's profit is passed through its
stockholders (shareholders), usually in proportion to their investment--this is known as pass-through
taxation. Essentially, this amounts to tax management by the corporate owners. The IRS taxes the corporate
profits at the personal income tax rates of the individual shareholders. S corporations (S stands for "small"),
also called subchapter S corporations, must comply with several important restrictions with which
entrepreneurs must comply.

S corporations have a limit on shareholders. Unlike with C corporations, the Internal Revenue Code limits the
number of S corporation shareholders to 100 or fewer, and owners can only be individuals, (or estates and
certain types of tax-exempt entities). Additionally, the individual shareholders must also be US citizens or legal
permanent residents. Furthermore, S corporations may only have one class of stock, whereas C corporations

14 Tax Foundation. "State Corporate Income Tax Rates and Brackets for 2019." 2019. https://taxfoundation.org/state-corporate-rates-
brackets-2019/
15 US Internal Revenue Code of 1986. 131 Stat. 2054.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                           567

may have multiple classes. For example, in a C corporation, there might be voting shares, nonvoting shares,
common shares (the type most people buy), and preferred shares (which are repaid first in the event of
bankruptcy).

 13.3 Partnerships and Joint Ventures

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the ownership structure of a partnership
  · Describe the ownership structure of a joint venture
  · Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of partnership and joint venture structures

A partnership is a business entity formed by two or more individuals, or partners, each of whom contributes
something such as capital, equipment, or skills. The partners then share profits and losses. A partnership can
contract in its own name, take title to assets, and sue or be sued.

A joint venture is, in essence, a temporary partnership that two businesses form to gain mutual benefits, such
as sharing of expenses and to work toward shared goals and the associated potential revenue. Joint ventures
share costs, risks, and rewards. A joint venture, for example, can help speed up expansion of your business by
gaining access to additional equity, new markets, or new technology. Partnerships and joint ventures share
many similarities, but they do have some important differences.

Overview of Partnerships

State law governs the formation and operation of all partnerships. It would be too lengthy to cover the laws of
all fifty states; therefore, this section contains some generalizations that may vary according to jurisdiction.
Federal law has very limited applicability to partnerships, primarily in the area of federal income taxation. A
general partnership is created when two or more individuals or entities agree to work together to operate a
business for profit. A partnership generally operates under the terms of a written partnership agreement, but
there is no requirement that the agreement be in writing. In many instances, the only requirement is that two
or more parties come together to operate a business for profit.

Entrepreneurs need to be careful because a general partnership can be informally created by the actions of
two or more people or entities pursuing a business for profit while sharing management duties. State courts
may deem these actions the creation of an informal or even formal partnership. For this reason, if two entities
or people come together to purse a joint business operation or strategy, the parties should document the
pursuit of the business venture in a written agreement. Many state laws require that some forms of a
partnership use a formal written partnership agreement or articles of partnership. If the venture is of a
shorter duration, it might be better to enter into an agreement documenting a joint venture. In either case,
the entrepreneur needs to have a clear understanding of the exact business relationship before embarking on
a new venture, and a partnership agreement can and should outline those details.

A partnership agreement addresses many important topics, including the monetary investment of each
partner, their management duties and other obligations, how profits or losses are to be shared, and all the
other rights and duties of the partners.
568                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Partnerships can take many forms, including general partnerships (GPs), limited partnerships (LPs), limited
liability partnerships (LLPs), and, in some states, limited liability limited partnerships (LLLPs). All states r equire
the registration of any limited liability entity. In GPs, liability of the owners is considered "joint and several,"
meaning that not only is the partnership entity liable, so too is each general partner.

The liability of partners, therefore, may be limited by the creation of an LP. A limited partnership requires at
least one general partner and one or more limited partners. A limited partner's liability is typically capped at
their investment, unless they take on the duties of a general partner. The general partner is personally liable
for all of the operations of the LP.

LPs have been around for many years and allow investors to provide funding for a business, while limiting
their investment and personal risk. LPs are commonly used in businesses that require investment capital but
do not require management participation by LP investors. Examples include real estate where the LP buys
commercial real estate, making and funding movies or Broadway plays, and drilling oil and gas wells.

Some states have relatively recently started to allow variations on the LP structure and offer businesses the
option of forming a related type of partnership entity. These limited liability partnerships are common with
businesses such as law firms and accounting firms. The partners are licensed professionals, with limited
liability for financial obligations related to contracts or torts, but full liability for their own personal
malpractice. The primary difference between LLCs and LLPs is that LLPs must have at least one managing
partner who bears liability for the partnership's actions. An LLP's legal liability is the same as that of an o wner
in a simple partnership. Entities that are formed with a founding partner or partners--commonly law firms,
accounting firms, and medical practices--often structure as an LLP. In this situation, junior partners typically
make decisions around their personal practice but don't have a legal voice in the direction of the firm.
Managing partners may own a larger share of the partnership than junior partners.

The final type of partnership is a limited liability limited partnership (LLLP), which allows the general partner in
an LP to limit their liability. In other words, an LLLP has limited liability protection for everyone, including the
general partner who manages the business.

Advantages and Disadvantages of General Partnerships

The GP is a very common business structure in the US. It is created when two or more individuals or entities
come together to create, own, and manage a business for profit. A GP is not technically required to have a
written agreement, or to file or register with the state government. However, GPs should have their business
structures described in writing, so that the entities working together have an understanding of the business
and the business relationship.

When a GP is created, one partner is liable for the other partner's debts made on behalf of the partnership,
and each partner has unlimited liability for the partnership's debt. This creates a problem when one partner
disagrees with the source or use of funds by another partner in terms of capital outlay or expenses. Each
partner in a GP has the ability to manage the partnership; if something negative happens such as an accident
(called a tort) that injures people and produces liability--like a chemical spill, auto accident, or contractual
breach--each of the partners is personally liable with all of their personal assets at risk. Also, the partners are
liable for the taxes on the partnership, as a GP is a pass-through entity, where the partners are taxed directly,
but not at the partnership level.

It should be noted that GPs may be a useful structure in certain situations because they are relatively easy and
inexpensive to form. The expanding use of LPs, LLPs, and LLLPs is discussed in the preceding text, but the

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  569

popularity of GPs has been on the decline. However, as long as the business does not have a high likelihood of
liability-producing accidents or situations, a GP can work. An example might be two partners offering graphic
design or photographic services. However, due to the different risks associated with them, GPs are often not
the best choice of business entity. Other types of entities offer the protection of limited liability and are thus
better choices in most circumstances.

Taxation of Partnerships

Partnerships are considered pass-through entities, whether they are GPs, LPs, or LLPs. Therefore, the
partnership's profits are not taxed at the entity level, like with a C corporation, but the profits are passed
through to the partners, who claim the income on their own tax returns. The partners pay income taxes on
their share of distributed partnership profits (disclosed on a Schedule K-1 form from the partnership to the
individual partners). Thus, there is no such thing as a partnership tax rate.
If the entity is a joint venture that is organized and run as a partnership, then it is taxed the same way, even if
the partners are corporations. The profits are distributed, and each corporation pays its own taxes. If, in the
alternative, the joint venture formed a separate distinct corporation, then it pays taxes as a corporation.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   See the University of Richmond Law School's good summary of the pros and cons of GPs
   (https://openstax.org/l/52URichLawGP) to learn more.

Joint Ventures: Business Entities Doing Business Together

A joint venture occurs when two or more individuals or businesses agree to operate a for-profit business
venture for a specific purpose. A joint venture is similar to a legal partnership but different in terms of purpose
and duration. Usually, joint ventures are used for a single purpose and a limited period. One example of a joint
venture involved BMW and Toyota working together to research how to improve the batteries in electric cars, a
single purpose, over a period of limited duration, envisioned to be ten years.

Companies enter into a joint venture often to avoid the appearance of the creation of a partnership, because
partnerships tend to create long-term obligations between the partners, while a joint venture is a limited
business enterprise. Typically, two business entities operate a business together on a joint project. The joint
venture agreement allows the entities to pursue a specific business objective while keeping their other
business operations and ventures separate.

A joint venture is not recognized as a taxable entity by the IRS. The entrepreneur can use a joint venture
agreement to develop a business enterprise, and if the business enterprise is successful, a new entity can be
created to take over the operations of the joint venture and move the business to the next level. For this
reason, a joint venture can be a good way test a business concept. If successful, then the operations and
assets can be rolled into another entity that supports investment from outside investors. The use of a joint
venture also allows the parties to test drive the relationship between the entities: to develop a business
570  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

venture with less risk.

Joint ventures can involve parties that are large or small, or from private or public sectors, or they can involve a
combination of types of entities, most often resulting in a joint venture that is formed as a corporation or LLC.
For example, the public company Google and the private entity NASA formed a joint venture to improve
Google Earth. Likewise, a joint venture might be something smaller, such as an arrangement between a
freelance IT engineer, a graphic designer, and a social media consultant to create a new cell phone app.
Figure 13.9 summarizes the relationships of the businesses in a joint venture.

Figure 13.9 Joint ventures are separate business entities, most often owned and operated by two other
business entities. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   WHAT CAN YOU DO?

   Challenges Facing Small Farmers

   Sometimes, small businesses are at a disadvantage due to size. We can see an example of this
   disadvantage in the field of agriculture. The cost of new agricultural equipment is very high, and land
   may be prohibitively expensive. These costs put small farms under pressure to compete by increasing
   the size of their operations. If you owned a small farm and were looking to expand, how could you use a
   joint venture?

 13.4 Limited Liability Companies

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the ownership structure of a limited liability company
  · Explain how limited liability companies are taxed
  · Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of the limited liability company structure

A limited liability company is a hybrid of a corporation and a partnership that limits the owner's liability. The

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                                         571

big advantage that LLCs have over GPs is in the protection of owners from personal liability. Thus, an LLC is
similar to a corporation in that it offers owners limited liability.

The advantage that LLCs have when compared to corporations, especially for entrepreneurs, is that they are
easier to form and less cumbersome to operate because there are fewer regulations and laws governing LLC
operations. Although LLCs tend to be easier to create, they still require a filing of articles of formation with the
state and the creation of an operating agreement. Owners of an LLC can be individuals and other business
entities. The entrepreneur can use the flexibility of an LLC to create a business structure suitable to the
operational and tax needs of the business.

In 1977, Wyoming was the first state to allow the LLC format--most states started allowing them in the early
1990s. In contrast, corporations have been around since the early nineteenth century. LLCs now significantly
outnumber corporations, with some estimates indicating that four times as many LLCs are formed as
corporations,[16] with the total number of LLCs nearing 20 million compared to about 2 million corporations.
Each state may permit varying types of LLCs, with different types of formation agreements and operating
agreements.

When evaluating the use of an LLC as the structure for your business, it is important to know that there are
some constraints on the use of an LLC. In most states, a nonprofit business cannot be an LLC. Additionally,
most states do not permit banks or insurance companies to operate as LLCs.

Overview of LLCs

The owners of an LLC are called members. The owner (if a single-member LLC) or owners often run the
company themselves. These are called member-managed LLCs. The daily operations of the LLC can also be
delegated to a professional manager, which is called a manager-managed LLC. If the original organizer of the
LLC chooses, they can organize an LLC in which the owners (members) will have little or no management
responsibility because it has been delegated to a professional manager. These options when drafting an LLC's
operating agreement allow an LLC to operate in different ways, so that an entrepreneur can develop a
business structure best suited to the needs of the business.

As long as the members (owners) do not use the LLC as an alter ego and/or commingle personal funds with
LLC funds, the LLC provides the corporate shield of limited liability to the investors. If the LLC is operated to
protect a sole proprietor, this might become an issue if the sole proprietor commingles funds. Commingling
funds or assets gives rise to the sole proprietor or other members of a multi-owner LLC being liable for all of
the debts of the LLC. Generally, the ownership of an LLC is represented by percentages or units. The term
shares is not used in operating agreements because LLCs cannot sell shares of stock like a corporation can;
thus, owners are not technically shareholders.

Taxation of LLCs

Entrepreneurs are able to make decisions regarding the taxation of LLCs. The government can tax the
business as a corporation or as an individual. This choice may involve more than simply a tax rate decision; it
might involve ownership and management issues, as well other financial considerations. However, this section
will focus on the tax decision aspect of the issue.

A multi-owner LLC's default taxation is as a partnership, meaning profits pass through and are taxed on the

16 Scott A. Hodge. "The U.S. Has More Individually Owned Businesses Than Corporations." Tax Foundation. January 13, 2014.
https://taxfoundation.org/us-has-more-individually-owned-businesses-corporations/
572  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

owner's federal tax return. However, LLCs can elect to be taxed as either a partnership or a corporation.
Single-member LLCs can also be taxed as a sole proprietorship or as a corporation. The fact that an LLC can
select its method of taxation as either a C corporation, S corporation, or partnership allows the entrepreneur
flexibility in creating the business structure of their choosing. Note, however, that tax laws change. For
example, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act of 2017 may make formation as an S corporation more attractive to some
entrepreneurs than formation as an LLC, at least as far as taxation is concerned. You should seek advice from
a tax accountant to ensure that you are able to make decisions based on the most current regulations.

 13.5 Sole Proprietorships

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the ownership structure of a sole proprietorship
  · Explain the advantages and disadvantages of operating as a sole proprietor

A sole proprietorship is a business entity that is owned and managed by one individual and has very little
formal structure and no mandatory filing/registration with the state. This type of business is very popular
because it is easy and inexpensive to form. The owner, called a sole proprietor, is synonymous with the
business and is therefore personally liable for all debts of the business. Sole proprietors do not pay separate
income tax on the company, instead reporting all losses and profits on their individual tax returns.

Overview of Sole Proprietorships

Entrepreneurs solely operating their own businesses are called sole proprietors. According to the Tax
Foundation, there are more than 23 million sole proprietorships in the US, far more than any other type of
business entity.[17] This statistic means that the sole proprietorship is by far the most common business
structure, even though the business is not legally separate from its owner. The primary reason that many
entrepreneurs choose the sole proprietorship format is that they do not have to make a choice, get
professional advice, or spend any money. An entrepreneur who just starts doing business is automatically a
sole proprietorship unless they elect to become a different type of entity and file that paperwork. An
entrepreneur who becomes a sole proprietor does not necessarily have to go to an attorney or an accountant,
or file any documents, making a sole proprietorship quick, easy, and cheap to form and operate.

Another development related to the decision to be a sole proprietor is the rapid growth of the gig economy.
Some individuals prefer to work on their own rather than become a full-time employee. Being a gig worker
falls somewhere between being a business owner and being an employee, so many gig workers, ranging from
drivers for a ride-sharing company to instructional designers, operate as de facto contractors who are sole
proprietors.

However, there remains a debate about whether these gig workers should be deemed sole proprietors.
Recently, California passed a new law, signed by Governor Gavin Newsom, which extends wage and benefit
protections to many thousands of workers who were previously self-employed sole proprietors working in the
gig economy. The new law is based on the presumption that when workers are misclassified as independent

17 Scott A. Hodge. "The U.S. Has More Individually Owned Businesses Than Corporations." Tax Foundation. January 13, 2014.
https://taxfoundation.org/us-has-more-individually-owned-businesses-corporations/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  573

contractors rather than as employees, they lose basic benefits such as a minimum wage, paid sick days, and
health insurance.

The sole proprietorship is the simplest method to operate a business--often under the owner's name--and
the owner is typically taxed directly by the IRS by attaching a Schedule C (Profit or Loss) form to the owner's
individual tax return. In order to document one's income, instead of being provided a Form W-2 from one's
employer, many self-employed individuals receive one or more 1099-MISC (Miscellaneous Income) forms from
clients, which typically demonstrate that the taxpayer is operating a sole proprietorship. Sole proprietors are
allowed to deduct their business expenses related to their income and, as both employer and employee, are
required to pay the full amount of employment taxes for Social Security and Medicare.

An owner can also operate under a DBA or "doing business as" filing. A DBA is filed at the relevant state or
local government office where the sole proprietor wants to operate under an assumed name. Technically, this
is not a new organization: It is just a different name. Any business entity may file for a DBA to operate under
an assumed name, and many individuals operate under a DBA to indicate the type of services they are
providing, such as Smith's Roofing Company. It is not uncommon for an individual to name a sole
proprietorship using LLC or Co. in its name; however, an individual operating under a DBA or assumed name is
not provided any of the protections provided to a corporation of LLC, even if Inc. or LLC is used in the assumed
name. A sole proprietor needs to consider the impact of using an assumed name prior to creating a DBA.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Sole Proprietorships

The sole proprietor is personally liable for everything. A sole proprietor is the investor, owner, and manager of
the business enterprise. The sole proprietor is personally liable for all of the taxes and any unpaid debts of the
business venture. The sole proprietor also has no business to sell and can sell only assets related to the
business. The sole proprietorship is the easiest business to start but has almost no differentiation from the
individual starting the business.

Taxation of Sole Proprietorships

A sole proprietorship is not taxed as an entity. All profits pass through to the owner who pays individual
income taxes on all profits earned. It does not matter whether the owner takes the money out of the business
or leaves it in the business; all profits are taxed to the individual owner. This is an area that requires significant
planning and may be a potential disadvantage, depending on how the individual owner's personal rate
compares to the corporate rate.

Other Low-Risk Entry Structures in Entrepreneurship

Over the past decade, various alternatives to traditional employment have become popular, leading many to
become entrepreneurs rather than employees. The US Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that, in 2019, there
are 55 million people in who are "gig workers," which is more than 35 percent of the US workforce. That
percentage is expected to increase to 43 percent by 2020.[18] This offers both an opportunity and a challenge.
There is a modicum of security when one is an employee of a company, which may not exist in the same way
for someone who is freelancing or working as a contractor. There are many examples today of people
becoming small entrepreneurs. This process goes by a variety of names, such as the sharing economy, the gig

18 Quora. "What Are the Pros and Cons of the Gig Economy?" Forbes. January 8, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/quora/2019/01/08/what-
are-the-pros-and-cons-of-the-gig-economy/#3e1dc24e1388
574  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

economy, the peer economy, or the collaborative economy. Maybe it means driving for a company such as
Lyft, Uber, or GrubHub, or perhaps offering services through TaskRabbit, UpWork, or LivePerson.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Online Resources for the Gig Economy

   The website business UpWork provides a platform for individuals to offer their services to large
   companies on a freelance or contract basis. Do you have skills as a web, mobile, or software developer,
   or perhaps in the area of data analytics? The UpWork website (https://openstax.org/l/52UpWork) says
   that over 5 million businesses use people listed on UpWork, including companies such as Microsoft and
   General Electric.

Offering your services in this new manner is not controlling of what type of entrepreneurial enterprise you
want to be. You can do most of these types of things as a sole proprietor, an LLC, or an S corporation.
According to the Tax Foundation, over the past thirty-five years, the number of C corporations has declined
significantly, while the total number of pass-through businesses including LLCs, S corporations, partnerships,
and sole proprietorships has tripled to over 30 million. According to estimates, there are only 1.7 million C
corporations, whereas there are 7.4 million LLCs, partnerships, and S corporations, and a whopping 23 million
sole proprietorships.[19] The explanation for these statistics is really quite simple. LLCs have quickly become
one of the most popular business structures due to ease of formation and operation. Likewise, sole
proprietorships are quick, easy, and low cost compared to corporations, which are more difficult and
expensive to form and operate. The choice is open and depends on the variables discussed in this chapter.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   Nic & Luc Jam[20]

   In an interview with the Balance, entrepreneur Leroy Bautista summarized his path to becoming a small
   business owner. He worked in high-end restaurants and successful catering companies for two decades
   before he was laid off during the economic downturn. Bautista didn't sulk or settle for a lousy job.
   Rather, he saw it as a chance to finally do what his coworkers and friends had been telling him to do: go
   out on his own, making his sauces and vinaigrettes, and selling them at local markets. It was out of
   necessity that the Nic & Luc company was born.

   Originally selling just a few flavors, he now sells almost twenty flavors. For many small businesses, the
   word "local" is used as a marketing ploy, but for Nic & Luc, it is part of the business purpose and a core
   value. Bautista thinks it is important to support other local businesses like himself.

   This is not a story that someone like Bezos or Gates might tell: It is much more basic, but it demonstrates
   how people at all levels are becoming business owners. Each one of them, including Leroy Bautista in this

19 Scott A. Hodge. "The U.S. Has More Individually Owned Businesses Than Corporations." Tax Foundation. January 13, 2014.
https://taxfoundation.org/us-has-more-individually-owned-businesses-corporations/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                        575

story, must make decisions about mundane things such as taxes, and liability; it can't be all about jam.

 13.6 Additional Considerations: Capital Acquisition, Business Domicile, and
Technology

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the capital acquisition opportunities available to different types of business structures
  · Explain how the advantages and disadvantages of where a business is registered should inform the

      decision of where to create a business domicile
  · Understand the role technology considerations may play in selecting a business structure

In addition to the main entity selection topics already discussed, such as ownership structure and taxation,
there are other considerations that entrepreneurs might want to consider. For example, when choosing a
business format, a founder would be interested in how to raise capital to use in the business.

Another issue to consider includes where to form a new business, since formation is largely a state issue, and
there are fifty different states from which to choose. This has the potential to affect multiple aspects of one's
business, including income and sales tax issues, government regulation, and litigation situs (location). For
example, some states, such as Wyoming and South Dakota, have no corporate income or gross receipts tax at
all; other states, such as California and New York, do have a state corporate income tax. For more information
on the variation between all 50 states, see the following website operated by Cornell Law School:
https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/corporations.

Capital Acquisition

Once an entrepreneur has created a business plan, the next requirement is to capitalize the business venture.
If the entrepreneur wants to start out small, a sole proprietorship is all that is needed, although even for small
businesses, this structure carries a high degree of risk. Basically, the entrepreneur can simply start working on
the business venture. If the entrepreneur's business venture is larger, raising capital becomes a major issue.
This can be done though bank loans or investors.

Entrepreneurs eventually need capital to grow their business. Capital typically comes in the form of cash.
Entrepreneurs need to consider the business structure they select for raising cash in the future if they plan to
grow their business. Banks, family members, friends, or others can lend cash to an entrepreneur. These types
of loans may not give the lenders ownership rights in the company. The lenders may take a lien on the assets
of the business venture but do not necessarily have the right to run the business. Management is typically left
to the owners when borrowing funds, but when a company receives investment funds, the investor also
receives an equity share in the business and may be involved in management.

Owners and investors may want to have the right to operate the business or may want the investment
structured in such a fashion so that the investors only participate in the profits or losses of the business, but

20 Alton, Larry. "4 Small Business Success Stories for New Entrepreneurs." The Balance Small Business. February 5, 2019. https://www.thebalancesmb.com/small-
business-success-stories-to-learn-from-4151885
576  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

do not operate the business. Depending upon the type of the business and the expectations of the
entrepreneur and possible owners, this needs to be considered before creating a company. An entrepreneur
raising capital needs to consider what participation is desired from investors and the timing of the needed
capital. Remember, investors become owners, whereas lenders are not owners.

Capital is required at every step of a business. There can be lines of credit to finance operations as receivables
are collected, and there can also be long-term borrowing for purchases of big-ticket assets required to operate
the business. The difference between a loan and an investment is that the loan principal and interest must be
paid back. However, an investment allows the investor to participate in the profits and losses of the business,
but does not need to be repaid because investors can get a return on their investment by selling their interest
in the business. Finding a good balance between how much ownership the entrepreneur wants to relinquish
versus how much of the profits need to be paid to finance the business is key. The entrepreneur needs to
determine this balance as the company grows. For example, Amazon started as a Washington state
corporation named Cadabra, Inc., operating out of Jeff Bezos' garage, and then through several transactions
became the world's largest online retailer incorporated as a Delaware corporation with its ownership shares
AMZN traded on the NASDAQ.

Growing companies will have different rounds of outside investment. Never consider that the first outside
investment received will be the last investment. There will be more than one round of financing in most
companies. As the investment and financing changes, there will be changes in the corporate structure of the
business venture. Just like Amazon, a company can start in one's garage and then go on to be a company
listed on a major stock exchange with a worldwide reach. Each step of the way takes careful planning (see
Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting).

Legal and tax issues are directly related to the agreements between entrepreneurs and their investors. The
written agreements should spell out the corporate structure with specific details of the arrangement between
the two. The business structure will drive the tax circumstances of the investment, business, and owners. This
may change with new investors, so agreements should be flexible. Many times, a new investment in the same
business may be created in which the new business structure purchases the assets of the old business
structure. This event will change all of the agreements evidencing the structure of the venture.

Agreements describing how the owners share in profits and losses, and how the owners share in making
decisions about the business venture can and do change. Many owners and entrepreneurs desire that their
company become a publicly held corporation. This is a company with its ownership shares traded on a public
exchange. The ease of buying and selling shares on a public exchange typically increases the value of the
company. Therefore, many investors desire that shares ultimately become publicly traded. A company may
start as a sole proprietorship, become an LLC, and then be converted into a corporation with its ownership
shares traded on a public stock exchange. In the circumstance where the company is growing, the business
structure will change over time.

Many publicly traded companies start as a privately held corporation before going public through an initial
public offering (IPO). A recent example is Spotify, which in a 2018 IPO raised $9.2 billion.[21] A closely held
corporation, which is essentially the same as a privately held company, has no public market for its stock. The
owners, as members or shareholders, have more control over the directions of the company, until the
company is taken public.

The assets of a closely held company can be sold to a company that is publicly traded, such as a reverse

21 Samuel Stebbins. "The Top 26 Largest Company IPOs of the Year." USA Today. December 7, 2018. https://www.usatoday.com/story/money/
business/2018/12/07/top-ipos-2018-26-biggest-companies-went-public-year/38611947/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                                     577

merger, or can be used to create a company that will pursue an IPO. Both of these are complicated endeavors
that require audited financial statements, the assistance of lawyers and outside accountants, and the use of an
investment bank. Each step of the way, the entrepreneur gives up some equity and control in the company in
exchange for investment money to help the company grow. Most small companies becoming public will (but
are not required to) list on a stock market like the Nasdaq SmallCap market or the Nasdaq National Market
System. This development provides the company direct access to international capital markets and many new
investors.

The issues that investors tend to look at include transferability or sale of their ownership interest, ability to
raise additional capital, and protection of the investors' assets outside of the investment. If the entrepreneur is
unconcerned about investment from outsiders, these considerations are not as important. Another issue is the
ability to raise capital through banks or by using the SBA to guarantee a loan through a participating bank. The
first step in getting an SBA loan is determining that the "business is officially registered and operates
legally."[22] This means that the borrowing business is a company that is registered in a state to do business.
An entrepreneur can borrow up to $4.5 million (the SBA limit[23]), to fund operations. However, the first step is
to create a proper business entity to which the bank can loan the money or in which an investor can invest.
The typical entities to which banks lend money and investors invest money are partnerships, LLCs, or
corporations. To create these entities, an entrepreneur needs to file the appropriate paperwork within a given
state.

In addition to traditional sources of funding, including borrowing, taking on partners, and selling stock
through an underwriter, there is a relatively new source of capital for small business entrepreneurs that is an
important addition to the capital acquisition options for startups. Equity crowdfunding involves a startup
raising capital through the online sale of securities to the general public.

In 2012, Congress enacted new legislation called the Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act, which
amended US securities laws to enable small businesses to use a variation on a technique known as
crowdfunding (see Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting). Crowdfunding is already in use as a way to
donate money to consumers and businesses through web portals such as GoFundMe, but those sites do not
offer SEC-compliant sales of securities in a business, as the JOBS Act now permits. Emerging growth
companies (EGCs) seeking capital are now able to raise equity capital more easily and at a lower cost. This new
type of funding should help level the playing field for EGCs and is viewed by many as a way of democratizing
access to capital.

An example of success using this new method of financing for entrepreneurial startups is Betabrand. This San
Francisco-based retail clothing company doubles as a crowdfunding platform. The company facilitates the use
of its platform for crowdsourcing clothing concepts and prototypes, and their conversion into actual products
by raising capital through their website.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The Crowdfunder website (https://openstax.org/l/52Crowdfunder) connects to one of several different

22 U.S. Small Business Administration. "Funding Programs." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans
23 U.S. Small Business Administration. "Loan Fact Sheet: The SBA Loan Guarantee Program: How It Works." October 2011.
https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/SDOLoanFactSheet_Oct_2011.pdf
578                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

   business-oriented equity crowdfunding websites. It offers EGCs or small business several avenues of
   funding, including equity, convertible notes, and debt. The primary advantage is the ability to raise equity
   capital without big fees, lots of federal regulations, and red tape.

Business Domicile: State and Local Considerations

There are multiple reasons why an entrepreneur may want to consider geographic location when forming and
operating a business. Of course, one practical consideration is where the entrepreneur lives, at least in terms
of operating a small local or regional business. However, there are other important considerations, such as
differing formation/incorporation laws, widely varying levels of regulation, different types of permitting, and
other relevant factors. As a rule, a corporation is considered a citizen of both its state of incorporation and the
state of its principal place of business.

The state where a person lives is not necessarily the state in which they must form and/or operate the
business. For example, if a person lives in the New York City metro area, they might well have a choice of New
York or New Jersey, or even Connecticut, Delaware, or Pennsylvania. The same may be true for the metro areas
of other large cities. Additionally, even if a person lives in the middle of North or South Dakota, they might
choose to start a business in another jurisdiction, such as Delaware, Alabama, or Wyoming, due to favorable
formation regulations. The following section discusses the issue of choice of jurisdiction when forming a
limited liability entity such as a corporation or an LLC.

Choice of State When Incorporating/Registering Your Business

Business entities seeking the protection of limited liability must be registered with a state. This typically
includes corporations, LLCs, and LPs. Additionally, if a corporation seeks to sell stock to investors in a specific
state (called an intrastate offering), it must be registered in that state. The first step is to select the type of
entity to be created and then file the appropriate paperwork with the state. Each entity is typically created
through the office of the secretary of state (or, in the case of Kentucky, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and
Virginia, the secretary of the commonwealth), with each state having a different process for creating the entity.
The Balance, a small business resource website, lists all state government offices in which to file the
appropriate paperwork (https://www.thebalancesmb.com/secretary-of-state-websites-1201005).

Forming a business in the state where the entrepreneur is physically located is generally the easiest way to
create the entity through which the entrepreneur will conduct business. Some entrepreneurs choose to create
their business entity in other states for privacy reasons or for tax savings. The entrepreneur will still have to
file and pay taxes in every state in which the business operates and will have to register its presence in the
state in which it is physically located. Some investors might prefer out-of-state incorporation, and the
entrepreneur needs to remember that the corporation will be subject to taxes, filing requirements, and other
fees imposed by each state of operation and the state of incorporation.

Delaware is a particularly popular state in which to incorporate due to the ease of regulations regarding
ownership structure and business-friendly laws; Nevada and Wyoming are popular as well for the same
reasons. The reason these states are popular is that initial fees are cheap, there are little or no renewal fees,
and the states emphasize asset protection. While Delaware, Nevada, and Wyoming offer good reasons to

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  579

incorporate, they are not best choice for every business. If a business incorporates in one state but does
business primarily in another, in all likelihood, it may very well have to pay the second state's fees and/or taxes
in addition to those of the first state. Entrepreneurs need to consider cost and ease of operations when
determining the state in which to create their business entity.

Multistate Taxation

Most businesses have a website and are glad to sell products to any buyer, regardless of where the buyer is
located. Amazon is an example of a company that capitalized on the concept of Internet sales. Amazon collects
sales tax from all forty-five states that have a statewide sales tax because it owes tax in every state and city in
which it operates.

Multistate taxation is not something that most small businesses consider, but it is an issue that can arise in
many different circumstances. For example, professional basketball players may be taxed by the state, or even
the city, in which they play. This means that an NBA player could owe taxes in over 20 states if he went to every
game. Just sitting on the bench in 20 different states could trigger multistate taxation, and, if the team plays in
other countries, foreign taxes could also be owed. This is true for every sport and every business that operates
in multiple states or other countries. It is not only multibillion-dollar corporations that are affected, but small
businesses and individuals as well.

Most online multistate businesses now collect and pay sales taxes in those states with a sales tax. This was not
always the case, however. For years, Amazon and other online retailers sold products without collecting any
state or local sales taxes at all. The legal requirement that companies did not have to collect sales taxes in a
state unless they have a "physical presence," such as warehouses, offices, and/or employees, gave online
companies carte blanche to ignore state and local taxes for many years."[24] Until the 2018 US Supreme Court
decision in South Dakota v. Wayfair, states generally did not require online sellers to collect and remit sales tax
to the state. However, this case changed the rules by creating the concept of an economic nexus, a virtual
connection with a state based on sales volume or number of transactions. This now means, in most states, that
if your business meets a threshold of $100,000 in sales in that state, it may now require you to collect sales tax
on online transactions. Therefore, your online business may have to collect and remit sales tax to as many as
forty-five states (five states do not have a sales tax). All entrepreneurs need to develop an understanding of
how the Internet and the related tax laws and regulations will affect their planned business operations.
Creating a company in another state will no longer automatically avoid multistate taxes and regulations.

Technology Considerations

Most new entrepreneurs have some familiarity with technology, whether something as basic as social media
or more advanced as extensive website development skills. However, most small businesses face challenges in
the areas of information technology security and compliance with legal and regulatory requirements.

Not all small businesses face these challenges. They are most common in companies that handle private
information, such as health records or credit card data. The storage and protection of this type of information
must comply with government regulations. For example, a small government IT contractor that deals with any
type of classified governmental information would need to ensure classified information was protected per
regulations and not at risk of exposure. In the healthcare field, recent hacks of patient health data, some of
which are handled by small businesses such as a solo practice physician's office, demonstrate the challenges

24 "Amazon's Local, State and Federal Tax Issues Explained." n.d. https://itep.org/amazons-local-state-and-federal-tax-issues-explained/
580  Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

of data protection. It is a significant challenge for companies with relatively small budgets to protect data.
Technology security adds large costs and requires skilled personnel, for any business, large or small.
Figure 13.10 summarizes the choices of business structure discussed throughout this chapter.

Figure 13.10 The characteristics of different business entities [C-Corporation, S-Corporation, Sole Proprietor,
General Partnership, Limited Partnership (LP), and Limited Liability Company (LLC)] are provided in terms of
owners, liability, taxes, formation, management, and capital. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax,
under CC BY 4.0 license)

 13.7 Mitigating and Managing Risks

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain Enterprise Risk Management and how a company uses it
  · Describe litigation and financial risks
  · Describe common insurance needs

Risk management is key to operating any business in a profitable fashion. There are many risks facing an
entrepreneur when starting and operating a new business venture. The trick is to eliminate risks that will
hurt

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  581

the venture, while taking on risks that will provide for long-term profitability. The risks facing the entrepreneur
need to be initially identified as part of developing a business plan and revisited regularly in ongoing
operations. Preparation for adverse events affecting a new business venture is necessary, but being too
pessimistic or allowing fear of adverse events to stop an entrepreneur from taking any risk will keep a
business venture from achieving it greatest potential and profit.

It is important that an entrepreneur develop an understanding of the risks of the business environment. The
risks include liability risks stemming from contracts and torts, sometimes referred to as operating risks,
regulatory compliance risks, financial risks, and strategic risks, including taxation. Understanding how the
business structure is used to operate the business venture allows the entrepreneur to develop a plan to
manage business growth and understand business risk.

Enterprise Risk Management

Profitable ventures develop a strong enterprise risk management program, which is an integrated, cross-
disciplinary approach to monitoring risk. An organization needs to look at both long-term and short-term risks
at all levels of the organization, and these risks need to be evaluated from all stakeholders' perspectives and
developed into an entity-wide program.

Enterprise risk management attempts to address the specific risks discussed in the preceding section by
implementing a risk program that enables a business to identify and manage risk. Specifically, a business will
go through a process that involves a multistage process of risk identification, risk assessment, and risk
abatement. Examples of risks that businesses face include those from natural causes, economic causes, and
human causes.

Natural causes of risk include disasters such as hurricanes and flooding, as well as earthquakes or other
catastrophes that result in loss of life and property, as well as business interruption. For example, a business in
New Orleans could be flooded by a hurricane. This results in damage to facilities and products, and threatens
the lives of workers. In order to counter such causes, businesses need to plan ahead for business continuity,
take out comprehensive insurance coverage, and have an evacuation/shut-down plan in place.

Economic causes of risk include global events leading to rising prices of raw materials, currency fluctuation,
high interest rates, and, of course, competition from other companies in the same industry. An example of this
would be unpredictable trade wars with China, leading to tariffs.

Human causes of risk refer to actions by employees, contractors, and those persons over which a company has
control. These events can include torts stemming from negligence at work, labor strikes, shortages of qualified
trained workers, and corporate mismanagement. An example of this type of risk would include embezzlement
of money by an internal financial executive.

The use of a comprehensive approach allows a business entity to review and combine all risks into a functional
perspective that allows the entrepreneur to evaluate risks and integrate new risks as different opportunities
become more important to the business venture. Businesses sometimes use a risk matrix to assess or
characterize the probability and impact of risk (Figure 13.11). The use of such a tool can help a business
quantify risk and decide whether to undertake an activity based on its level of risk.
582                    Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

Figure 13.11 A risk matrix can be a useful tool to assess the likelihood and severity of risk that a venture may
have. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Risk appetite is important for a business venture to consider, both when creating its business structure and
during ongoing operations. Table 13.1 shows an overview of the considerations a business venture should
entertain in both its creation and operation.

      Risk Item                                        Risk Appetite[25]
Existing risk profile                                                   Consideration
Risk capacity
Risk tolerance         Current level and distribution of risks across the business and across risk categories
Risk attitude          Amount of risk the business can support while pursuing its objectives
                       Amount of variation the business can tolerate while pursuing its objectives
                       Management's attitudes toward growth, risk, and return

Table 13.1 COSO's Enterprise Risk Management, Understanding and Communicating Risk Appetite outlines these
considerations for assessing a business's appetite for risk.

This is the basic approach to evaluating a new venture's appetite for risk. Determining and understanding the
risks facing a new venture should start during the preparation of the business venture's written business plan
and should continue through the operations of the venture.

25 Rittenberg, Larry and Frank Martens. "Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO)". Enterprise Risk
Management, Understanding and Communicating Risk Appetite. January 2012. https://www.coso.org/Documents/ERM-Understanding-and-
Communicating-Risk-Appetite.pdf

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  583

   LINK TO LEARNING

   The Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission, also known as COSO, deals
   with risk management. The mission statement of the COSO (https://openstax.org/l/52COSOmission) is
   "to provide thought leadership through the development of comprehensive frameworks and guidance
   on enterprise risk management, internal control and fraud deterrence designed to improve
   organizational performance and governance and to reduce the extent of fraud in organizations."

Legal Risk and Protection

Business operations of any sort need to follow business regulations and laws. The failure to follow business
regulations may lead to fines, lawsuits, or even criminal penalties. Legal risk stems primarily from a breach of
contract and/or the commission of a tort. Common examples of this type of risk includes product liability
lawsuits. These lawsuits are frequently very expensive class action lawsuits or regulatory investigations of
dangerous products. There are many famous case examples including automobiles, asbestos, pharmaceutical
drugs, breast implants, and airplanes.
Other lawsuits stem from contracts, including borrowing money from a bank. The business has an obligation
to pay it back, or it breaches a covenant within a contract. Other common types of contracts are those used in
selling services and products, leasing real estate, and other similar contractual obligations.
Due to liability risks, business owners and investors are always looking for ways to limit their personal liability.
Incorporation is a standard risk protection strategy for this potential problem, as are the use of other types of
limited liability structures such as LLCs. This is one of the main advantages of properly operated corporations
and LLCs, which allow for limited personal liability of owners and investors. Partners in GPs and sole
proprietors are personally liable for all of the debts of the business, even beyond their own investment in the
business.
However, a particular challenge for small business entrepreneurs is that even when they form a corporation or
LLC, many lenders, landlords, and other entities providing credit to a small business circumvent the limited
liability protection by requiring owners and investors to personally guarantee the debts of the business
operations. This means that the owner who personally guarantees the credit will have to pay back the
obligation if the business cannot. An owner can obtain insurance or borrow money for such guarantees. LLCs
and corporations do protect their owners, shareholders, and members from a number of different tort claims,
such as personal injury lawsuits and claims made directly against the organization.

Financial Risk and Protection

An entrepreneur needs money to launch a business, whether that comes in the form of loans from family,
their own savings, or investors. The founder will be expected to put their own money at risk, whether in the
form of a loan to their own business or equity in their own business. If they do not have any "skin in the
game," then others will not be interested in loaning them money. This means that if the business fails, it will
have repercussions for the owner, even if they operate as a corporation or LLC. This is the essence of financial
584         Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

risk: starting a new business with insufficient funds to sustain operations over an extended period of time.
Any new business owner needs to have a sound financial strategy as a part of the overall business plan. This
should show income projections, the liquid assets that will be required to break even, and the expected return
on investment for all investors in the first five-to-ten-year timeframe. Failure to accurately plan could mean
that the entrepreneur risks business closure and bankruptcy, and investors get nothing.

Insurance Protection

Risk management and protection are enhanced with the purchase of different types of insurance, which
involves spreading risk over a large number of people (policyholders). If a company is a corporation, it may
need directors' and officers' liability insurance to indemnify the directors and officers if they get sued. Another
insurance policy many companies get is called errors and omissions insurance, and this insurance coverage
protects employees in negligence claims and cases if employee theft. Other types of insurance policies that
most businesses carry include automobile insurance, health insurance, property insurance, and cyber/data
breach insurance. Insurance coverage for a business venture needs to be specific to the business structure
and its operations. Keep in mind that not all risks can be insured against--for example, a bad economy that
leads to a loss of business or a bad decision by the owner to enter a market that does not work out.

Information Technology/Cybersecurity for Small Businesses

According to the SBA, the risk of hacking, ransomware, and customer privacy are equally as significant for
most small businesses as for larger ones. The SBA has set guidelines related to cybersecurity for
entrepreneurs. The SBA recommends the ten-step action plan shown in Table 13.2.

Step              Small Business Administration Recommendations for Cybersecurity[26]
1                                                                      Action
2
3     Protect against viruses, spyware, and other malicious code
4     Secure your networks
5     Establish security practices and policies to protect sensitive information
6     Educate employees about cyber threats and hold them accountable
7     Require employees to use strong passwords and change them often
8     Employ best practices on payment cards
      Make backup copies of important business data and information
      Control physical access to computers and network components

Table 13.2

26 Rebecca Martin. "Protecting Assets from Cyber Threats." News Tribune. November 7, 2016. https://www.newstribune.com/news/business/
story/2016/nov/08/protecting-assets-cyber-threats/647637/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                         585

Step               Small Business Administration Recommendations for Cybersecurity
9                                                                      Action
10
      Create a mobile device action plan
      Protect all pages on your public-facing websites and apps, not just the checkout and sign-up pages

Table 13.2

The Federal Communications Commission joins the SBA in the preceding recommendations. For more
information, see the following website: https://www.fcc.gov/general/cybersecurity-small-business.

WHAT CAN YOU DO?

Managing Payment Data

If you operate a small business, are you prepared to deal with hackers who break into your website and
steal credit card data from consumers who bought your products online? Small businesses running an e-
commerce site must comply with the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard
(https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/). This is a regulation that could cause severe legal risk for
entrepreneurs if your system is compromised, and credit card data are stolen. Consumers rightfully
expect and demand a safe online experience when they visit your site. Have you paid an expert to
evaluate your system and install the best security system? It may be costly, but perhaps not as expensive
as the damages you could be ordered to pay by a court if credit card data are hacked.
586                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

     Key Terms

B corporation business that meets a very high standard of social and environmental performance, public
     transparency, and accountability to balance profit with social purpose

business purpose reason the entrepreneur forms the company and determines who benefits from it,
     whether it is the entrepreneur, customers, or some other entity

business structure legal organization of a business; also called entity selection
C corporation corporation taxed the corporate level, and then again on the owners' personal income tax

     returns if corporate income is distributed to the shareholders as dividends
capital money raised for operating a business
corporation complex business structure created by filing the appropriate documents with the state of

     incorporation
economic nexus virtual connection with a state based on sales volume or number of transactions
enterprise risk management integrated cross-disciplinary approach to monitoring risk
equity crowdfunding raising of capital through the online sale of securities to the general public
financial risk starting a new business with insufficient funds to sustain operations over an extended period

     of time
for-profit business business structure designed to create profits that are distributed to the owners
general partnership business created when two or more individuals or entities agree to work together to

     operate a business for profit
insurance spreading risk over a large number of people (policyholders)
joint venture temporary partnership in which two different enterprises combine for the purpose of mutual

     benefits such as sharing of expenses and to work toward shared goals and the associated potential
     revenue
legal risk risk stemming primarily from a breach of contract, a regulatory violation, and/or the commission
     of a tort
limited liability company (LLC) hybrid of a corporation and a partnership that limits the owner's liability
limited liability partnership (LLP) business arrangement for professional partnerships, such as law firms or
     accounting firms, in which partners are licensed professionals, with limited liability for financial
     obligations related to contracts or torts, but full liability for their own personal malpractice
limited partnership (LP) business arrangement that has at least one general partner and one or more
     limited partners
not-for-profit organization (NFPO) business structure that is usually dedicated to furthering a particular
     social cause or for advocacy related to a common shared interest by using its surplus revenues to achieve
     its ultimate objective
partnership business entity formed by two or more individuals, or partners, each of whom contributes
     something such as capital, equipment, or skills
privately held corporation company that does not allow members of the investing public to own stock;
     instead, it is owned by the founder's family or friends, or a private group of investors
public corporation quasi-governmental entity, a corporation owned or sponsored by the government
publicly held corporation entity in which members of the investing public own the stock
S corporation "pass-through" entity, also known as a small corporation, where shareholders report and
     claim the business's profits as their own and pay personal income taxes on it
sole proprietorship business entity that is owned and managed by one individual that has very little formal
     structure and no mandatory filing/registration with the state

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues  587

     Summary

13.1 Business Structures: Overview of Legal and Tax Considerations
Being an entrepreneur carries with it the responsibility to make significant decisions, the first of which is to
decide the business purpose: For example, who should benefit from the creation of the entity? The second
important decision to make is whether you are going to be a for-profit or not-for-profit business. This decision
is closely related to the business's purpose and is not necessarily controlled by how much revenue you think
you might have but rather by who is going to "own" the entity and what it does with the profit it makes. A
third decision to make is the type of business entity or structure. Choices include corporation, LLC, partnership,
and sole proprietorship.

13.2 Corporations
When forming a corporation, there are numerous choices. One choice is whether to form a C- or S corporation.
This is primarily a tax decision, with C corporations being taxed as corporations, and S corporations being
taxed as partnerships. Which one is the best for you depends on a number of variables, including how many
shareholders you aim to have and how much of the revenue you want to leave in the corporation versus take
out of it in the form of dividends, considering possible double taxation issues. Another choice is whether you
want to go through the process of becoming a certified B corporation through adherence to a number of
social/sustainability guidelines. Finally, you must decide if you eventually want your equity (stock) to be
publicly held, as it is in most large companies, or privately held, which may give you more control but limit
access to capital.

13.3 Partnerships and Joint Ventures
Partnerships are a popular form of doing business. Within the structure of partnerships, there are multiple
entities or structures. Making the choice can be rather complicated because an ill-informed choice could result
in legal problems. Choices include a GP, LP, LLP, and LLLP, each with a different set of circumstances that
might make it the right or wrong choice. The factors that would play a role in selecting which type of
partnership to form include business purpose, management structure, taxation, and liability. In addition to
partnerships, a related type of entity is a joint venture. Joint ventures can be combinations of two or more
business entities that decide to come together for a limited period of time for a specified purpose.

13.4 Limited Liability Companies
LLCs have become, over the past twenty-five years, one of the most popular business entities for new startups.
The phenomenal growth in LLCs is due to a straightforward equation: easy formation + easy operation +
limited liability = popularity. LLCs offer entrepreneurs several qualities that they seem to like: They are low
cost, low maintenance, protect the owner's personal assets from liability, and offer flexible taxation choices.

13.5 Sole Proprietorships
The sole proprietorship structure or entity is the most common form of doing business in the US. It is easy and
inexpensive to form, is directly managed by the owner, and is subject to minimal regulation in terms of its
formation and/or operation. However, with these good points are also some drawbacks. The owner has
unlimited personal liability for all business-related obligations, which makes using this form of business very
risky. Additionally, the only way a sole proprietor can remain that way and get access to capital is to borrow
money from the bank or a perhaps a family member. Sole proprietorships cannot sell stock like a corporation
can nor can they take on more partners as in a partnership or LLC.
588                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

13.6 Additional Considerations: Capital Acquisition, Business Domicile, and Technology
Multiple considerations play a role in the selection of the best business structure for each entrepreneur. This
decision flows from the entrepreneur's vision of how the proposed business will operate and affects all
aspects of business operations. The decision includes issues related to legal liability, taxation, and the ability to
raise capital. This process may also include consideration of the best state to form and operate in, as a result
of taxation, regulation, and other related matters.

13.7 Mitigating and Managing Risks
Risk is part of the equation for any startup business. There is no way to protect against every risk. However,
there is a way to identify risk, plan for it, manage it, mitigate against it, and protect against it to an extent. The
key to understanding and dealing with risk is not to take a utopian approach to a business startup, thinking
that it will never happen to you. Risk is omnipresent. Statistically, some unexpected things will happen. Thus,
the best approach to risk is to consider and implement strategies to help you and your business deal with it
such as incorporation, insurance, and monitoring.

     Review Questions

1. A not-for-profit business ________.
    A. is allowed to retain earnings for use within the organization
    B. must distribute profits to shareholders
    C. must turn over to the government any excess earnings
    D. can pay dividends to shareholders

2. The term "for-profit corporation" means which of the following?
    A. The business must make a profit or forfeit its status.
    B. The business may make or lose money without changing its status.
    C. The business is not allowed to sell stock to the public.
    D. The business must have more than 100 shareholders.

3. Which of the following business structures often involve two or more businesses starting a new business
together?

    A. sole proprietorship
    B. general partnership
    C. joint venture
    D. corporation

4. How is an S corporation taxed?
    A. at the entity level as a corporation
    B. at the owner level as if it were a partnership
    C. at both the entity and owner levels
    D. at a special lower rate of income tax

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                        589

5. A public corporation is ________.
    A. owned or sponsored by the government
    B. owned by member of the investing public
    C. owned by a combination of public and private investors
    D. none of these choices are correct

6. A C corporation is taxed ________.
    A. at the entity level
    B. at the individual level
    C. at both the entity and individual levels potentially
    D. only at the state level, not federal

7. Limited liability partnerships (LLPs) ________.
    A. are normally used for firms that consist of licensed professionals such as lawyers or accountants
    B. can be used for partnerships that sell services but not goods
    C. are used for firms that do business across state lines
    D. require that the stock be owned by fewer than 100 shareholders

8. A joint venture ________.
    A. must be a corporation
    B. can choose to be any type of entity
    C. must be either a partnership or a C corporation
    D. None of these choices are correct

9. General partners have what type of liability?
    A. limited
    B. joint and several
    C. joint only
    D. personal only

10. Of all the business entity choices, LLCs are the most like ________.
    A. S corporations
    B. C corporations
    C. sole proprietorships
    D. joint ventures

11. LLC owners are called ________.
    A. members
    B. shareholders
    C. limited equity investors
    D. directors

12. LLCs offer flexible tax treatment, meaning ________.
    A. they can be taxed like corporation
    B. they can be taxed like partnerships
    C. they can be taxed like proprietorships
    D. All choices are correct.
590                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

13. Sole proprietorships offer limited liability ________.
    A. if you register it with the state
    B. if you elect to be taxed as a corporation
    C. if you have an SBA loan guarantee
    D. Sole proprietorships never have limited liability.

14. A sole proprietorship ________.
    A. pays taxes at the highest corporate rate
    B. pays taxes at the lowest corporate rate
    C. pays taxes at the individual rate
    D. None of these choices are correct.

15. Sole proprietorships ________.
    A. must register with the state
    B. are similar to general partnerships in terms of liability
    C. are similar to LLCs in terms of liability
    D. are not allowed by law to operate outside of the US

16. States can levy a sales tax on items sold online to a customer in a different state if ________.
    A. the business has a nexus with that state
    B. there is an contract between the business and the state comptroller
    C. the items sold are over $300
    D. the business is one that only sells foreign-made items

17. As a general rule, LLCs, GPs, and SPs are taxed as ________.
    A. corporations
    B. not taxed
    C. individuals
    D. taxed twice, once as entity and once as individuals

18. Entrepreneurs can choose what state to incorporate in, and many choose ________.
    A. New York
    B. Delaware
    C. California
    D. Texas

19. Enterprise risk management includes ________.
    A. identifying risk
    B. risk assessment
    C. risk abatement
    D. All of the choices are correct.

20. A business owner can insure against all but which one of the following?
    A. earthquakes
    B. a bad economy
    C. flooding
    D. hurricanes

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues                                       591

21. Examples of risk facing a business include ________.
    A. human risks
    B. economic risks
    C. natural risks
    D. All of the choices are correct.

     Discussion Questions

1. Distinguish between for-profit and not-for-profit entities.
2. What are the distinguishing characteristics of a B corporation?
3. Why would an entrepreneur choose to operate an S corporation rather than a C corporation?
4. What are the choices of entities for operating as a group of engineers?
5. How does a joint venture differ from the other business structures?
6. Distinguish between LLC and LLPs.
7. Why are there more sole proprietorships than any other business entity in the US?
8. What are the general guidelines used to determine where your business must pay sales taxes for sales
made online?
9. Identify the common types of risks that a business may face.

     Case Questions

1. The Big University football team, a member of the Southeastern Conference (SEC), brings in over $100
million a year in revenue, including TV rights, ticket sales, and bowl games. Seats to a game cost well over
$100, and coaches are paid millions of dollars (more than anyone else at Big U, including the president).
However, despite enormous revenues, universities and their football teams are considered not-for-profit
organizations and pay no taxes on the $100+ million their football programs bring in. Should a university
football program be allowed to exist as a not-for-profit organization?

2. Jen started a new sustainability-oriented business six years ago, making single-serve coffee pods out of
recyclable paper, rather than plastic. Her company, Jen's Pod, is now experiencing rapid growth. Jen started
her company as an LLC but has been considering making a decision to incorporate. What are some of the
advantages of changing to a C corporation?

3. You are headed off to college. Some close family members decide it would be a good idea to buy a house in
the college town and then rent it out to students, with you also living there and actively managing it. Assuming
you and your family buy it, what form of business would you select?
592                                                                               Chapter 13 Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues

4. Jackson owns and runs a small computer repair business, a sole proprietorship, out of his home, with one
employee. He also goes to small businesses at their locations, mostly cleaning viruses and doing other small
maintenance tasks and repairs. A family physician's office calls him in for a repair. He sends his employee to
do the repair. Unknown to him, his employee makes a copy of patients' personal information and sells it on
the dark web. Jackson ends up being sued, and the plaintiffs ask the court to allow them to access Jackson's
personal, nonbusiness bank account that also has his spouse's funds in the account. Can the plaintiffs take
that money?

     Suggested Resources

13.1 Business Structures: Overview of Legal and Tax Considerations
The Small Business Administration (SBA) has a great "tool box" for entrepreneurs. Tools include information

  on how to create a business plan and how to qualify for government contracts. It also has free online training
  classes and a list of networking events. Go to this link, and then click on "Create a Business Plan" and get
  started. SBA: https://www.sba.gov/tools

13.2 Corporations
A cost-effective solution for obtaining business counsel is the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE),

  which provides free advice for small businesses and entrepreneurs. The SCORE organization is the nation's
  largest nonprofit network of volunteer, expert business mentors, with more than 10,000 volunteers in 300
  chapters. You can find them at: https://www.score.org/

13.3 Partnerships and Joint Ventures
The IRS website has a clear explanation of partnerships with regard to taxation, regarding both income tax

  and employment/payroll taxes. You might find enough information here to help reduce the time you spend
  with a CPA, saving your company a lot of money: https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-businesses-self-
  employed/partnerships

13.4 Limited Liability Companies
The SBA has an excellent website for LLC owners. It has information about multiple topics including

  comparisons with other structures, and links to other websites that offer good advice: https://www.sba.gov/
  business-guide/launch-your-business/choose-business-structure

13.7 Mitigating and Managing Risks
North Carolina State University, Poole College of Management, has an excellent enterprise risk management

  initiative. It has a wealth of helpful information for entrepreneurs on this topic: https://erm.ncsu.edu/library/
  article/coso-erm-framework

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    14

              Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.1 New Story is changing the way social enterprises manage resources through an innovative
business model that uses crowdsourcing to fund construction. (credit: modification of photo provided by New
Story)

 Chapter Outline

        14.1 Types of Resources
        14.2 Using the PEST Framework to Assess Resource Needs
        14.3 Managing Resources over the Venture Life Cycle

      Introduction

   New Story, a forward-thinking social enterprise, set out to solve a global issue that affects more than one
   billion people[1] worldwide: homelessness and lack of adequate shelter. The organization has impressed many
   investors by revolutionizing homebuilding techniques. Its founders--Brett Hagler, Alexandria Lafci, Mike
   Arrieta, and Matthew Marshall--share a passion for "improving lives through safe homes and a shared vision
   to change the traditional charity model."[2] When its founders realized the global need for proper shelter,
   many people having been displaced by natural disasters, they decided to take advantage of an alternate
   charity model by connecting with other building organizations and using crowdfunding. These four innovators
   combined their skills to create an organization that emphasizes building sustainable homes at a quick pace
   and affordable price. New Story's business model includes an innovative approach to home building and
   design by incorporating the needs of each family, local partners and workers, and crowdfunding campaigns to
   pay for construction.
   At their start, New Story knew they needed the support of great mentors and an accelerator to raise funds for
   overhead costs, so they applied to one of the most prominent accelerators in the United States--Y

   1 Joseph Chamie. "As Cities Grow, So Do the Numbers of Homeless." Yale Global Online. July 13, 2017. https://yaleglobal.yale.edu/content/
   cities-grow-so-do-numbers-homeless
   2 New Story. "Founding Story." n.d. https://newstorycharity.org/about/
594                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Combinator, a community of founders that funds startups in an accelerated three-month development
process. Optimizing this opportunity, New Story built 113 houses through their "100 Homes in 100 Days"
campaign in Haiti, a challenge that Y Combinator posed to them. This experience enabled the New Story team
to identify global partners that extended their reach to developing communities in Bolivia, Mexico, and El
Salvador.

One of the best technological advances that New Story has leveraged in its collaborations with companies is
the 3-D printer by ICON, which allows a home to be printed in as little as twelve hours for only $6,000. The 3-D
printer uses three main components to build a house: robotics, a special mix of materials that dry quickly, and
a tablet that runs the software needed to design the home.

By securing funding and finding local community partners, New Story has built sixteen communities, with
more than 2,200 homes in four countries.[3][4]

 14.1 Types of Resources

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Distinguish between tangible and intangible resources
  · Determine the venture's tangible and intangible resource needs and how to attain them
  · Describe the various funding resources available to entrepreneurs and discuss the pros and cons of each

You have learned about many opportunities for entrepreneurs to explore and the processes that ensure their
success. This discussion focuses on the various resources that entrepreneurs need to start, maintain, and grow
an enterprise, and, in general, how to procure those assets. Many entrepreneurs make the mistake of moving
forward in their business endeavor without taking enough time to research their industry and determine what
resources are required to help their business not only get off to a positive start but also the resources needed
for its continued operation. Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales covered primary and secondary sources of
information and how to make use of the information gleaned from them for marketing purposes. Much of that
research also applies to questions surrounding resource allocation. But before we delve into allocation, let's
examine the general categories of resources needed in just about every new venture: tangible, intangible, and
financial.

Tangible Resources

As you can imagine, resources needed for the enterprise are varied and can have different attributes. These
assets are essential in the operation of the business enterprise. Assets (see Entrepreneurial Finance and
Accounting) are property or resources that create a benefit to the person (or company) who owns them. They
can be tangible or intangible. Tangible resources are assets that have a physical form. They can be seen,
touched, and felt. Tangible resources differ between product-based and service-based businesses. A product-
based business uses tangible resources in the production of goods sold to customers, such as raw materials,
land, facilities, buildings, machinery, computers, supplies, and vehicles. The warehouse shown in (Figure 14.2)
would be considered a tangible resource for a tire (product-based) company.

3 New Story. "Our Impact." n.d. https://newstorycharity.org/impact/
4 New Story. "Founding Story." n.d. https://newstorycharity.org/about/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  595

Figure 14.2 Facilities, machinery, and other equipment are necessary tangible resources for a product-based
company. (credit: "forklift warehouse machine worker" by "pashminu"/Pixabay, CC0)

Tangible resources for a service-based business include buildings such as a doctor's office, bank, movie
theater, amusement park, retail store, or restaurant, which are enterprises that include both products and
services (Figure 14.3). Facilities and resources that the business needs to provide its services and run
operations may include computers, office equipment, furniture, and technological resources. As Figure 14.3
shows, the equipment and décor need to be taken into consideration because they becomes part of the
product offerings, even if the core product is a service.

Figure 14.3 Resources needed for a doctor's office include (a) furniture, decorations, and amenities for a
waiting room and check-in areas, as well as (b) rooms with medical equipment and supplies in which to see
and treat patients. (credit (a): modification of work by "icethim"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; credit (b): modification of
work by "osseous"/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Place of Operation

Your facility needs will depend on the type of product or service you are offering and vary in scope from office
596                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

space to a food truck to a manufacturing facility to a storefront for sales. Knowing the limit of your budget
(discussed in the next section) should help you focus on locations that you can afford. Experts recommend
that you allocate only a certain percentage of your sales to your lease or purchase; some businesses use
industry averages as guidelines. Factors to assess are location, visibility, foot traffic (how many potential
customers walk by), how well the building has been maintained, the maintenance it will need in the future,
how long you would want to stay in that location, and the insurance, property tax, and renovation costs, or the
cost to build a new building. One approach is to make an assessment of your sales per square foot and
compare those to sales of similar companies in the same industry or market. These data can be found through
local commercial realtor offices, city or county government offices, and local associations.

Machinery/Equipment

Machinery and equipment are critical assets to helping launch a business. For service businesses, such as
restaurants, dry cleaners, print shops, etc., the equipment can be expensive. In recent years, however, a larger
reseller market has emerged for many types of equipment that are still serviceable. It is important for tax
purposes to report the current asset value of used equipment and have an accountant confirm its useful life
for your income statement and tax returns. (See Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues for
more information.)

For companies that manufacture products, you may have to order customized tooling and assembly
equipment. Again, if you must acquire new equipment, you will need to understand what its useful life is and
determine whether you must procure or acquire the equipment from a supplier who charges a "piece price"
on top of each component or finished product they supply to you. If you choose this second approach, your
supplier may insist on a long-term manufacturing agreement to manage their risk.

Vehicles

For some businesses, vehicles are necessary equipment to run day-to-day operations. You can use your own,
which can be cost effective, or you can purchase or lease one. If purchasing a used vehicle, it is best to check
the Kelley Blue Book (www.kbb.com), a reference guide that lists market prices, before purchasing it from a
dealership; make sure that there are no defects or negotiate a lower price if you find them; and make sure to
secure documentation on warranties. Other reliable valuation sources are carfax.com, nada.com, and
edumunds.com.

Many small business owners are undecided as to whether buying or leasing a business vehicle nets better
benefits. Let's assume for the purposes of this discussion that the vehicle is primarily a business vehicle and is
not used a majority of the time for personal use. Relevant considerations include both tax and cost-related
issues.

One difference between the purchase and lease of the vehicle relates to the tax deduction for depreciation.
When you own a business vehicle, you can deduct a depreciation value over the life of the vehicle. Generally,
you are not eligible to deduct depreciation on a leased vehicle. However, there is a corresponding difference
with regard to the deductibility of monthly payments. With a leased vehicle, the monthly lease payments are
tax deductible, whereas if the vehicle is purchased with a car loan, only the interest on the car loan is
deductible as a business expense. Ultimately, the decision to lease or buy is one that an entrepreneur should
make in concert with a tax advisor.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  597

   LINK TO LEARNING

   There are also useful online calculators that can help small entrepreneurs explore the pros and cons of
   leasing versus buying a vehicle (https://openstax.org/l/52LeaseBuy) to inform these important business
   decisions.

Technology

No matter what business you are in, you must invest in technology to support your day-to-day operations. This
typically includes computers and software, as well as Internet service and intranet/network functionality. The
following list includes most of the basic investments you will need to make for your business:

  · Computers: Laptops, desktops, and tablets are an obvious necessity for day-to-day tasks, communication,
      and even production of products or services. Think about the performance and attributes needed to
      operate the business for insight about what brand and quality to buy. A good operating system that can
      process calculations and requests faster can make your business operations smoother and more efficient.

  · Internet: Every business must have strong and reliable Internet service to ensure connectivity of
      computers, routers, and peripherals. Communication in today's environment cannot happen without this
      technology, and there are many providers that have good packages for businesses to get the bandwidth
      necessary to operate a business and/or to provide connectivity to customers.

  · Router: If you are using multiple computers, laptops, and printers that need to be connected to each
      other, you will need a wireless router. A wireless router will help you keep documents and printers
      accessible from anywhere in your office, even if it's a small home office. You can also have a hard-wired
      router, which blocks outside signal interference.

  · Printer: Most businesses need a good quality printer for printing documents, marketing materials, and
      forms. Most printers now use color ink and come with the ability to scan and copy documents. They also
      vary in quality, so you will need to consider your printing needs and the costs of toner/ink to determine
      the level of quality you need.

  · Server: If you need to store and retrieve data--such as customer profiles, emails, and sales
      information--you will likely need a server. The server is a hardware system with software that performs
      various functions that cannot be done from one computer.

  · Cloud computing: Cloud services have emerged as a cost-effective way to process, store, and use data for
      company operations. Rather than host your data and systems on your own hardware services, many large
      companies like Amazon, Verizon, and Microsoft offer web services hosted on a network of computers.
      This option provides ongoing data integrity and security, while lowering the cost of IT services and
      equipment.

  · Software: There are many software applications and tools that are essential for business operations.
      These tools support day-to-day tasks. Common software needs include accounting and billing software
      like QuickBooks, customer relationship management tools such as Salesforce or Marketo, word
      processing and spreadsheet software like Microsoft Word and Microsoft Excel, presentation software such
      as Microsoft PowerPoint, diagram tools like Draw.io, email marketing tools like Constant Contact or Mail
      Chimp, file management systems like Dropbox, online phone/meeting apps like Skype and Zoom, social
598                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

      media management systems such as Hootsuite, project management tools like Bootcamp, and more.
      Some of these tools are free. Others carry a cost but may have free trial periods if you need to test them
      before investing. Most offer easy subscription payment schedules that can be set up monthly or yearly,
      and include ongoing software updates.

Supplies

There are many other supplies needed to operate the business, mostly basic items that you might take for
granted but that need to be expensed: paper, toner, files, staplers, writing utensils, cleaners, and so on. You
will likely need basic office furniture too. You may also want to invest in certain amenities that create a working
environment and set the stage for your envisioned company culture--whether that's a coffeemaker, a
dartboard in a break area, or whiteboards for meetings and brainstorming.

Licenses and Permits

What types of licenses might be required to operate your business? You may need a basic business license or
permit provided by the government for the business to be valid, such as registering as an LLC, partnership, or
company (Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues discusses these business structures in more
depth). These licenses let the government know what kind of activities the business performs and ensure
taxes are collected properly. They also make your business a legal entity and prove that it exists in case you
need funding or permits. Some businesses require a sales tax license for products and services, whether they
are tangible or digital.

Other considerations include professional certifications that pertain to the industry you are working in, such as
certifications in accounting (CPA), financial advising, cosmetic services, or healthcare. Many industries require
licenses before you can begin to operate; such industries include healthcare, financial services, construction,
real estate, insurance, transportation, and engineering. If you will be receiving customers in your home office
or storefront, you may be required to undergo a home inspection, especially from the health department if
you are in a foodservice industry. Signage outside your business location may also require a permit or
compliance with local regulations.

Other permits that may be required for a building include a certificate of occupancy, fire, electrical, HVAC,
plumbing, and hazardous materials such as gasoline, diesel, oil, or compressed gas cylinders. Check the laws
and regulations of your local and state governments to ensure your business meets the legal requirements for
licensing and permits. You can do this by contacting the secretary of state in your state and also by contacting
your local chamber of commerce. Importantly, these licenses and permits often carry a cost and should be
part of your startup costs with renewals included in your operational budget.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Service-Based versus Product-Based Resources

     Go to bizjournals.com and select one of the small businesses profiled in the listings of current local
     business news. Select one service-based enterprise and one product-based enterprise. Make a list of all
     the different types of tangible resources they each need to start their enterprise and sustain it. How do

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  599

   the resource needs of each enterprise differ and how are they similar? What did you learn about
   resources from this activity?

Intangible Resources

Intangible resources are assets that cannot be seen, touched, or felt. Intellectual property--which includes
creative imaginings such as formulas, designs, brands, and inventions--is an intangible resource, and so are
the patents, trademarks, and copyrights that protect the intellectual property. For example, if you are a small
business owner, you might want to protect your logo, company name, website, slogan, new product prototype,
or maybe a newly developed manufacturing process that allows you to shorten production time.
In our current technological era, intellectual property has become more important than ever. The Ethical and
Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs introduced you to intellectual property protection as an important
measure to safeguarding creativity. Entrepreneurs must protect their ideas for as long as possible to sustain a
competitive advantage. A competitive advantage for a business could be a formula for a product, like the
recipes Kentucky Fried Chicken or Coca-Cola use for their food and beverage products. They protect their
formulas so other companies do not replicate them and profit from them. Smaller companies can also invent
new products, methods, and branding that will need to be protected. Patents, trademarks, and copyrights are
three protections for this type of intangible resource.[5]

Patents

As Creativity, Innovation, and Invention discusses, a patent grants the owner the right to claim the ability to
exclude others from making, selling, using, and importing a product or process to the United States for a
period of time. This time is usually twenty years from the date the application was first submitted to the US
Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO). This allows the inventor to recuperate the costs of researching and
developing the novelty before competitors can copy it. Types of patents include utility, business process,
design, and plant patents.
A utility patent is granted to an individual who invents or discovers something novel and purposeful such as a
machine, a process, a product, an improvement to any of these, or even a composition of matter. Most patents
awarded to inventors are utility or plant patents. The USPTO receives more than half a million applications
each year.[6]
The application and approval process can take several years and can involve a substantial investment that can
range from a couple thousand dollars to over $15,000, depending on the complexity and type of patent, as well
as the fee for a patent lawyer. Lawyers can help with conducting a patent search and ensuring that the
invention doesn't yet exist, while providing guidance on the application process. Patent attorneys are often
expensive, charging between $200 and $800 an hour, but they can make the process easier.
Usually, the first application an inventor files is for provisional twelve-month patent protection, which covers

5 United States Patent and Trademark Office. "What Are Patents, Trademarks, Servicemarks, and Copyrights?" General Information Concern
Patents. October 2015. https://www.uspto.gov/patents-getting-started/general-information-concerning-patents#heading-2
6 United States Patent and Trademark Office. Nonprovisional (Utility) Patent Application Filing Guide. January 2014. https://www.uspto.gov/
patents-getting-started/patent-basics/types-patent-applications/nonprovisional-utility-patent#heading-6
600  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

the invention for the first year while the inventor waits for the approval of a final, nonprovisional patent. A
patent examiner processes the application and determines whether to award the protection or not. Having the
help of a patent lawyer is not necessary, but it usually makes the process easier and increases the odds of
receiving the patent. Not having a lawyer can delay the process or prevent the inventor from getting the
patent, especially if the inventor is not familiar with the process, or if the invention is complex. Choosing a
lawyer carefully is important, as experience and knowledge of the process matters. If the patent is awarded,
the final patent goes into effect retroactively to the filing date of the provisional patent, and the inventor has
twenty years of protection against other companies copying the design. Figure 14.4 shows an example of a
patent for the well-known 3-D printer, which was awarded in 1986 to its inventor Chuck Hull.[7]

Figure 14.4 Here is an example of a schematic from Chuck Hull's 3-D printer patent provided by the US
Patent and Trademark Office. (credit: modification of "US Patent US4575330A" by Charles W. Hull/Google
Patents, Public Domain)

A business process patent is a type of utility patent granted to someone who develops a new business method,
and just like a tangible product, the method must be new and nonobvious, and it must employ an equipment
or type of technology to be valid. Nonobviousness is a legal requirement for a patent acquired under federal
law (35 U.S.C. § 103), and generally means something that is not readily apparent. A proposed invention is
obvious if someone of ordinary skill in a relevant field could easily make the invention based on prior art and
thus would not be patentable, whereas a nonobvious invention is capable of being patented. The application
must include a description of how the method works with the technology or equipment, and it must have a
real-world application and not just be an idea. An example is Amazon's 1-Click shopping cart that enables
people to store credit card and shipping information to enable speedy purchases.

7 Joseph Flynt. "A Detailed History of 3D Printing." 3D Insider. n.d. https://3dinsider.com/3d-printing-history/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  601

A design patent is granted to an individual who creates something original and novel as an ornamental design.
A design patent involves the actual design of an invention. For example, Apple has hundreds of design patents
for its iPhone, and Samsung has hundreds of patents for its various products. (Figure 14.5) shows a patent
granted to Apple in 2011. Read the "Abstract" portion. Does it describe something familiar? Every design
element, like the LCD screen, the width and length of the phone, and many of its other features that are added
to each of its generations, requires a new patent.
602                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  603

Figure 14.5 Here is an example of a US patent awarded to Apple. (credit: modification of "Sample patent to
illustrate `INID' numbers" by USPTO/Wikimedia Commons, Public Domain)

A plant patent is as it sounds--it's granted to someone who creates or discovers a new type of plant, as in the
living organism, not facility. The patent applies to a plant or its contents, which must be innovative and
nonobvious, and must have utility.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Nolo is a legal resource for small businesses and consumers (https://openstax.org/l/52Nolo) that
   provides information on the basic requirements for utility, design, and plant patents.

Trademarks

A trademark provides the owner the ability to use a name, symbol, jingle, or character in conjunction with a
specific good. A service mark is, according to the USPTO, a word, phrase, symbol, or graphic that identifies the
origin or source of a service.[8] Both marks prevent others from using those same assets to sell their products.
A trademark can be the most valuable asset a company owns. Customers will often pay more for a product or
service if it comes from a specific brand with a good reputation. Customers view brands as a promise of the
experience they will have: Brands promote confidence in the product and the benefits that the consumer may
enjoy. Successful businesses create brand loyalty through these efforts, creating a relationship with
customers. When users see themselves in the brand, they will choose that brand to create their own identities.

Protecting the name of the company and its products, jingles, logos, and even social media is therefore
necessary to gain and protect a competitive advantage, because among competitors, the trademark is often
the only way to distinguish among products. Can you think of a brand you are loyal to--perhaps your Apple
iPhone, your Starbucks coffee, or your local entertainment spot? Consider what that company has done to
earn your loyalty.

Usually, once the business begins to use its name, logo, character, and other assets, they are informally
protected by trademark law and can use the TM symbol. However, if a business wants extended protection, they
should file for legal trademark protection.

Trademarks can be registered at the state or federal level. As the names imply, state trademark registration
protects the business's mark within its own state, and federal trademark registration protects the business's
mark across the United States. Once the registration has been filed and accepted at the federal level, the
business can use the ® symbol after the protected item. Examples of trademarks include the Apple name and
logo, the McDonald's logo, the talking GEICO lizard, and Nike's "Just Do It" slogan.

If you are opening your own candle and soap company, for example, you might want to register your company
name and logo initially to prevent others from using it and benefiting from your reputation. If you decide to
create a jingle, a slogan, a character, or another branding asset, you can do it while you develop and grow your
business, as it can become cumbersome and expensive if it's done all at once. Getting a trademark itself is not

8 "Trademark Basics." United States Patent and Trademark Office. n.d. https://www.uspto.gov/trademarks-getting-started/trademark-basics
604                     Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

as difficult as getting a patent, but just as with a patent, getting a lawyer's help can prove beneficial.
Trademarks are not as costly--it may cost a few hundred dollars to file the application--but attorney fees can
vary, depending on the type of project and the length of time it takes to process the application. This can
range from a few hundred to thousands of dollars. This type of intellectual property can provide an
opportunity for your company to be sustainable for years to come and avoid other businesses copying or
using your ideas to promote themselves.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Check out this video on the basics of applying for a trademark on the USPTO website
   (https://openstax.org/l/52tradeUSPTO) to learn more.

Copyrights

A copyright is provided to an author of an original work, including artistic, dramatic, architectural, musical,
literary, and software works. Copyrights are granted by the Copyright Office, which is a part of the Library of
Congress.[9] Table 14.1 summarizes the types of US intellectual property protection.

 Intellectual Property       Types of Intellectual Property Protection                                         Office Providing
         Protection                              Protected Items                                                   Protection

Patent                  Machine, process, improvement, plant, design, and                                  US Patent and
                        matter composition                                                                 Trademark Office
Trademark               Name, symbol, jingle, character, and logo
                                                                                                           US Patent and
Copyright               Artistic, dramatic, architectural, musical, literary, and                          Trademark Office
                        software
                                                                                                           US Copyright Office

Table 14.1

The US Copyright Office's website offers a variety of publications that further explain what works are or are
not eligible for copyright: https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-protect.html. While filing with the
Copyright Office is not required for copyright (the rights exist when the work is created), the process provides
more formal legal documentation to protect your business interests. Registration requires a fee (basic
registrations are under $100), and other services or specialty requests may add additional expenses.[10]

Trade secrets are oddly similar yet completely different from traditional intellectual property (patents,
copyrights, and trademarks.) Trade secrets derive their legal protection from their inherently secret nature,
not from a grant of exclusivity by the government. In fact, patents and copyrights are required to be made

9 "What Does Copyright Protect?" Copyright.gov. n.d. https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-protect.html
10 "What Does Copyright Protect?" Copyright.gov. n.d. https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-protect.html

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                              605

public, whereas trade secrets are not.

Examples of trade secrets range from the formula for Coca-Cola to the Google search algorithm. An inventor
has a choice: patent the invention or keep it as a trade secret. Some advantages of trade secrets include the
fact that a trade secret is not limited in duration/time (patents generally only last for twenty years). A trade
secret may therefore continue indefinitely as long as the secret is not revealed to the public. However, a trade
secret is more difficult to enforce than a patent because the level of protection granted to trade secrets is
generally considered weaker when compared with the protection granted by a patent. Additionally, a trade
secret may be patented by someone else who developed the relevant information by legitimate means.

Determining Your Resource Needs and How to Attain Them

As you begin your entrepreneurial plan, start by developing a list of the basic tangible and intangible
resources you will need and determine their availability. For example, let's say you are starting a solar panel
manufacturing company called Helios Panels. Your new manufacturing plant will require you to have a 10,000
square foot factory, where you will need two or three specialized machines to build your solar panels.
Unfortunately, the area of town that you like does not have buildings available. You will probably need to look
for another location where there's a facility that fits your needs that is easily accessible for transport vehicles.
If you don't make your list first, then you run the risk of ending up in a facility that is not suitable. Table 14.2
and Table 14.3 provide starting points for thinking through the tangible and intangible resources needs for
your venture.

   Resource                               Tangible Resource Needs                           My
Location/                                                                                 Needs
facility                                               Considerations

Machinery/   · Will there be customer interaction, and if so, does the location meet the
equipment       needs of the target market?

Technology   · How much square space is needed?
             · How well will the location meet the needs of employees?
             · Does inventory need to be stored?

             · What equipment is needed to create the product or provide the service?
             · What quantity of equipment is needed to meet customer demand?
             · Are there any special requirements for machinery, such as level ground,

                vibration or sound protection, or water and electricity supplies?

             · What hardware is needed (computers, tablets, printers, or routers)?
             · What software is required?
             · What type of Internet service is needed?
             · What other technology architecture might be required (server, network, or

                cloud computing)?

Table 14.2 This table can help you determine your tangible resource needs.
606                                                                         Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

   Resource                                 Tangible Resource Needs                             My
                                                         Considerations                       Needs
Vehicles
               · Are vehicles needed, and if so, for what function (transporting goods or
Miscellaneous     meeting clients)?
supplies
               · What basic supplies may be needed (desks, chairs, wastebaskets, or
Licenses/         whiteboards)?
permits
               · What office supplies are needed for operations?

               · Is the business licensed as a legal business entity if needed?
               · Does the location/facility require any licenses or permits to operate?
               · Do all parties involved in providing products/services have necessary

                  licenses or certification to be in compliance with industry and government
                  standards?

Table 14.2 This table can help you determine your tangible resource needs.

 Resource                                     Intangible Resource Needs                         My
Patents                                                    Considerations                     Needs
Trademarks
Copyrights     · Does the venture merit patent applications (utility, design, or plant)?

               · Do the immediate plans or long-term vision include elements that should be
                  trademarked (name, symbol, logo, jingle, or character)?

               · Do the company's offerings include intellectual property such as artistic,
                  literary, architectural, or software works that need to be protected?

Table 14.3 This table can help you determine your intangible resource needs.

Business owners are constantly faced with difficult decisions about resources. A decision tree is a beneficial
tool that Business News Daily describes as a "flowchart graph or diagram that helps explore all of the decision
alternatives and their possible outcomes."[11] In other words, it uses a logical framework to help us make
decisions. First, you determine what your different options are for use of resources, and then you can calculate
the return for each option, using mathematical models that help estimate the probability of successful
outcomes.

For example, let's say that you must decide which piece of expensive equipment to use in the manufacture of
your solar panels. You can create a decision tree to determine the best course of action (Figure 14.6).

11 Chad Brooks. "What Is a Decision Tree?" Business News Daily. March 28, 2014. https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/6147-decision-tree.html
This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  607

Figure 14.6 A decision tree can help estimate the probability of success when making a decision regarding
how to allocate resources, sometimes including examining cost tradeoffs. (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Working through these questions can help you be prepared prior to opening the business and identify
additional resources you will need in the future. This takes time and effort, but the payoff is worthwhile in
having a clear understanding of needs to support a path to success. Furthermore, the risk of expensive and
unrecoverable mistakes can be mitigated when one uses management tools such as the decision tree tool.
Creating a checklist with answers and details (Figure 14.7) can help sort through and organize your thoughts
and your action steps.
608  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.7 Sample checklist for determining whether a location and other physical resources are
appropriate for Helios. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   ARE YOU READY?

   Get Organized

      · Create a checklist of the various resources you might need for your own business idea. Categorize
          them into tangible and intangible.

      · Prioritize them in order of importance to your growing enterprise and what cost factors to consider
          for each.

      · Construct a decision tree that shows what choices you had to make as you made your checklist.
   Often in the planning stages, entrepreneurs fail to identify all the resources they may need in the startup
   phase, and, as a result, the business suffers and opportunities are lost. This article from Business News
   Daily on decision trees (https://openstax.org/l/52BusNewDecTree) can be a helpful resource when
   completing this exercise.

Funding Resources

Funding resources are the monetary resources necessary to start and operate a business and are usually the
biggest challenge that entrepreneurs face. If you don't have funding, you are not able to secure your basic

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                                                               609

resources--that is, to buy the raw materials to make a product, hire employees, purchase inventory, or secure
facility space, furniture, or equipment. Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting covers these funding sources
in depth. Here, we consider how these can be best leveraged to acquire the other resources needed for your
business.

Personal Savings

Most entrepreneurs start their business by tapping into their personal savings. Many entrepreneurs will work
another job while setting aside some savings money for their venture. Using personal savings can be a good
idea if the business requires low startup costs (marketing material, software, equipment, products, and
materials) and low maintenance costs for the first year. This can include businesses that don't require as much
capital, such as professional services (engineers, accountants, and business consultants). Saving for major
expenses like equipment can also help avoid paying fees and loans, but it may tie up the money in assets and
will prevent you from covering payroll or other operational costs. Having cash reserves on hand can ensure
that your basic business needs are met. The positive aspect of using your own savings is that you have the
opportunity to use the funds as you see fit: You decide how you want to spend the money. A potential negative
with this freedom is that if the business fails, your investment will be depleted as well.

Bootstrapping

Bootstrapping literally means to pull yourself up by the bootstraps with tenacity and "sweat equity" using the
bare minimum resources.[12] This means that you do things as cheaply as possible until you start earning
revenue that you can reinvest in the business. For example, entrepreneurs starting out might work from home
to save on rent and utilities, might create a website and marketing materials themselves, and might use social
media to promote the business. Once a customer base is established, the entrepreneur may explore options
for outside-of-the-home office space and invest in professional services from a website designer and
marketing printer.

Using credit cards can be an option to help the entrepreneur bootstrap and not take out loans. This can be
risky, but if you are disciplined and only use them for the essentials of the business, such as production or
marketing, they can really help get the enterprise off the ground. Paying off the balance every month and
using credit cards that provide rewards and cash back can help develop healthy habits, while reaping the
rewards to use on items that are highly needed.

An example of the savvy use of a credit card comes from Johnny Cupcakes, a "t-shirt bakery" in Boston,
created by Johnny Earle, who started selling witty cupcake t-shirts, as shown in Figure 14.8, out of the back of
his '89 Toyota Camry. He used his parent's credit card to charge the materials for his t-shirts and bootstrapped
his operations out of his home with family help until his clever shirts started selling so well that he had to open
his first retail store. Fortunately, Earl was smart enough to use the credit card only for production of his t-
shirts, and once they sold, he used the revenue to pay off the credit card completely so as to not incur any
more debt or interest charges. Eventually, his business started to flourish and he didn't need to use credit
cards to operate. Today Johnny Cupcakes brings in millions of dollars. The company has expanded to locations
in Los Angeles and London, and Earle speaks to entrepreneurs all over the world.[13]

12 Alejandro Cremades and Barbara Corcoran. The Art of Startup Fundraising: Pitching Investors, Negotiating the Deal, and Everything Else
Entrepreneurs Need to Know (Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley, 2016).
13 Johnny Cupcakes. n.d. https://johnnycupcakes.com/pages/about
610  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.8 Johnny Earle started his company, Johnny Cupcakes, using his mother's credit card to fund the
production of the shirts. His car was his first storefront. (credit: photo provided by Johnny Cupcakes, work by
Dave Green, @JOHNNYCUPCAKES, https://johnnycupcakes.com/)

Bank Loans

Bank loans are another funding option with different banks that focus on various industries and different
interest rates available. Usually, these loans can be secured by some sort of equity. This can take the form of
personal assets, such as the owner's home, cash, vehicles, other commercial property, or business assets like
equipment, inventory, or cash. Rates can be high, especially for startups that don't have any credit history. The
paperwork required can also be cumbersome, and the payments have to be made on time regardless of how
much revenue the business is earning. Organizations such as the Small Business Association (SBA) and local
chambers of commerce can be helpful in providing guidance and loans (see Entrepreneurial Finance and
Accounting).
Bank loans are most helpful when the business does not have enough money to fund a particular part of
operations, such as expanding production by means of buying new equipment. Although loans may be
difficult to attain, there are local banks and large banks that provide help to small businesses and startups.
Interest rates may range from 5 to 8 percent, and the loans can be used for the purchase of capital equipment
or assets that are necessary for the business to take off, such as land/facilities, working capital, or marketing.
Once a business has established making payments on the loan, it also establishes good credit. It may then
qualify for larger loans or a line of credit, which is an amount of money that a bank allows a business to
borrow on demand to expand a business or to have cash flow for required expenses. Usually, there is an
interest rate attached to the line of credit that will have to be paid back within agreed terms, and often an
annual fee for an open line of credit. Entrepreneurs with good credit ratings can access amounts around
$25,000-50,000 without taking a term loan.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                                                               611

Friends and Family Members

Friends and family can be a great way to get quick funding because they usually believe in your skills and
ideas, and they want to see you succeed. Entrepreneurs should have a specific strategy for asking friends and
family for the amount they need to open a business. This can range from a few hundred to thousands of
dollars. You will want to determine whether to ask many people to help you with small investments or have
one or a few people provide larger amounts. It depends on the strength of your relationships and how much
stress you're willing to introduce into the relationship. Many entrepreneurs have persuaded friends and family
members to give small amounts, and some have persuaded a few to give large amounts of money.
Regardless, it is important to have a strategy for asking and a plan for how to pay them back. You will also
need to be prepared to discuss their expectations regarding the use of their money. Are they expecting to be
part owners of your company? Is this a loan that must be repaid? Is it a gift? It is always best to keep
communications about funding the business professional. If they are investors, the expectation is that they will
have a say in how you run your business.

Once you have figured out what interest you are willing to give up in return for the investment, make it
professional by giving a presentation about the business and signing a contract to ensure that they will get
paid back, whether in money or shares of stock. This safeguards the relationship by holding you accountable
for paying back the money.

There are many contract templates available online, such as those at Loanback.com, Lendingkarma.com,
Exilend.com, and Zimplemoney.com. These contracts should include the amount of money you're asking for,
the interest rate, timeframe of payback, installment information, and any other necessary terms. If the money
is a gift, it is recommended to get a statement in writing that those funds are a gift in case you need proof of
where that money came from and whether payback was expected.

Angel Investors

Angel investors are usually professionals who have accumulated wealth and are open to sharing their wealth
in exchange for some sort of equity. Many are former entrepreneurs who have harvested their business and
enjoy providing guidance and support to new entrepreneurs. Others have worked in large corporations and
have an abundance of knowledge and interest in new technologies. The name given to this type of investor
began with those "angels" who helped fund Broadway shows in the last century.[14] The name stuck, and now
they fund many industries, not just the arts. Many of these angels belong to groups of investors such as
private equity groups, while others look for opportunities on their own. They also can range in their lending
capabilities, as they are private individuals with differing amounts of wealth.

An example of an angel investor is Natalia Oberti Noguera (Figure 14.9), the CEO and founder of an
organization called Pipeline Angels that helps provide capital for women and nonbinary entrepreneurs. She is
not the typical angel investor, as she focuses on empowering minorities through her business coaching and
providing capital opportunities for women.[15]

14 Alejandro Cremades and Barbara Corcoran. The Art of Startup Fundraising: Pitching Investors, Negotiating the Deal, and Everything Else
Entrepreneurs Need to Know (Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley, 2016).
15 Natalia Oberti Noguera. n.d. www.nataliaobertinoguera.com
612  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.9 Natalia Oberti Noguera is founder and CEO of Pipeline Angels. Her goal is to change the face of
investors and support women and nonbinary social entrepreneurs. (credit: modification of "TechCrunch
Disrupt NY 2017 - Day 2" by TechCrunch/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)

Venture Capitalists

Venture capitalists are usually large private or public firms that are interested in pooling funds to invest in high
return, high-risk startups or growing firms. These investors want high payouts in an average span of three to
five years, so they will likely fund promising businesses in technology sectors, pharmaceuticals, media and
entertainment, and biotechnology.[16] The business must give up some of its equity to gain those funds.
Usually, venture capitalists not only provide the funds necessary to start or grow the business, but will also
provide guidance and expertise. More than likely if you are seeking funds this way, you will probably deal with
an established venture capital firm, but occasionally, an individual may work alone as a venture capitalist.
For example, Birchbox received $90 million from their first rounds of funding from venture capitalists. This
allowed them to fully develop their business model and grow to be valued at over $500 million. Most of the
funds went to creating the technology that fueled their website, hiring customer representatives, and creating
distribution systems.

Crowdfunding

Just like in the case of New Story (Introduction), there are instances where businesses rely on crowdfunding,
which is a good vehicle for collecting large amounts of money made up of small donations. That's the beauty
of crowdfunding: You can receive various amounts of money from many people through an online platform,
with a request that can be shared not only with family and friends, but with many other people who are
passionate about your idea. New Story created a new business model that allows them to crowdfund its home
building projects entirely. This model, together with New Story's partnerships, has helped them create many
communities in different countries, thanks to the donations from people who care about this cause. There are
many types of online platforms that focus on specific industries. The most common platforms include
Kickstarter.com, Indiegogo.com, CircleUp.com, and Fundable.com, among others. In 2012, Congress passed
the JOBS Act to allow startups to raise money from people who were not professional investors. Crowdfunding
was born from the ability to raise money without having to create an IPO.

16 Rachel Hallett. "These Are the Industries Attracting the Most Venture Capital." World Economic Forum. February 13, 2017.
https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2017/02/these-are-the-industries-attracting-the-most-venture-capital/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                                       613

LINK TO LEARNING

Visit the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority site explaining the details of crowdfunding and the JOBS
Act (https://openstax.org/l/52FINRA) to learn more. Notice the rules for specific amounts raised.

Grants

A tougher way to get funding for your venture is by applying for grants from the government at the federal,
state, and local levels.[17] Most require a match of funds by the entrepreneur and may have many more
requirements, but they can be a good way to launch. You can start by looking up federal grants and work your
way down to your local city level. Federal grants are broken down by industry. Usually, they focus on fields that
have innovations in technology, science, or health. Some of those grants such as the Small Business
Innovation Research Program or the Small Business Technology Transfer Program focus on these disciplines
and can range from $150,000 to $1 million. Other governmental entities offer grants, such as the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration, the National Science Foundation, and the Departments of Energy,
Health, Defense, and Education; these grants focus on their fields, and their amounts and requirements vary.

State grants, on the other hand, generally focus on economic, educational, or social issues. These can be
smaller and easier to acquire since competition can be lower. Each state has its grants posted on the
https://www.grants.gov/ website and includes requirements and funding opportunities. These focus on areas
of growth and needs such as green technology, education, environmental initiatives, tax incentives, job
retention, historic preservation, and tourism, among others.[18] Grants are also discussed in The Ethical and
Social Responsibilities of Entrepreneurs.

Resource Funding Considerations

When evaluating resource needs, you can consider these questions:

  · How will I obtain the money needed to operate the business on a daily basis?
  · When might I need to hire staff, and how much would their wages and benefits cost?
  · Where are these sources of money I can tap into for both immediate and long-term needs?
  · Would a line of credit be a better option for my business or should I pursue a term loan?
  · Is borrowing from friends and family a practical option?
  · Are there angel investors who fund businesses in my industry who I can investigate?
  · What will I need in terms of assets and financial reserves to open my business and keep the doors open

      for at least six months? One year? Five years?

Based on your needs, you will be able to choose from the type of funding that best suits you. Table 14.4
expands on the pros and cons of these different funding resources.

17 Priyanka Prakash. "Small Business Grants: 107 Ways to Get Money for Your Business." Fundera. October 15, 2019.
https://www.fundera.com/blog/small-business-grants
18 Priyanka Prakash. "Small Business Grants: 107 Ways to Get Money for Your Business." Fundera. October 15, 2019.
https://www.fundera.com/blog/small-business-grants
614                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

   Types of       Pros and Cons of Funding Types                                  Cons
    funding    Pros
Personal
savings        · Only risk your own funds                                         · Risk losing all your savings/retirement
               · Use the funds as you see fit                                        accounts
Bootstrapping  · Can take the time to save up
                                                                                  · Hard to save enough money to fund a
Bank loans        funds                                                              business, so the amount is limited
               · Can run a smarter business by
Venture                                                                           · Can cause cash flow challenges
capitalists       making better decisions on a
                  tight budget                                                    · May not get paid until the business makes
                                                                                     money
               · Requires the least amount of
                  investment                                                      · Requires "sweat equity" using minimal
                                                                                     resources
               · Using credit cards can
                  potentially provide rewards                                     · May need risky use of credit cards

               · Ability to get greater amounts                                   · Must qualify for loan on the business
                  of funding than personal                                           creditworthiness
                  savings and bootstrapping
                                                                                  · Must qualify for loan based on personal
               · May be faster funding than                                          creditworthiness of all spouses, partners,
                  waiting to save up                                                 members, or stockholders

               · Builds credit history                                            · Must pay interest
               · Set payment rate                                                 · May default loan
               · No loss of equity in venture                                     · Cash outflow on interest and principal

               · Potentially large sum of money                                      payments
               · Ability to grow quickly                                          · Can jeopardize needed cash for other
               · Not a loan, so no regular cash
                                                                                     productive uses
                  repayment plan                                                  · Potential loss of collateral
               · Access to useful connections                                     · Potential decrease in credit rating

                  and experience in the industry                                  · Give up ownership/equity
                                                                                  · Have to take others' direction
                                                                                  · Expectation of payoff
                                                                                  · May cause company to grow too quickly
                                                                                  · May relinquish management control or

                                                                                     decision-making to an unknown person
                                                                                  · Can be squeezed out of own company

Table 14.4

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                           615

   Types of                                      Pros and Cons of Funding Types  Cons
    funding                                   Pros
Angel
investors     · Useful investing networks and     · Give up ownership
                 experience in the industry       · Have to take others' direction
Friends and                                       · Expectation of payoff
family        · Ability to guide you toward       · May relinquish management control or
                 success
Crowdfunding                                         decision-making to an unknown person
              · Invest funds in exchange for      · Can be squeezed out of own company
Grants           equity and participation in the
                 venture's success                · Expectations need to be met
                                                  · Risk losing their money
              · Not a loan                        · Usually will raise less funding
                                                  · May complicate relationship
              · Can be easier and faster to       · Might be embarrassing
                 acquire                          · Has tax implications if provided as a gift

              · People believe in your idea/      · Requires significant planning/work
                 skills                           · Requires some sort of reward
                                                  · Can be stressful method
              · Ability to raise from many or a   · Transparency required and may need to be
                 few
                                                     documented
              · No credit check
              · Flexibility for payback           · May only focus on certain industries
                                                  · Difficult to obtain
              · Ability to raise cash from many   · Long process
                 people                           · Reporting may be required
                                                  · Repayment may be required if specific
              · Fast
              · Larger overall sums                  conditions are not met
                                                  · Some conditions of the grant are outside
              · Range from small to large
              · May have little competition          the control of the benefactor
              · May offer training
              · Free application

Table 14.4
616  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

     WORK IT OUT

     Informational Interviews

     Do some research within your industry to see how your idea compares to those who have been in
     business five years or more (reaching success) and those in business five years or less (startups). Explore
     whether you can access needed resources to successfully launch the intended enterprise and reach the
     proposed customer.

     If you can, interview others in the industry to get a pulse on the considerations of entry into this
     business. For example, you can ask them the following questions:

       · What experience did you have in your industry before you started your own business?
       · What made you consider opening a business?
       · What were some of the positive aspects you saw about this industry? What were some negative

           aspects?
       · What are the obstacles of entry into this industry?
       · How much funding did you need to get started? How much to continue operating?
       · What networks of business owners, mentors, and guides did you tap into before you started your

           business?
       · What organizations did you join to get help with your business?
       · How much time did you spend in your business each week?
       · What did you give up in your personal life when you started your business?
       · If you could start over, what would you do differently? Would you still open your own business?
       · What advice do you have for someone who is just starting?

 14.2 Using the PEST Framework to Assess Resource Needs

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Describe the components of the PEST framework (political, economic, sociocultural, and technological
      factors)

  · Apply the PEST framework to assessing resource needs
  · Understand how to assess typical resource costs at startup

As you venture into planning the resource allocation for your enterprise, you will learn that there are a variety
of tools that can help you. It is important prior to launch to identify the minimum resources needed for
startup. Some businesses will require more capital equipment (such as production machines); some require
more technological resources, such as software (or software designers); some companies may require a lot of
funding at the beginning of their quest, whereas some will require only a small investment of money. The level
of resources needed for an enterprise changes over time, as well.
As the entrepreneur goes through the brainstorming process to identify the feasibility of the idea, they can
simultaneously begin to think practically about what they will need to make this business operational: What

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  617

raw materials are needed to manufacture the product? How many employees are needed at each phase? Will
a physical site be necessary, and, if so, where will it reside?

Narrowing down the minimum resource needs of the enterprise in response to some or all of these questions
is essential to a successful business launch. The entrepreneur can gather information and make an informed
decision on what needs have to be covered at the beginning of the venture. This information can be
condensed into the business plan, marketing plan, or pitch that can be shared with stakeholders. The
information gleaned from the stakeholders' responses to the plans informs not only the entrepreneur and
stakeholders internal to the business, but external stakeholders such as banks, investors, suppliers, vendors,
and partners. The information is essential for the decision-making process. One tool that can help ensure that
planning is comprehensive and well thought through is the PEST framework.

PEST Framework

The PEST framework is a strategic assessment tool that entrepreneurs can use to identify factors that may
influence access to essential resources. PEST is an acronym for political, economic, sociocultural, and
technological factors (Figure 14.10).

Figure 14.10 Gaining an understanding of these four factors can help entrepreneurs gauge access to
important resources. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch the video about PEST (https://openstax.org/l/52PEST) to learn more. Why is it important to look at
   the outside environment? How does the PEST analysis work?

Political Factors

Although you may hope to be your own boss, make your own schedule, and follow your own rules, you must
still work within the realities of outside factors that affect your business. Political factors stem from changes
in politics, such as the policies of a new presidential administration or congressional legislation. Such policies
can affect access to capital, labor laws, and environmental regulations. Moreover, these political changes can
take place on federal, state, and local levels. Figure 14.11 lists several political factors that can influence a
business. Tax reform law, for example, could influence the amount of taxes a business owes, while actions by
the newly appointed chair of the Federal Reserve could affect how much capital may cost the small business
618                                      Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

owner because of interest rate changes.

Figure 14.11 Businesses must follow all laws and regulations, but political factors such as the ones listed
here can influence the profitability of the organization. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under
CC BY 4.0 license)

Recently, the 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act changed corporate tax rates, as well as the payments businesses
make quarterly to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS). Other changes included the expansion of certain
deductions and tax credits (including which specific business expenses can be deducted), and a new method
to depreciate assets, as well as other rules related to employees who help businesses receive credits and
minimize taxes.[19]

Businesses must also follow environmental laws, such as those from the Occupational Safety and Hazard
Association[20] and the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).[21] For example, these government agencies
require businesses to train employees about materials that may be hazardous to people and provide notices
and reports on these matters. The EPA also has regulations on air and water emissions that businesses must
follow, as improper disposals can harm the environment. Smaller businesses may be exempt from some of the
regulations under certain circumstances.

Imported products are regulated by the federal government through quotas and tariffs. Tariff laws have been
used as political instruments to manage the flow of goods between countries. Tariffs are taxes or duties that
are added to imported goods from another nation. Quotas, a limit on the number of items entering a country,
are also used to restrict the volume of goods entering a country. For example, the US government in 2019
imposed tariffs on $550 billion of Chinese products, while China has imposed tariffs on $185 billion worth of US
products. While it is likely that this ongoing trade dispute will be resolved, free trade remains an ongoing
source of international economic competition.[22]

For example, business owner Daniel Emerson, CEO of light manufacturer Light and Motion, described in a
National Public Radio (NPR) interview that the latest round of tariffs on materials from China might push him
to open a manufacturing plant overseas. Light and Motion manufactures lights for bicycles, headlamps,
drones, and media production. According to Emerson, in order to get his parts from China, he has to pay the
US government for importing them. He states that these tariffs might destroy his company, as his main

19 Internal Revenue Service. "The Highlights of Tax Reform for Businesses." October 2018. https://www.irs.gov/newsroom/the-highlights-of-
tax-reform-for-businesses
20 Occupational Safety and Health Administration, United States Department of Labor. n.d. https://www.osha.gov/about.html
21 US Environmental Protection Agency. n.d. https://www.epa.gov/
22 Dorcas Wong and Alexander Chipman Koty. "The US-China Trade War: A Timeline." China Briefing. October 12, 2019. https://www.china-
briefing.com/news/the-us-china-trade-war-a-timeline

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                                                        619

competitors in China and other countries don't face those tariffs; therefore, his prices are forced higher.
Emerson might have to move his company to the Philippines, which has no tariffs. He'll have to build them
there and ship the completed lights to the United States.[23] As an entrepreneur, you should remain aware of
political issues that may impact your operations and planning.

Economic Factors

Entrepreneurship has a direct impact on the economy by providing employment opportunities to many
people. However, economic factors can also affect the success of a business. For example, they can deter
customers from purchasing goods and services due to an economic downturn. On the other hand, when the
economy is expanding and growing, people tend to feel confident about their jobs and income, and they may
spend more than usual. Economic factors--which include inflation rates, interest, currency exchange (if the
business operates or engages globally), state of the economy (growth or decline), employment rates, and
disposable income--can impact the business owner's pricing of goods or services, the demand for such
services, and the cost of production.

Taking the state of the economy, for example, when the economy is down, restaurants will see a decline in
clientele as more people prepare meals at home to save money, or they will switch from fine dining
restaurants to more casual or fast-food restaurants. In weak economies, consumers tend to purchase store
(often called "private label") brands more often than national brands to reduce their grocery bill. When the
economy is healthy, consumers spend more on entertainment and restaurants, which can be considered
luxury items. The restaurant will need to adjust its resources to meet the economy-driven fluctuating demand.
When demand is high, it is likely that the restaurant will need more supplies and more employees. These
needs, in turn, result in the restaurant needing additional financial resources to buy more supplies and to pay
employees. When demand is low, the opposite is true.

Sociocultural Factors

Knowing about your customers is key to delivering what they really want. Additional factors that need to be
taken into consideration include changes in how society is moving and the direction of that movement as it
relates to your customer base and potential new markets. These sociocultural factors include population
growth rates, changes in where people live, social trends such as eating healthier and exercising, education
levels, generational trends (millennial, baby boomer, or Gen X and Y), and religious culture. These factors can
affect not only the seven Ps you learned about in the Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales chapter, but also
resource assessment more specifically. It is necessary to look at these factors closely in order to allocate
marketing resources optimally. For example, if you are opening a restaurant and you see an increasing trend
in healthy food, you may want to allocate your resources to fresh ingredients or more vegetarian and vegan
options.

One far-reaching sociocultural factor is the impact that digital shopping has had on brick-and-mortar retailers.
This online shopping trend has forced long-established companies such as JCPenney, Payless, Gap, Victoria's
Secret, Radio Shack, Macy's, and Sears, to close thousands of stores, file for bankruptcy, or shut down the
business altogether. These companies have faced enormous competition from entities such as Amazon and
smaller businesses such as ModCloth and Birchbox that interact with customers virtually and stay on top of

23 National Public Radio. "U.S. Tariffs on China May Force California Company to Move Production Overseas." All Things Considered.
September 24, 2018. https://www.npr.org/2018/09/24/651221317/u-s-tariffs-on-china-may-force-california-company-to-move-production-
overseas
620                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

societal trends. Younger generations such as the Y and Z generations have triggered these social changes, as
they are technologically savvier and expect to find exactly what they want, where they want it, and when they
want it.

Technological Factors

In the case of technological factors, the enterprise needs to be sure it has equipment that allows it to operate
efficiently. There are different types of technology that help with marketing, finances, productivity,
collaboration, design, and production.
Being able to use technology to meet the needs of the customer, such as having an informational or an e-
commerce website (so the customer can purchase from the comfort of home) is a "must" these days for most
ventures. Digital marketing has allowed entrepreneurs to promote their businesses in many different ways,
through e-mail marketing, digital ads on search engines such as Google or Bing, websites, social media
groups, YouTube videos, and blogs. These tools are easy to use, available, and can be affordable, even on a
shoestring budget.

   WORK IT OUT

   Social Media as a Resource

   Leveraging social media technology is essential to building your brand and awareness in today's digital
   society. Create an idea sheet for a Facebook page for your Helios solar panel enterprise, which was
   mentioned earlier in the chapter. What are the types of information you want to include? Do you want
   the page to be operational or just informational? Will this social media tool be used as the main source
   for customers to learn about your business or will it be a supplemental tool to create deeper
   relationships?

Other technology can also be helpful in managing payments from customers, billing, human resources
payments, and keeping the books. QuickBooks is a popular software program that a starting entrepreneur can
purchase and use to manage the company's financials. Other products are available too--ZOHO Books, FRESH
Books, GoDaddy Bookkeeping, and Kashoo--each has pros and cons.
Other types of software such as UAttend help small businesses keep track of their employees' time and
productivity, and Basecamp helps entrepreneurs keep track of the projects that everyone is working on, while
allowing them to collaborate with each other and keep track of what is happening. These tools can make it
easy for an entrepreneur to manage a project with contractors or employees.
Other technology that needs to be taken into consideration if you are manufacturing a product includes the
tools and equipment that will create goods and services. Some examples are CAD (computer-aided design),
3-D printing for developing quick prototypes (Figure 14.12), CAM (computer-aided manufacture), robots, and
new materials that allow faster and cheaper production of goods. 3-D printing, for example, is a
manufacturing process that uses a technique of adding layers of material to create rapid prototypes. It can be
used to create prototypes of products, toys, architectural models, prosthetics, tools, fashion, automotive parts,
and even final products like homes, as in the case of New Story.[24] The use of prototyping allows for creativity,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  621

and these newer technologies allow users to create many prototypes. Nike, for example, uses 3-D printing to
make their prototypes because it is faster than waiting for a full prototype to go through the manufacturing
process. Using these technologies for prototyping can also avoid the expense of building the actual product,
allow for the final product to be refined quickly, and help in the reduction of manufacturing errors.

The drawback is that some of these technologies can be expensive to purchase, and it can take a long time to
recuperate the cost. (However, when wages and benefits costs rise quickly, they can pay for themselves rather
quickly.) Entrepreneurs must be sure to acquire only those tools and materials that will help them get started.
Then, as the business thrives, more funding is available for more expensive equipment and software
Entrepreneurs then need to have the skills and knowledge to operate specific software and consider upgrades
and replacement costs. Questions include: What about support services? How long will support last? If the
entrepreneur updates the PC, will the old software run on the new operating system? Can the data be easily
copied to the new operating system or software program?

Figure 14.12 3-D printing allows companies to develop prototypes quickly before investing substantial
resources. (a) A 3-D sphere, for example, can be created using (b) a 3-D printer. (credit (a): modification of
"ball 3d printing design" by "metalurgiamontemar0"/Pixabay, CC0; credit (b): modification of "3d printer
printing technology" by "kaboompics"/Pixabay, CC0)

Assessing Resource Costs for Startup

Starting a business can be an exciting event, and one that requires thoughtful planning. Resource planning
can help determine start-up costs, which helps determine an estimate of breakeven sales, profits, what types
of funding to use, and how to plan for future expenses like tax payments. According to the SBA business
guide,[25] there are several steps you should take to determine startup costs for different types of businesses.
First, figure out the type of business you want to open: brick and mortar, online, or services. Brick-and-mortar
businesses have physical locations where a customer may purchase a product in one or several locations.
Online businesses operate through e-commerce websites and sell products and services virtually. These may
or may not also have a physical location. Service businesses provide services rather than a tangible product.
Also, consider the type of business structure you will have (see Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk
Issues).

24 "What Is 3D Printing?" 3DPrinting.com. n.d. https://3dprinting.com/what-is-3d-printing/
25 US Small Business Administration. "Calculate Your Startup Costs." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/calculate-
your-startup-costs#section-header-6
622                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Next, make a cost list like the one in Table 14.5. There could be additional costs based on the resource needs
identification discussion in Types of Resources. Many of the costs will be easy to determine, but others--like
salaries, insurance, and improvements--might be more difficult to estimate. You can consult research sites,
local business resources (such as the chamber of commerce), or speak to mentors or consultants (such as
SCORE) for more guidance on how to estimate these numbers. Also see Building Networks and Foundations to
see how industry professionals can help determine startup costs (Table 14.5).

                        Examples of Common Costs Related to Starting a Business

           Types of Costs                Examples for a Fictional Marketing Consulting Firm

Physical space for an office, building,  10' × 15' office space downtown building
factory

Real estate, land                        None

Furniture and fixtures                   Two small desks, six chairs

Inventory                                None

Equipment and supplies                   Computers, color printer/copier/scanner, paper, ink, office
                                         supplies

Vehicles                                 Personal cars

Utilities                                Electric, heat/air conditioning, water, cell/Internet

Rent/utility deposits                    Rent, utility deposits

Licenses and permits                     Business LLC license

Insurance for business and vehicles      Owned personally

Accountant and lawyer fees               Accountant and lawyer

Employee salaries and wages              One part-time assistant, one web developer

Advertising and promotion                One radio commercial

Market research                          Customer databases

Printed marketing materials              Stationary, brochures, business cards

Digital marketing                        Website, social media, e-mail marketing

Memberships                              Chambers of commerce/networking groups

Table 14.5

Determine the estimated cost for each item. Once the list has been developed, finding out what each of those
items costs will allow you to make an estimate of your basic needs. A good source of information is the US
Bureau of Labor, which publishes a list of occupations and their wages and benefits by location and

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  623

profession. Some costs may have a range to consider, and a decision tree such as the one shown in Figure 14.6
may be helpful. Many state governments have a labor and workforce department that tracks wages and
employment data for specific industries and professions on an annual basis.

After you have identified all of the costs, determine which ones are one-time costs (pre-launch costs) and
which will be ongoing costs (typically monthly, quarterly, or annual). Pre-launch costs include everything you
must have before opening the door of your business to the public. These include licenses and business
permits, marketing materials, equipment, and inventory. Ongoing costs, on the other hand, are recurring.
These may include rent, utilities, certain ongoing marketing costs like digital ads, and salaries. It is suggested
to have at least one to two years of saved monthly expenses to make sure you give the business time to create
a brand and a customer base. Add up your total pre-launch costs and your monthly costs to identify of how
much capital you will need to start your business.

You should include this information in the financial section of your business plan. This data can help provide a
clear picture of expenses and future revenues that banks and venture capitalists may find useful in making
decisions about investing in your business.
624  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.13 This template from the Small Business Administration (SBA) is designed to help you capture the
one-time and ongoing costs for your resource needs. Adding your total one-time expenses to your total
monthly expenses will help you calculate your start-up costs (you should generally plan ahead for a few years
of monthly expenses). (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

   ARE YOU READY?
   Specialty Pizzeria Costs

   Imagine that you are interested in opening a pizza parlor in your town. Your idea is to provide specialty
   dietary choices such as vegan and gluten-free pies in addition to regular pies. You would like to open it in
   a new, busy shopping area where you can reach your target market.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                  625

Download the SBA's business worksheet to figure out your one-time and monthly costs for your
business: https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/2017-07/Startup%20Costs%20Worksheet.pdf.

 14.3 Managing Resources over the Venture Life Cycle

Learning Objectives

By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain how resource dependence theory helps a venture grow
  · Understand typical resource needs through the life cycle
  · Describe the basic steps in securing human resources
  · Understand the importance of educational and personal resources to the entrepreneur

The evaluation of needed resources does not end with the startup phase. This is an essential activity that the
business owner must engage in throughout the life cycle of the business. Many entrepreneurs have failed to
re-assess how their needs have changed as industry, technology, economic, political, or social changes emerge
in the marketplace. This lack of timely assessment of operational needs can result in business struggles or
even failure. Business owners need to be engaged in ongoing research, monitoring of the external
environment, ensuring they have the ability to easily respond to changing circumstances.

When Birchbox, a business covered in Entrepreneurial Marketing and Sales, first entered the cosmetics sales
market through an innovative business model, the founders (Katia Beauchamp is pictured in Figure 14.14),
were able to fund their startup through venture capitalists who saw a great opportunity to tap into a new
model of selling cosmetics. After it had been in business for a while, Birchbox grew not only in customers and
employees, but also in competitors. The company struggled with cash flow as it grew its customer base and
struggled to keep a healthy profit due to its tight margins from selling other brands' items. After talks of
selling to QVC and Walmart, Birchbox sold its ownership to an internal investor who provided the cash for the
company to continue to innovate its products and digital processes, and to add more cosmetic partners.[26]

26 Jason Del Rey. "Birchbox Has Sold Majority Ownership to One of Its Hedge Fund Investors after Sale Talks with QVC Fell Through." Vox. May
1, 2018. https://www.recode.net/2018/5/1/17305940/birchbox-recap-viking-global-qvc-merger-sale
626  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.14 Katia Beauchamp, owner of Birchbox, will stay at the helm of the company with the help of a
hedge fund investor. (credit: photo provided by Birchbox)

As we can see from the Birchbox example, business operations are impacted by various internal factors such
as increases in the customer base, employee growth, as well as changes in marketing needs and external
factors, which include fierce competition that can curtail the venture's productivity, impact competitive
advantage, or limit its access to key resources. In the case of Birchbox, cash flow was necessary for product
innovations and digital marketing changes to combat their competition.
To counteract some of this, dependencies can be formed with others in a network of enterprises. This can aid
in circumventing the impact of external factors such as an increase in competition in their respective market,
limited ability to obtain credit for capital resources, shortages of the raw materials needed to produce their
goods, or human resources to meet demanded service and production levels.
For example, many businesses within a particular industry are dependent on the same purchasers, vendors,
raw materials, or other environmental resources. The resource dependence theory (RDT) model posits that
forming networks such as mergers, vertical integrations, and joint ventures, or engaging in joint political
activities, can help mitigate dependencies among member groups.[27] This classic model remains relevant
today.
As Launch for Growth to Success discussed, mergers occur when two companies have the same specific goal
and create a contract to become one company, with the shared goal usually of gaining new customers,
growing market share, improving purchasing power, or reaching new markets.
In vertical integration, a company acquires members of its supply chain, which helps gain economies of scale,
improve deliveries of inventories, reduce costs, and may also stifle competition.
A joint venture (see Business Structure Options: Legal, Tax, and Risk Issues) can be less taxing to the
companies involved, as each of them retains their identities and management teams while pooling their assets
to create synergy through a new project or engagement in political activities. Being able to gain control over
their external environment through these alliances is essential to aid a small business toward growth and
sustainability.
In the case of Birchbox, there could be a time when a cosmetics brand and Birchbox could merge to create a
new line of products, or Birchbox could acquire one of its cosmetics brands in vertical integration. However in
more recent years, cooperative ("coop") arrangements have emerged to help small businesses share

27 Pfeffer and Salancik. The External Control of Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1978).

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                                                         627

resources collaboratively based on a common interest and trust. For example, Community Supported
Agriculture is a popular way for farmers and other commodity growers to gain selling power through their
combined efforts.[28] In particular, Red Hen Bakery, a small artisanal cheese making company in Ontario, has
supported its business by partnering with both local pig farmers and craft breweries to help manufacture their
cheeses. They also sell vouchers to customers in advance to help manage seasonality.
In another example, farmers have turned to commercial aerial drones to help assess their crops' viability and
optimize their use of fertilizers, irrigation, and other resources. Consulting firms have emerged to provide
these monitoring services, despite the constraints that the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) imposes on
commercial drones. These common interests have helped them lobby the Farm Bureau and other trade
associations to accelerate FAA permits for this type of commercial use.

   WORK IT OUT

   Auntie Anne's Pretzels and Strategic Partnership

   Visit Auntie Anne's Pretzels (https://openstax.org/l/52AuntieAnne) to learn more about their story.
      · Write a summary on how Anne Beiler leveraged relationships in the initial launch of her business.
      · What strategies did Beiler use to identify strategic partners, resources and processes to protect her
          profitability?

Resources Needed Based on Life Cycle

Entrepreneurs need to identify and plan for their resource needs (Table 14.6) and costs for all stages of the
venture's life cycle, which is shown in Figure 14.15. Evaluating the cost of the enterprise at each phase for both
a good and a service helps the entrepreneur assess its feasibility (see the discussion on funding at various life
cycle stages in Entrepreneurial Finance and Accounting).

28 "The Growth of Community Supported Agriculture. Morning AgClips. February 7, 2018. https://www.morningagclips.com/the-growth-of-
community-supported-agriculture/
628  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

Figure 14.15 Entrepreneurs and business owners should plan for resource needs and their associated
funding across all phases of the business life cycle. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

Startup Phase

The startup phase is an exciting and exploratory time for the entrepreneur. In this phase, ventures are
defining their identity, growing their customer base, learning more about their target market and how best to
serve it, how to develop the products that will meet demand, and how to hire the people that will make it all
happen. At this time, resources are often scarce, and the entrepreneur may be bootstrapping to keep costs
low. This means that the entrepreneur might be working from home to save on rent and utilities, and may
have only a part-time employee or none at all. The product may be created on a single piece of equipment that
can produce on only a small scale. When a product is first developed, there are also costs to consider. These
include costs of raw materials, production, packaging, and personnel for the production, or what is commonly
known as cost of goods sold. Recall that the cost of goods sold is the accumulated costs of creating a product
(materials, direct labor) or a service (direct labor). At introduction, there is packaging, marketing, promotions,
and shipping, and, if inventory is maintained, warehousing.
Any sales revenue is immediately re-invested into the business with the aim of developing a cycle of growth.
The entrepreneur at this point may forgo a salary while the business takes off and may also wear many hats to
keep the ball rolling instead of hiring employees.
Advisory boards are crucial during this phase, as they bring current information to the table to inform
entrepreneurs of trends, changes, or regulatory adjustments within the industry that could affect their
enterprise. An advisory board is a group of knowledgeable people who aid an organization to make strategic
decisions about the business and its issues without having the power to vote or make any legal decisions.
Having access to key contacts, networks of professionals, and public resources are key to having a current
toolkit from which to draw information to inform decision-making and resource management.
In the case of Christina's Confections, she started baking goods at home with her own oven. She did quite a bit
of bootstrapping and used her savings to buy ingredients, utensils, packaging materials (boxes and
containers), marketing materials (flyers, brochures, business cards), and a basic website, and to pay a part-
time employee. For two years, Christina didn't collect a salary so she could save money for the next phase,

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  629

which is growth.

Growth Phase

During the growth phase, the business has been around for a few years, its identity has been developed, its
customer base has grown, sales are accelerating, and there is a need for more resources to sustain this
growth. Resource needs can take the form of cash to invest in new equipment, new materials, more
marketing, or new personnel. Additional equipment may be needed to help with a higher output, or perhaps
the current location is too small to produce at a larger scale. The location might not be big enough for
customers, or to welcome guests, so a new building may be required. More material might also be needed to
create more products due to higher demand, and more people may need to be hired for production. There
may be a need for management and administration to expand as the organization grows, too. Departments
may now evolve and require processes to coordinate efforts between functions such as production, human
resources, and marketing.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Take a look at this checklist for growing a small business (https://openstax.org/l/52SmallBusCheck) from
   Visa and SCORE. Review the seven steps that address key issues that can affect business growth.

During the growth phase, the entrepreneur might need to change marketing strategy, advertising, production,
or even packaging to keep up with demand.

Let us revisit Christina's Confections bakery. Two years into operations, she needs to identify a larger location
for her bakery. She now has ten employees and has several corporate accounts she services for special events.
She recently partnered with a neighborhood catering company and has been retained to provide the baked
goods for their catered events. These changes mean that Christina will need to obtain funding for the
expansion, locate a space near her existing location, or expand on the location she is currently leasing. Part of
her consideration at this point is determining if it is feasible for her to purchase a location, which would allow
her to gain all the benefits of facility ownership as she often works long hours and needs flexibility for access.
The ideal location would be one in which she could reside above the storefront so she can incorporate living
expenses into her monthly expenses.

Maturity Phase

In maturity, when the product has perhaps saturated the market and there may be lower-cost alternatives, the
entrepreneur has to deal with competition as sales level off and more companies are fighting for customers'
dollars. At this point, spending resources in branding becomes very important, as customers have many
choices available to them and having a reputable image and uniqueness as well as a brand that inspires brand
loyalty helps businesses attract them.

As needs change with this growth, the entrepreneur must reconsider the resources, operationalize how these
are used, and determine what efficiencies may be gained by retaining certain resources and outsourcing
others. Outsourcing is the activity of hiring an outside company or third party to perform a specific task, job,
or process, or to manufacture goods. This is common in human resources, where many companies outsource
their workforce to reduce costs and focus on retaining tasks they excel at.
630                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

For example, if you are a digital marketing company and have several web design projects you are working on,
outsourcing can help you pass some of the most challenging tasks in the design or coding process to another
company, while your venture focuses on the steps in the process that are your company's strengths. Similarly,
another company could seek to use your company's resources if they believe your company has a greater
proficiency for specific tasks.

Decline/Rebirth Phase

During the decline phase of a business, if there is to be rebirth, resources must account for making changes to
the product so it can have its renaissance. In Christina's case, if the traditional bakery industry were to decline,
she could decide to use different ingredients and equipment to make a new kind of cake that uses only fruit
and vegetables, or something completely different that would ensure the business would still be unique
enough to come back to the life cycle. Most companies that have lasted many years in business have gone
through this cycle several times and have been able to reinvent themselves. Small bakeries, clothing chains,
and car manufacturers have been able to "come back" within industries that are easy to fail in due to their
decline. Also, many tech companies such as Apple, Nintendo, and Polaroid were once in the decline phase, but
their ability to shift allowed them to have a rebirth.

Business                       Summary of Resources for Each Phase of Business
  Phase                                                         Resources Needed

Startup     Initial capital, basic equipment, inventory, few employees, facility (home or location), cost of
            goods sold, marketing materials, mentorship
Growth      More capital, additional employees/departments, marketing, additional equipment, inventory
Maturity    Branding, outsourcing
Decline/    New equipment/technology, new products, new patents, equity funding for possible merger
Rebirth

Table 14.6

Human Resources

As you begin your entrepreneurial journey, you will realize that you cannot do everything on your own. You will
need people to help. In the beginning, you may need office assistance or production assistance, and, initially,
they could be part-time hires. As you grow, though, you will realize that you need to have a more sophisticated
understanding of how to build a skilled workforce. Human resources are the people needed to support the
current and future growth of the venture, and help the company increase production and the provision of
services, as well as help with the administrative tasks required to operate the business. Employees add value
to the enterprise in that they help the business generate revenue. Having the proper staff is a constant
process that must have procedures in place and starts with having a plan set out to recruit and hire the people
with the skills that match your venture's needs. In addition to hiring, a small business owner can consider

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  631

getting human resource help through partner firms, outsourcing, and even outside consultants who are not
actual employees of the company but provide support or specialized services for the company. Building
Networks and Foundations discusses building a team. Here, we focus on the essentials of the human
resourcing process.

First, figuring out why you need the help is an important step in assessing the needs of the company. Usually,
entrepreneurs will need some sort of part-time help managing an office, manufacturing a product, or
producing a service. The need and the outcome must be greater than the cost of hiring someone. This
assessment ensures that current revenue can cover the addition of another person's compensation. For
example, you may need to hire a part-time assistant who would cost $15,000 to $30,000 a year. If having that
part-time assistant frees you up to sell $50,000 of product, then it is financially worth hiring that person. In
addition, if you hire a salesperson at $40,000 to $50,000 per year, including benefits, and they sell $100,000 a
year for you, then it is worth hiring that person because they are generating profit. Keep in mind that many
entrepreneurs start with virtual assistants, bookkeepers, designers, web developers, or managers who can
vary in price and only work when you need them. Using sites such as UpWork to hire freelancers to cover a
portion of your business allows you access to dozens to hundreds of choices to find a resource that works for
you, often at lower costs than hiring someone on staff.

Once you establish that hiring new employees is a need and a smart financial choice, you need to create a job
description to attract the right candidates. This contains a statement of the employee's tasks and
responsibilities, the processes used, and the desired outcomes. It will also include the parameters of how the
job will be done, the environment, the hours, and the skills and experience necessary to perform well.

In preparation for determining your hiring needs and creating job descriptions, the following steps will guide
you on topics and decisions to consider. After determining your resource needs, the remainder of the steps
can occur in varying order depending on your specific situation.

Step 1: Determine Resourcing Needs

Understanding the needs of your business in terms of job functions is the first step to hiring. Defining the
work that needs to be done based on your business strategies can help guide your business needs. If you are
a business consultant and need help managing the office, you can make a list of all the needs of the upkeep of
the office. This can include answering phones, setting appointments, attending customers, making copies,
paying bills, and ordering materials.

You will also need to determine whether you need full-time or part-time people, and what the budget is to
clarify the direction of your hiring. Making a list of the tasks or goals for the business and estimating the time
that it will take to finish them can help decide to hire a part-time or full-time person.

Keep in mind that needs may change, so even if you made a plan, the execution may vary, and you may need
to make changes. By determining your costs and the benefits of those costs, you can figure out how many
people you can bring on to accomplish the goals set in your business plan or marketing plan. If your plan calls
for having sales of $100,000 the first year, you might want to hire one part-time employee at $25,000 who can
help you achieve that goal. If your goal is to have sales over $1 million, then you likely might need more
employees.

Figuring out what skills and experience your team should have is a good starting point for developing the job
description, and setting the salaries and benefits you will offer. Once you set your descriptions and post them,
whether online, at a job fair, or in a newspaper, you will see the applications coming in. If your industry calls
for more sophisticated experience and skills, you may also want to hire a staffing agency to help you with the
632  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

hiring.

Step 2: Hire a Team

Hiring a team of employees can be a daunting task, but if you first focus on understanding the needs of your
business and the amount of time required to perform those tasks, this step will be a lot easier (Figure 14.16). It
involves setting up the job description, deciding on a salary and benefits to pay, posting it on various job
websites such as Indeed.com, careerbuilder.com, or monster.com, and any industry job portal that may be
important to reach qualified people. Oftentimes professional networking--such as online sites like LinkedIn or
local groups like your chamber of commerce--may result in additional leads. The alumni center at your local
university or community college may also be a place to connect with qualified candidates. Technology schools
or trade schools are excellent sources to find skilled workers looking for that first full-time job after earning
certification or licensing.

Figure 14.16 Hiring the right employees for your business will ensure that they will help you start and grow
the company. (credit: "job interview hiring hand shake" by "Tumisu"/Pixabay, CC0)

Once posted, you must decide how long to advertise the position. Also consider that the interview process can
take a few days, weeks, or months, depending on how many people you are hiring and the quality of your
prospects. If you are satisfied with the process, then you select the employee(s) and inform them of your
selection. But before you extend an offer, you might want to conduct a background check first and then offer
and welcome them into your team. Conducting background checks, including criminal checks, should be a
routine procedure in the hiring process. A formal job offer should never be made until the results of the
background checks have been received and reviewed. If a potential candidate accepts a job offer and you are
then required to withdraw that offer because results of a background check disqualify the candidate, many
problems will be unnecessarily created.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                          633

LINK TO LEARNING

Before conducting any interviews, you should be aware of which questions are legal and which are not
legal (https://openstax.org/l/52LeglInterview) to ask in an interview. Minnesota State Colleges and
Universities website offers a repository of appropriate questions.

Step 3: Create an Employee Handbook

If you're starting your business from scratch with no sales, it is likely that you will only need one or two part-
time people to help you with your business. An employee handbook at this time may not be necessary;
however, once you have ten or more employees, and your business begins growing, you will want to create
company employment policies and rules for all employees to follow. You could also create this handbook at
the inception of your business. This handbook is a road map that may include rules about how to act as
representatives of the business, attire expectations, hours required to work, proper etiquette, legal and
regulatory compliance for full- or part-time employees, and sanctions for when these rules are not followed.
Most companies today also need to create policies around social media use and statements made online via
social media. Listing any benefits such as earned vacation, paid time off for jury duty, holiday pay, personal
time off, and price discounts for employees and family members should also be included. Sometimes in filings
for unemployment, the state workforce commission will require a copy of the employee handbook to help
determine what the former employee is entitled to receive. Having written policies in a handbook and
following them can save a lot of time and protect against conflicts with employees.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Some companies have begun to create funny and memorable handbooks (https://openstax.org/l/
   52Handbook) to entice employees to read them and understand them.

Step 4: Secure Independent Contractors, if Necessary

As covered in Building Networks and Foundations, sometimes looking outside of your business to get help can
be a good idea while building or growing your venture. Independent contractors are people who provide
work without being part of the payroll for the contracting business. They may perform work similar to
employees, but they are not employees of the company; therefore, the business does not have to pay for
benefits or withhold taxes. However, these workers set their own time for work, can come and go as they need
to, use their own equipment to complete assigned tasks, and can perform the work in their own way, as a
service provided. You may want to consult with an accounting expert in tax issues before beginning work with
independent contractors.
634                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

     LINK TO LEARNING

     Take a look at this checklist to determine whether a human resource should be considered an employee
     or an independent contractor (https://openstax.org/l/52ContractCheck) from the IRS. The distinction
     carries important legal implications, and the burden is on the employer to make the correct classification.
     Failure to classify workers correctly can be an expensive mistake.

Step 5: Establish Benefits

When designing a position and hiring people, another important consideration is the benefit plan you will
offer. Common benefits include contributing to or providing health insurance costs, paid vacation time and
sick days, providing access to 401K retirement accounts and contributing to them on the employee's behalf,
and insurance--including life, long- and short-term disability, and accident insurance. In addition, you might
want to offer stock options to provide employees with a piece of your business and entice them to work for a
company that they own. Each of these benefits is subject to state or federal regulations, or both. Seeking
advice from professionals on these issues would be a valuable use of the entrepreneur's time and money.
Getting these employee benefits wrong can doom a company quickly.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Visit the Society for Human Resource Management site for examples of benefits and how to implement
   them (https://openstax.org/l/52Benefits) to learn more.

Once employees are on board, there is an ongoing process of training, promoting, and managing them, as
well as developing relationships that will be key to the success of the enterprise. In the evaluation of human
resources, you may need to consider these questions:

  · Are the skill levels that I need available in the region where I plan to operate?
  · What is the prevailing wage for the human resources I need?
  · How much can I afford to pay employees at this phase in my business?
  · Are independent contractors the best option or are employees a better fit?
  · Will I need to provide ongoing formal training or maintain certifications or licensures for my staff or are

      employees responsible for these items themselves?
  · How can I be competitive with other business to attract the talent I need?
  · Will I need to provide benefits such as vacation, retirement plans, health insurance, or life insurance?

Educational, Support, and Mentorship Resources

Entrepreneurs need to be mindful not only of the resources needed to operate the business, but also of the
resources needed to support them in their challenging role of being an entrepreneur. Ongoing education and
mentorship are key supports. When entrepreneurs are asked what topics they need learn more about when

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                      635

starting and growing a business, often they request more educational support in management, leadership,
communication, financial, and marketing education. Many owners are experts at their craft but don't know
how to manage the business itself and must take courses or earn certificates to gain that "how to run a
business" knowledge. Local chambers of commerce and other organizations provide training sessions,
workshops, and educational programs in marketing, communication, management, and leadership. Other
needs include finance, accounting, and software use. The SBA has a learning center where business owners
can learn about many topics from how to write a business plan to the legal requirements and financing
options that apply to their venture.[29] One important topic they address is digital marketing, a training most
entrepreneurs need in this day and age. The Small Business Development Center and SCORE are organizations
that also provide myriad workshops at no cost or for a very small fee.

Although some entrepreneurs do have business degrees and a few have advanced degrees, they still need to
keep abreast of trends and changes in their industry. They have to continually educate themselves through
various forms of research, by attending conferences, and through programs available through the chambers
and other organizational networks. Maintaining a subscription to a major industry newspaper or trade
magazine can be extremely beneficial. Another common trend is for starting entrepreneurs to work in the
industry of their business to acquire the skills and knowledge necessary before they embark on their journey.
For example, if you want to open a digital marketing business, you might first gain some experience by
working for a digital marketing company prior to opening the business. However, you should make certain
you abide by any noncompete or similar clauses in your employment contracts.

As we have seen throughout the text, being an entrepreneur is no easy task. It requires many hours to start
and grow a business, not to mention the daily stressors from challenges that arise from interactions with
employees, customers, and suppliers. High-performing entrepreneurs must have a good support system to
help them overcome the ups and downs that owning a business might bring.

Having friends and family members who are supportive of the venture is important because these are people
the owner trusts with personal and work issues on a daily basis. Their support is key to the success of the
entrepreneur as they listen and understand the frustrations of being in business and may also help with the
business itself. By the same token, the entrepreneur needs to spend time with friends and family to bring
work-life balance to their lives.

Having mentors who have gone through similar issues and can listen and advise is a great advantage to
entrepreneurs. Mentors act as counselors to the business and are genuinely interested and happy to help the
business owner. Most mentors have been through similar challenges and have great knowledge and passion
about the industry in which they work. SCORE can be a strong network for finding a mentor. This program is a
partner of the SBA and provides free education and mentors to business owners. The mentors are volunteers
who have many years of experience and now want to help other businesses for free. You can go to their
website (https://www.score.org/) and type in your zip code or industry to find a mentor near you. Doreen
Graves is an example of a marketing mentor in northeast Mississippi who feels that she is not only a mentor to
her mentees, but a support system and confidante, as they share with her their most personal stories of
struggle, family values, and business dreams. She feels fortunate to have the power to help them.[30]

29 US Small Business Administration. "Learning Center." n.d. https://www.sba.gov/learning-center
30 Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE). https://www.score.org
636                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

     WHAT CAN YOU DO?

     Take a SCORE Course

     Go to SCORE (Senior Core of Retired Executives) and take a look at Become a SCORE Volunteer
     (https://www.score.org/volunteer). It outlines four ways to donate your time:

       · Mentor: Offer confidential business mentoring services, either in person or online
       · Subject matter expert: Provide focused knowledge based on your professional skills or industry
       · Workshop presenter: Lead local workshops, seminars and events to help entrepreneurs meet their

           goals and achieve success
       · Chapter support role: Share your skills in marketing, tech, finance, fundraising and more to help

           expand the outreach of SCORE
     Which of these roles do you see yourself fitting into some day and why?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  637

     Key Terms

advisory board group of advisors that helps an organization make strategic decisions about the business,
     and brings certain knowledge and experience that can bring a new perspective on issues without having
     the actual authority to vote or govern

copyright grants the creator of a work the exclusive right to reproduce the work, typically for a specified
     period of time

decision tree flowchart diagram used to explore the outcomes of different decisions
economic factors inflation, interest, employment, and currency exchange, rates, (among many other

     factors) that impact the business owner's pricing of goods or services, the demand for such services, and
     the cost of production
funding sources monetary resources used by the entrepreneur in the operation of the initial startup and
     early business
human resources people hired by the entrepreneur to perform various duties in the business, provide
     customer service, or produce the goods
independent contractors (also, freelancer) people or businesses that provide work similar to an employee
     without being part of the payroll for the contracting business, and who pay their own taxes and pay for
     their own benefits
intangible resources assets that cannot be seen, touched, or felt, such as intellectual property, patents,
     designs, and processes
line of credit lending of funds in exchange for a promise to repay
outsourcing hiring an outside company or third party to perform a specific task, job, or process, or to
     manufacture goods
PEST framework that can be used to distinguish political, economic, sociocultural, and technological factors
     influencing access to needed resources
political factors stem from changes in politics, such as the policies of a new presidential administration or
     congressional legislation, as well as of state and local offices
pre-launch costs cost of all the resources needed to open the business to the public
quota specific number of units allowed into a country; sometimes quotas are limited to one source, such as
     one country, and sometimes the limit is placed on aggregate quantity regardless of source(s)
resource dependence theory (RDT) model creating networks with business partners through mergers,
     vertical integration, joint ventures, or engaging in joint political activities to slow dependency among
     member groups
service mark word, phrase, symbol, or graphic that identifies the origin or source of a service
sociocultural factors changes in how society is moving and the direction of that movement as it relates to a
     customer base and potential new markets
tangible resources assets that have a physical form as they can be seen, touched, and felt
tariffs taxes or duties that are added to imported goods from another nation
technological factors technological equipment and tools the enterprise needs to be sure it operates
     efficiently
trademark registration that provides the owner the ability to use a name, symbol, jingle, or character in
     conjunction with a specific product or service, and prevents others from using those same symbols to sell
     their products
638                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

     Summary

14.1 Types of Resources
Determining which resources a venture needs is essential to its success. Assets are types of property that
benefit the person or company in possession of them. They can be tangible or intangible. Tangible resources
can be seen, touched, and felt. They may include raw materials, land, facilities, buildings, machinery,
computers, supplies, furniture, information technology, and vehicles.

Intangible resources cannot be seen, touched, or felt. They include intellectual property such as designs,
formulas, art, written work, brands, and inventions that can be protected by patents, trademarks, and
copyrights.

Entrepreneurs oftentimes have novel ideas about how to provide a service or how to create a better product.
These ideas are important to safeguard so other competitors don't copy those same characteristics of a
product, process, machine, piece of writing, or any other of the works cited earlier. A way to protect them is to
ensure that you have a patent, trademark, or copyright so others cannot benefit from your work. It is always
beneficial to do a check before applying for one of the protections and make sure that the invention hasn't
been created before. Searching the USPTO website and hiring an attorney will ensure you are the first one to
register your idea and help you through the lengthy and often expensive process of protecting a new idea.

Funding sources are essential to starting and scaling a business. These include an entrepreneur's own savings,
bank loans, venture capitalists, angel investors, crowdfunding, and friends and family. It is important to
consider the pros and cons of your financing options in relation to your resource needs in order to plan for
short- and long-term needs.

14.2 Using the PEST Framework to Assess Resource Needs
Business owners need to know what resources they need before launching. The PEST framework can help you
become aware of outside forces that affect the procurement of resources you need to succeed. PEST looks at
the political, economic, sociocultural, and technological factors that affect resource costs and availability.
Different businesses require different resources, so going through a checklist of basic needs, finding the
associated costs, splitting them into one-time costs and ongoing costs, and adding them up will ensure the
entrepreneur is aware and ready to document for an investor or bank the resources needed.

14.3 Managing Resources over the Venture Life Cycle
The life cycle of the business requires resource allocation and planning at each stage. These stages include the
startup phase, growth phase, maturity phase, and decline/rebirth phase. There are instances where a business
has failed because the owner failed to re-assess shifting resource needs caused by changes in the marketplace
and the overall environment. Research is an ongoing process, and keeping an eye on the external
environment allows a business to be able to shift on time.

Resource dependence theory (RDT) is a model that explores creating networks with other companies through
mergers, vertical integration, and joint ventures. RDT can help counteract the effects of competing with each
other by optimizing collaboration.

Human resources include the labor that produces a product or service, and provides administrative support
and customer service. Having good employees adds value to the enterprise because they help generate sales
and profit. Education in marketing, management, and leadership are important topics to engage in as a
business owner as well as having personal support from mentors.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning  639

     Review Questions

1. What types of tangible, intangible, and funding resources exist? Give examples of each.
2. What is an example of a tangible resource and an intangible resource?
3. What is the PEST tool? How can entrepreneurs use it to their advantage before launching a business?
4. Why is it important to figure out costs before launching a business?
5. What are examples of costs that must be taken into consideration before opening a business?
6. What is the difference between one-time costs and monthly costs? How much should an entrepreneur have
of monthly costs in advance?
7. Define the resource dependence theory.
8. What is the life cycle of a business and how do resource needs and their associate costs shift over time?

     Discussion Questions

1. Discuss how a small business can be bootstrapped at its inception. What kind of costs can the entrepreneur
avoid or lower with tenacity and sweat equity?
2. If you were to start a small business, what would it be and what kind of resources would you need to get
started?
3. Which do you think are more difficult to protect: tangible or intangible resources and why?
4. Discuss how political factors can impact a business.
5. What are some examples of sociocultural factors that may affect a business?
6. Explain how economic factors can increase the price of a product.
7. When is it a good time to hire an independent contractor and when is it a good time to hire an on-staff
employee?
8. Explain how resource dependence theory helps a venture grow.
9. Discuss the steps required in hiring new employees. What sorts of factors must you think of before you hire
a new team?
10. Discuss the importance of having personal resources, such as a strong support system, when starting a
venture.

     Case Questions
640  Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

1. Christina has always wanted to open a small neighborhood bakery, Christina's Confections. She is currently
working out of her home, earning income making cakes and baked goods for weddings, parties, and other
special occasions. She would like to find a location for her bakery, as she believes there is a market, and she
would like to expand her business to a retail operation. She has some money saved and her credit is good, but
she is concerned that obtaining a loan will be challenging. Sales have been consistently increasing, and she
now has one part-time employee, but she thinks that with a retail location she will need to hire an additional
two people on a part-time basis. If she does hire staff, she will need to consider the cost of labor, how many
hours she would need each of these staff, and the tasks she would need them to perform at this stage in her
business operation. As a result, she will need to consider their wages as a cost of labor on top of all the other
supplies, insurance, rent, advertising, point-of-sale equipment, and various other costs she did not have when
she was operating out of her home. She needs to figure out how she will make money and how she will
finance or pay for her new start-up costs in the retail location.

Christina needs to evaluate all the resources she would need for this enterprise and create a checklist so that
she can determine if the time is right for her to take this important step with her bakery. As she progresses
through the process, the questions get more specific and the answers become much more detailed.

Review Christina's resource needs and make a list of them.

2. Going back to this case question on Christina's Confections, go over the list of resources that you created.
Now that you have additional information, determine if that is a good list; if not, add or delete items that are
necessary for her to run her business. What additional resources did you come up with? What can she do to
ensure she can cover all her expenses?

3. Consider Christina's Confectionaries bakery example and focus on the maturity phase of her business.
Describe how Christina can develop her brand to distinguish her from other bakeries and what kind of costs
she can expect to incur while doing this.

    Suggested Resources

14.1 Types of Resources
The Business Journals company profiles: https://www.bizjournals.com/profiles/company
Circleup: http://circleup.com
Exilend: https://www.exilend.com
Fundable: http://fundable.com
Indiegogo: http://indiegogo.com
Kickstarter: http://kickstarter.com
LendingKarma: http://www.lendingkarma.com
LoanBack: http://loanback.com
NewsLink: http://www.newslink.org
Society of Human Resources Management: http://shrm.org
US Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov/
US Securities and Exchange Commission Regulatory Actions: https://www.sec.gov/
rules.shtml

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning                                                             641

Trade Show News Network: http://www.tsnn.com
US Census Bureau: http://www.census.gov
Copyright Office: https://www.copyright.gov/
US Chamber of Commerce: https://www.uschamber.com/
US Patent and Trademark Office: https://www.uspto.gov/
ZimpleMoney: http://www.zimplemoney.com
SEC Information on crowdfunding portals: https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/tmcompliance/

  fpregistrationguide.htm
Link to SEC (FINRA) crowdfunding portals: https://www.finra.org/about/funding-portals-we-regulate
New York University, Stern School of Business: https://www.stern.nyu.edu/
Link to data on margins by sector: http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/New_Home_Page/datafile/

  margin.html
Loopnet: https://www.loopnet.com/
Bizstats: https://www.bizstats.com/

14.2 Using the PEST Framework to Assess Resource Needs
SBA calculation of startup costs: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/calculate-your-

  startup-costs#section-header-6
US Department of Labor: https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/statistics/wagesearnings
https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/5-small-business-start-up-costs-options.html

14.3 Managing Resources over the Venture Life Cycle
Referrals and Associations
Tradeshows: http://www.tsnn.com/
Industry research publications: http://www.newslink.org
National Association of Women Business Owners: https://www.nawbo.org/
University and Organizational Resources
Small Business Development Centers: https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/osbdc/about-us
New York University, Stern School of Business: https://www.stern.nyu.edu/
Governmental and Other Agencies:
https:///www.bls.gov
https://www.census.gov/
https://www.sba.gov/
https://www.ready.gov/business/implementation/resource
https://www.usa.gov/laws-and-regulations
https://www.sba.gov/video-series/2_minute_video_series#363481
642                                                                               Chapter 14 Fundamentals of Resource Planning

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
    15

              Next Steps

Figure 15.1 Consider the importance of having a source of light when the sky is dark, or when disaster strikes
and electricity is lost, or for some people, when the infrastructure for electricity doesn't exist. Andrea Sreshta
and Ana Stork identified this situation as an opportunity to create a new product that provides light when the
infrastructure does not. (credit: modification of work by LuminAID)

 Chapter Outline

        15.1 Launching Your Venture
        15.2 Making Difficult Business Decisions in Response to Challenges
        15.3 Seeking Help or Support
        15.4 Now What? Serving as a Mentor, Consultant, or Champion
        15.5 Reflections: Documenting the Journey

      Introduction

   "How can you know what you're capable of if you don't embrace the unknown?"--Esmeralda Santiago
   In 2010, two graduate students participated in a project to assist post-earthquake relief efforts for Haitians.
   These two students focused on the need for light. For most people, we turn on a light switch and seldom ever
   consider how important light is to our safety and extending our sight beyond dependence on the sun for
   daylight. Andrea Sreshta and Ana Stork analyzed the problems people have after a disaster and noticed that
   no one addressed the challenges of lack of light. Recognizing the opportunity to solve this problem, these two
   social entrepreneurs created a reusable solar powered light source, LuminAID.
   Now that you have learned how to create a business plan and understand more about entrepreneurship, we
   turn to the challenges that many entrepreneurs face as they start their venture, with advice to help you
   overcome them and consider your next steps beyond the current venture's successes.
   In this chapter, we consider some of the challenges faced by entrepreneurs along the journey, identify reasons
   why these occur, and discuss what we can do to avoid these challenges through proactive problem solving and
644                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

understanding biases and habits that get in the way of our success. Some of the themes in this chapter include
being open-minded, possessing a willingness to re-evaluate and adapt to new information, and avoiding
mistakes through learning from past contributors to the field of entrepreneurship.

 15.1 Launching Your Venture

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Explain the importance of creating and discussing the vision statement
  · Determine the documents necessary for managing risks
  · Describe company culture and the purpose of a code of conduct
  · Summarize how to outline and schedule the operational steps of the launch

The big day has arrived. Your opportunity recognition process noted that your idea solves a significant
problem or need, you double-checked that the target market is large enough for potential profitability, you
have a method to reach this target market, you have a passion to start this company, and you found resources
to support the start-up. Knowing that you analyzed and addressed these topics, you now need to consider
some of the more sensitive topics regarding the agreements within your team. Many entrepreneurs overlook
the issues discussed here or act on them in a generic manner instead of fitting them to the specific needs of
the venture. This lack of due diligence can be detrimental to the success of the business. The advice presented
here can help you avoid those same mistakes.

To protect the interests of all parties involved at launch, the team should develop several important
documents, such as a founders' agreement, nondisclosure and noncompete forms, and a code of conduct.
Before these are drafted, the team should ensure the venture's vision statement is agreed upon. (See
Entrepreneurial Vision and Goals for a discussion around creating a vision statement.) The entrepreneurship
team needs to be in complete agreement on the vision of the venture before they can successfully create the
founders' agreement. If some team members have an interest in creating a lifestyle business (a venture that
provides an income that replaces other types of employment), while other team members want to harvest the
venture with significant returns, there is a clash between these expectations. An angel investor will also have a
strong opinion on the vision for the venture.

Founder's Agreement, Nondisclosure Agreement, and Noncompete Agreement

Honest and open discussions between the entrepreneurial team members, including your angel investor if an
angel investor is part of your initial funding, must take place before opening the venture. These frank
discussions need to include a founders' agreement as well as the identified vision for the venture. The
founders' agreement should describe how individual contributions are valued and fit into the compensation
plan and should consider and answer these questions:

  · Will the entrepreneurial team members receive a monthly compensation?
  · Is there a vesting plan with defined timelines aligned with equity percentages?
  · What happens if a team member decides to leave the venture before an exit event? How will that team

      member be compensated, if at all?

Discussing the entrepreneurial team members' expectations avoids the problem of an entrepreneurial team
member expecting a large equity stake in the company for a short-term commitment to the venture, and other

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  645

misguided expectations. Such problems can be avoided by addressing the following questions:

  · What activities and responsibilities are expected from each team member, and what is the process or
      action when individual overstep their authority?

  · Is there an evaluation period during which the team members discuss each other's performance? If so,
      how is that discussion managed, and is there a formal process?

  · What happens if a team member fails to deliver on expected actions, or if an unexpected life event
      occurs?

The founders' agreement should also outline contingency plans if the business does not continue. The
following questions help define those next steps and need to be answered prior to opening the venture:

  · If the venture is unsuccessful, how will the dissolution of the venture be conducted?
  · What happens to the assets, and how are the liabilities paid?
  · How is the decision made to liquidate the venture?
  · What happens to the originally identified opportunity? Does a team member have access to that idea, but

      with a different team, or implemented using a different business model?

Once the venture opens, discussing these topics becomes more complicated because the entrepreneurial
team is immersed in various start-up activities, and new information affects their thoughts on these issues.
Along with these topics, the founders' agreement should also state the legal form of ownership, division of
ownership (this refers to the division of equity at either the next round of financing, or harvesting of the
company), as well as the buyout, or buyback clause. (See Entrepreneurial Journey and Pathways for a
discussion on the life cycle stages of a venture, including end stages of harvesting, transition, and
reincarnation of the business.)

The buyback clause addresses the situations in which a team member exits the venture prior to the next
financing round or harvesting due to internal disputes with team members, illness, death, or other
circumstances, clearly stating compensation and profit distribution (with consideration of what is reinvested
into the venture). Discussing these topics provides agreement between all team members about how to
address these types of situations. The buyback clause should also include a dispute resolution process with
agreement on how the dispute solution is implemented. Identifying exactly how these items are handled
within the founders' agreement prevents future conflicts and even legal disputes.

If the entrepreneurship team includes an angel investor, the angel investor typically has the final say in these
questions. In the best possible scenario, the angel investor has experience creating a founders' agreement
and can provide valuable insights into working through this document. One common approach to creating this
document, given the angel investor's available time, is for the entrepreneurship team to discuss and agree on
the final document, then have the angel investor review the document for final approval. Making Difficult
Business Decisions in Response to Challenges will help in finalizing your founders' agreement.

After completing the formal vision statement and the founders' agreement, you might want to have an
attorney evaluate the documents. This checkpoint can identify gaps or decisions that were not stated clearly.
After receiving the examined documents back, the team should once again review the documents for
agreement. If everyone is satisfied with the documents, each entrepreneurship team member should sign the
document and receive a copy. If, later, the entrepreneurship team decides a change needs to be made to
either the vision statement or the founders' agreement, an addendum can be created, again with all parties
agreeing to any changes.

Two other formal documents your team might want to consider include a nondisclosure agreement and a
646                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

noncompete agreement. These documents can be applied to all employees, including the startup team, with
consideration of extending to other contributors such as contractual personnel. A nondisclosure agreement
agrees to refrain from disclosing information about the venture. Topics that might be included in this
document include trade secrets, key accounts, or any other information of high value to the venture or
potentially useful to a competitor. A noncompete agreement states that the person signing the agreement
will not work for a competing organization while working for the venture, and generally for a set length of
time after leaving the venture. Often, this time period is one year, but it can be longer depending on the know-
how or intellectual property the exiting team member has.

Company Culture and Code of Conduct

In conjunction with these formal documents, the founding team should determine the culture they would like
to build for their venture. Ideally, the organization's company culture is made up of the behaviors and beliefs
that support the success of the organization. For example, when you walk into a business, is there a bustle of
noise and activity, or is the business calm and restrained? This impression results from the organization's
culture. We could compare the difference between walking into a high-end jewelry store and walking into a
fast food restaurant. Both businesses have distinctly different cultures. If the venture is highly dynamic with
fast-paced decisions and constant change, then the culture should support this type of venture. Perhaps the
team wants to create a work hard, play hard culture. In that case, standards that support ad hoc team creation
for impromptu discussions should be encouraged, rather than setting up a bureaucratic culture that requires
approval of all meetings and deliberation of decisions prior to action. Many tech companies support a work
hard, play hard culture. This culture is reinforced with open office spaces that provide opportunities to
collaborate with colleagues. Or perhaps ping pong tables and kitchens are provided to encourage interaction.
Even the hours of operation contribute to culture creation by either encouraging employees to set their own
hours or restricting work hours through regulated entry. In contrast, a more bureaucratically structured
environment may fit a venture whose success relies upon compliance with external regulations and the use of
highly sensitive or private information. An example of a bureaucratic culture aligns with many financial
institutions. The culture within a bank conveys security of our deposited funds; we want a bank to have
processes and systems in place that reinforce that we can trust the bank with our finances.

The culture-defining process should include the entrepreneurship team's creation of a code of conduct. Some
organizations develop a code of conduct that includes guiding principles, while other organizations create
detailed descriptions of what is acceptable and what isn't acceptable. Your venture's code of conduct should fit
with your venture's vision, the culture desired, and the entrepreneurship team's values. Codes of conduct
should be created as documents that include a sensitivity to people within the company as well as the greater
community. A code of conduct addresses the values that the organization supports, as well as ethical
considerations. The purpose of a code of conduct is to help guide employee actions to align with the desired
behavior. Including uniquely specific examples that align with the specific venture, can further communicate
the desired behaviors. There are many varieties of codes of conduct; the main point is to create a code that
supports the values and behaviors that you want to advance throughout your organization. Figure 15.2 and
Figure 15.3 show two approaches to developing a code of conduct that fits the company's culture and vision.
The first example might be used by an advocacy-based venture that desires a principle-based approach to
guiding employee behaviors through a code of conduct that provides general guidelines, rather than a more
rule-based approach as presented in the second example. These two examples highlight the importance of
creating a code of conduct that fits the beliefs and culture that you want to encourage within your venture.

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps                                                                                 647

Figure 15.2 This sample code of conduct demonstrates how a code of conduct needs to fit the specific
organization's needs. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Figure 15.3 This code of conduct addresses more traditional and general topics than in the first example. In
all cases, the code of conduct needs to address your unique venture including awareness of how the code of
conduct aligns with the leadership and culture that you want to develop.[1] (attribution: Copyright Rice
University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Earlier, we discussed the importance of the lead entrepreneur taking the initiative to discover the investor's

1 Some language adapted from the U.S. Department of State Sexual Harassment Policy: https://www.state.gov/s/ocr/c14800.htm.
648  Chapter 15 Next Steps

business knowledge and learning about the investor's previous experience in funding an entrepreneurial
venture. The code of conduct is another area that entrepreneurial teams frequently skip over by accepting a
generic code of conduct rather than recognizing that there are a multitude of topics, phrases, and principles
that should be uniquely designed to fit the venture. These two examples demonstrate the vastly different
topics addressed within a code of conduct as evidence for why your code of conduct must fit your intentions
for how you will conduct business and support the success of your venture.
These preparatory documents should be personalized to align with the entrepreneurial team and desired
behaviors that support the success of the venture. Although standard language and forms addressing these
topics are available online, these generic models aren't intended to meet your unique venture's needs or the
entrepreneurial team's needs. Taking the time to discuss and prepare these documents pays off in well-crafted
documents and aligns the entrepreneurship teams' vison, goals, and dreams for their venture.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Google's code of conduct

   Review Google's code of conduct (https://openstax.org/l/52CodeConduct) as you think about developing
   your own code of conduct. What do you like about Google's code of conduct? What would you change?
   How does this example help you in creating a code of conduct for your venture?

Operational Steps to Launch

The next action is outlining the operational steps in the venture creation process. A good approach is to create
a chart that identifies how you should proceed. The goal in creating this chart is to recognize what actions
need to be taken first. For example, if you need a convection oven for your business, what is the timeline
between ordering and receiving the oven? If you need ten employees to manually prepare and package your
product, how long will it take to interview and hire each person? According to Glassdoor, the hiring process
took 23 days in 2014 and appears to be lengthening in time as organizations become more aware of the
importance of hiring the right person.[2] What about training? Will your employees need training on your
product or processes before starting the venture? These necessary outcomes need to be identified and then
tracked backwards from the desired start date to include the preparatory actions that support the success of
the business. You've probably heard the phrase that timing is everything. Not only do entrepreneurs need to
be concerned about finding the right time to start the venture, they also need the right timing to orchestrate
the start-up of the venture.
Below is a sample Gantt chart, a method to track a list of tasks or activities aligned with time intervals. You
can use this tool to help identify and schedule the operational steps that need to be completed to launch the
venture. One approach to creating a Gantt chart is for each team member to independently create a list of
operational activities or tasks required to start the venture that fall under their area of involvement. Then the
team can create a master list of activities to discuss: This helps clarify who is contributing to or owning each
task. Next, have all team members create their own Gantt chart based on their task list: That is, the time
required for each task should be spelled out, including steps that must happen sequentially (when one task

2 Glassdoor Team. "How Long Should the Interview Process Take?" June 18, 2015. https://www.glassdoor.com/blog/long-interview-process/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  649

cannot be started until another step is complete). Once again, bring all team members together to create one
master Gantt chart. This will help ensure that dependencies from member to member are accounted for in the
planning. These contingencies and dependencies need to be identified and accommodated for in the master
schedule. For example, in Figure 15.4, we see that Mike Smith cannot perform system testing until Sam Watson
has developed the system modules, and in turn, that task can't be done until Mike Smith has documented the
current systems. After completing the chart, agree on assignments of responsibility to follow through on the
activities, based on the timelines from the Gantt chart.

Figure 15.4 This sample Gantt chart demonstrates how activities are listed and tracked over time to assist in
organizing and planning a sequence of activities. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

See the Suggested Resources for more information on how to use a Gantt chart to assist in tracking the
actions needed to support the start-up of your venture and to organize each action based on your necessary
timelines. You might want to reach out to other sources to find examples of how other entrepreneurs worked
650  Chapter 15 Next Steps

through their operational start-up steps.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   This TED Talk features Paul Tasner (https://openstax.org/l/52PTasnerTED) sharing how he found himself
   changing his career at the age of 66, reinforcing the idea that the world of entrepreneurship is open to
   all people regardless of age, race, background, health, or geographic location. In this presentation, he
   references a variety of activities he needed to experience in order to understand the process of starting
   his venture. Regardless of what we learned in our past experiences, launching a new venture includes
   new experiences and decisions.
   After watching this video, do you have some ideas regarding starting a new venture around the idea of
   senior entrepreneurs? How could you support this group or build a network that creates a community of
   support for this large population?

Launch Considerations

Sage advice in launching the new venture is to quickly recognize when you don't have the answer or
information to make the best decisions. In the early stage of launching the venture, the level of uncertainty is
high, as is the need for agility and spontaneity. Even identifying the actual moment when the venture becomes
a new venture can be difficult to determine. Should the venture be recognized as a new venture after receiving
the necessary licenses or tax identification number, or when the first sale occurs, or when funds are first
invested, or by some other method?

It is also important to keep in mind the end goal of the venture, often referred to as "begin with the end in
mind." For example, many highly successful ventures never earn a dollar in sales. Depending on the
entrepreneurial team's vision and the business model selected, the venture could be highly valuable from a
harvest, or sale of the venture, perspective. Frequently, this decision is dictated by the angel investor. These
people frequently started their own venture, harvested the venture, and as a result have funds available to
invest in other new ventures. In most cases, the angel investor expects to cash out of the venture at some
point in the future. These are investors who are not interested in holding a long-term equity position but
rather expect to grow the venture into a position where another company buys out the venture. This buyout is
also known as the harvesting of the venture and the point at which the angel investor receives a percentage of
the harvested dollar sale to cover the equity stake in the new venture. Because of this pattern, entrepreneurs
are often advised to "begin with the end in mind" when launching a new venture. If the goal is to sell the
venture to another company, we want to identify that company before launching the venture. Of course, at
this point, this is only a desire or hope, as you cannot require or expect another company to have an interest in
your new venture. But you can design the new venture to align with this end goal by making decisions that
support this end goal.

Consider the example of YouTube, a startup with zero dollars in sales but with a harvest price of $1.65 billion in
stock from Google. The startup team, former PayPal colleagues, understood that the technology was being
developed for video searching and recognized that creating a platform to house video-sharing would be
desired by companies such as Google at some point in the future. Consider the tight timeline between 2005
when YouTube began supporting video sharing, and the harvest of YouTube to Google in 2006, 21 months

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps                                                                                           651

later. This example clearly points to the importance of beginning with the end in mind.

   ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

   A New Greeting Card Concept

   Is there a connection between ship architecture and greeting cards? Most people would quickly say there
   isn't any connection between these two disparate ideas. However, Wombi Rose and John Wise studied
   ship architecture, with Wise moving on to a boat-building start-up in Louisiana when they reconnected
   and decided to start a new venture. While traveling in Vietnam, the two ship architects came across the
   paper-cutting process of kirigami, similar to origami, but rather than folding paper, the paper is cut. The
   two engineers realized that the same design software used in building ships could also be used in
   creating these three-dimensional paper objects. Despite the declining greeting card industry's sales,
   these two entrepreneurs decided to enter the greeting card industry with a new approach to greeting
   cards. Pop-up kirigami art folds flat until the envelope opens, and a kirigami object pops up. Lovepop,
   the name of their greeting card line, has grown to 30 employees and $6.7 million in revenue.[3]
   What evidence is there that Rose and Wise followed the concept of "begin with the end in mind"? If Rose
   and Wise followed this advice, and you were a part of this team, at what point would you begin seeking a
   buyer for this company? What milestones might you select for harvesting the company? Consider what
   actions you would accomplish to increase the sale amount to the maximum amount.

Launching your venture is a unique experience for every entrepreneurial team and for every venture. These
novel situations and uncertainties create both challenges and new learning opportunities. Accepting that a
multitude of possibilities exists and recognizing the importance of researching and discussing actions are
valuable to the success of the team. Angel investors hold a wealth of knowledge, and with an equity stake in
the venture, these investors should be included in all discussions. If you have an angel investor on your team,
you have an added advantage to tap into the expertise available to support the venture. In conjunction with a
well-aligned angel investor, conducting research to explore decisions will improve your venture's success.
Although these decisions might seem difficult, the next section addresses how to approach difficult decisions
and the role emotional connections for the venture and its team play in those decisions.

 15.2 Making Difficult Business Decisions in Response to Challenges

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Recognize that cognitive biases can sabotage the success of the venture
  · Identify key problem indicators
  · Distinguish the emotional components involved in difficult decisions

Now that you are prepared to launch your business venture, let's look at your business plan and the
assumptions you made while preparing it. Did you keep a list of assumptions? Did you update assumptions as

3 Stephanie Schomer. "This Hot Greeting Card Company Uses 3-D Design and Origami to Beat Hallmark. Inc. June, 2017.
https://www.inc.com/magazine/201706/stephanie-schomer/lovepop-greeting-card-design-awards-2017.html
652  Chapter 15 Next Steps

new data and information suggested "retiring" some initial ideas? Did you identify milestone timelines within
your business plan? Did you fully assess risks and have mitigation plans to address them? These are essential
questions to consider before launch. As the business venture comes into existence, you should review your
assumptions and identified milestones. Ask the following questions:

  · Are your assumptions still realistic?
  · Is your business venture on for the associated milestones?
  · Do you need to consider any changes that have occurred in the industry you plan to enter? Has the

      competition changed? Are there new regulations?

Tracking any changes and comparing them to your earlier assumptions provides an opportunity to reconsider
whether changes to your plan, assumptions, and milestones are necessary. After you begin your venture, you
should continue to review your assumptions and milestones. If you are not meeting your projections and
milestones, what has changed? What decisions should you adjust to situate your venture into a stronger
position for success? If your venture is doing better than expected, analyze why the venture is exceeding your
forecasted projections.

It is important to return to your business plan and consider what you will do if your assumptions are incorrect,
so if your milestones aren't met, you can avoid the problem of escalation of commitment. The concept of
escalation of commitment describes when an entrepreneur feels so committed to the plan of action that
they end up losing their perspective on the reality of what is happening to the venture. They ignore the danger
signs and think that if they just work harder, or pour more money into the venture, they can force the venture
to become successful. Once an entrepreneur becomes this committed to the venture and is working
passionately to keep the enterprise afloat, they can lose the focus and objectivity to make rational decisions.
They can begin to react to the situation, stubbornly persist, or begin to ignore the danger signs that should
alert them that reevaluation of the situation is necessary.

Escalation of commitment negates the recognition that a pivot action is necessary. As you recall from Launch
for Growth to Success, in the entrepreneurial world, pivot is the action in response to recognition that the
current method, approach, process, or idea isn't working. Pivot is the point at which entrepreneurs realize that
a change is required and pivot into something different.

Cognitive Biases and Problem Indicators

There is a fine line between believing in one's abilities and the value of the venture versus stepping into a
perspective that ignores new information or results. Entrepreneurs often need to face criticism and challenges
where their confidence in the opportunity and their ability to create a successful venture override the criticism,
but there is also danger in not listening to new information and re-evaluating one's perspective to avoid
biases. According to Cossette, in reviewing twenty-five empirical papers on heuristics and cognitive biases of
entrepreneurs, overconfidence and optimism are the two most significant biases that contribute to an
entrepreneur's failure to recognize the need to change or end the venture. Other causes for the
entrepreneur's failure to end the venture include "the law of small numbers, the illusion of control, the
planning fallacy, escalation of commitment, the status quo bias, and the hindsight bias,"[4] as shown in
Figure 15.5. To avoid this failure to exit the venture, we can identify fail-safe points within the business plan.
These are the points that trigger the entrepreneur to consider what actions are needed to bring the venture
back to a healthy position and whether this action is reasonable and feasible. Identifying these trigger points

4 Pierre Cossette. "Heuristics and Cognitive Biases in Entrepreneurs: A Review of the Research." Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship,
27(5), 471-96. November 2015. doi:10.1080/08276331.2015.1105732

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  653

and creating contingency plans before opening the venture can prevent the entrepreneur from becoming
trapped by these biases, such as the dangers of becoming overly committed and throwing resources into an
impossible situation. Let's look deeper into these biases and potential key problems that challenge our own
decisions and the success of the venture.

Figure 15.5 The biases shown in this image are areas that can contribute to the failure of the venture. Being
aware of these biases provides a reality checkpoint. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC
BY 4.0 license)

As described in Cossette's research, the law of small numbers refers to the target market not being large
enough, or failure to attract a larger target market. The illusion of control refers to the entrepreneur believing
that he or she can force the market into realizing the venture is the best, or that additional persistence will
result in positive results. The planning fallacy identifies the pattern of creating a business plan that is too
optimistic. Gish noted that business planning is intended to present realistic decisions and projections;
however, research suggests that confidence in the plan places entrepreneurs in a position of believing their
plans are accurate, causing a heightened belief that the venture will succeed, when in fact, the business plan is
overly optimistic.[5]
The status quo bias is a tendency to refer to a previously identified behavior or information as the ongoing
habit to perpetuate. This bias can prevent the entrepreneur from recognizing that a new action is
required--when a creative or innovative change is necessary to avoid economic distress rather than following
a previously established pattern or habit--instead of continuing to follow the status quo. The hindsight bias is
the belief that, in hindsight, the action or event was predictable, when in fact there was little if any indication
that an event would occur.
As you can see, many of these problems are related to the hubris of the entrepreneur. Hubris is a strong belief
in oneself, a belief of over-confidence or pride in one's ability to affect the outcome of decisions when other
factors have the greatest influence.

5 J. Jeffrey Gish. "Failing to Plan but Not Planning to Fail: A Theory of Entrepreneur Optimism and Business Planning." Academy of Management
Annual Meeting Proceedings, 2016(1), 1. November 30, 2017. doi:10.5465/AMBPP.2016.10945abstract
654  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Aside from these challenges, other key problem indicators include insufficient available cash. Burn rate is the
rate at which the venture burns through the available cash needed to sustain the business: More cash is going
out than is coming into the business (review burn rate in Developing Startup Financial Statements and
Projections). Lack of control systems can be a contributor to excessive cash use, as can excessive waste in
production, lack of follow through on collection of payment, or low inventory turnover creating excessive
waste, such as with perishable products.

A misconnect between the target market's desires and the product or service provided, can also create
challenges, as can incorrect pricing of the product, or not having the right talent in your personnel or start-up
team. However, planning only for success can be the biggest problem an entrepreneur makes. Keeping an
open mind provides opportunities to see the reality of how the venture deviates from the plan as an action
item to reconsider the venture from a new perspective.

Decision Making to Overcome Challenges

Now let's look at how we can reevaluate the venture and consider what changes are possible to position the
venture for a different future than first envisioned. Let's examine a real story from Stacy Madison's life. Stacy
Madison is the entrepreneur who started Stacy's Pita Chips. Madison had a background in social work but
wasn't happy with her career choice, so she decided to open a sandwich food cart business in downtown
Boston. As her business became more popular, customers had to wait in line for longer times. When they
reached the food cart window, they were often cranky and unhappy about the wait. Madison and her team
discussed ideas on what to do for customers who grew tired of waiting in line. They came up with the idea of
slicing bagels into chip size bites and baking the bagels with olive oil, then handing the bagel chips out to the
customers waiting in line. Customers loved the bagel chips and requested the chips when they reached the
food cart window. At first, Madison's team would explain that they did not sell the chips but only gave them
away to help their customers who grew hungry waiting in line. After repeatedly hearing this request from
customers, Madison reevaluated her sandwich business and considered that maybe she should be in the bagel
chip industry. The success of this story is that Madison sold her pita chip company to Frito-Lay for $65
million.[6] And the purpose of this example is to remember that when we start a venture, we need to be open-
minded to recognize unexpected patterns and new information that can lead us in a different direction from
the original plan and intention.

Personnel Change Challenges

One area of potential problems in a new venture is the entrepreneurial team, the start-up people on the
original team, and the need for personnel changes within the team. Where did the people on your startup
team come from? Are some of them longtime friends or perhaps family members? What skills or knowledge
do they bring to the venture? Are they aligned with the needs of the venture? And importantly, are they the
best resource for their role once the venture is up and running? Answering these questions clarifies whether
team members are a good fit within the venture over time. The startup team no doubt provided enthusiasm
and ideas that helped to identify and formulate the potential new venture. Team members probably
contributed ideas and content in building the business plan, but over time, the needs of the venture will
change. Being aware that changing needs might also result in changes within the startup team, and employee

6 Katie Morell. "The Story behind Stacy's Pita Chips." Open Forum. May 11, 2012. https://www.americanexpress.com/us/small-business/
openforum/articles/the-story-behind-stacys-pita-chips/

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps                                                                                                  655

skills, is part of managing the growing venture.

For success, the team and employees need to align with the needs of the venture. Sometimes, entrepreneurs
begin their business with people who agreed that the idea was sound and that the opportunity existed and
was worth supporting. But these people might not have the knowledge, skills, and abilities necessary to
support the venture as it grows. Frequently, we share similar skills and interests with our friends and family
members. This means that we might have a venture with too many people with the same skill sets. Or we
might have disconnects between what the venture needed in the past and what the venture needs currently.

Another personnel problem is discovering unethical actions that violate the code of conduct created in the
preparatory documents. According to the National Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. Workforce in their 2014
report, 60 percent of reported misconduct involved someone with managerial authority.[7] These findings alert
us to the importance of creating a code of conduct that aligns with the values needed to support the success
of the organization. When the entrepreneur feels pressure to act unethically in an attempt to bring in new
business or prevent the organization from financial stress, unethical actions can become tempting. Knowing
that 60 percent of unethical actions occur at the managerial level should provide evidence to support the need
to proactively consider how to avoid this dangerous situation. The same report encourages addressing
potential problems by including zero tolerance for abusive behavior, lying, discrimination, and sexual
harassment. An interesting finding noted that egregious rule-breaking behavior was infrequent, while more
subtle "ongoing and continuous behavior, such as abusive and intimidating behavior, seems to be more
prevalent."[8] This result speaks to our earlier discussion on the importance of creating an appropriate culture.
If an undesirable behavior is prevalent, this would seem to indicate that the culture supports this behavior.
The study also noted that "frequency of misconduct reflects the strength of the company's ethics culture,"
noting that "60% of misconduct committed in companies with a strong ethics culture was a one-time
occurrence," and that frequency of unethical acts rose as the culture of ethics declined.[9]

Recommendations from this same report for encouraging ethical behavior include the actions shown in
Figure 15.6.

7 Ethics Resource Center. National Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. Workforce. 2014. https://www.bentley.edu/sites/
www.bentley.edu.centers/files/centers/National%20Business%20Ethics%20Survey.pdf
8 Ethics Resource Center. National Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. Workforce. 2014. https://www.bentley.edu/sites/
www.bentley.edu.centers/files/centers/National%20Business%20Ethics%20Survey.pdf
9 Ethics Resource Center. National Business Ethics Survey of the U.S. Workforce. 2014. https://www.bentley.edu/sites/
www.bentley.edu.centers/files/centers/National%20Business%20Ethics%20Survey.pdf
656  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Figure 15.6 The Ethics and Compliance Initiative from the National Business Ethics Survey outlines policies
and processes that encourage ethical behavior. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY
4.0 license)

Ethics and alignment of personnel to the venture's future growth and success are all reasons to reevaluate the
entrepreneurial team and personnel. Frank conversations are required to protect the future success of the
venture and the best decisions to support this success. Ethical challenges need to be addressed quickly and
preferably proactively to avoid being pulled down into reacting to a crisis that could be avoided by creating a
culture and code of conduct that encourages correct actions. Sage advice is to clearly state up front the vision
for the venture and agreement from the start-up team that the survival of the venture is the priority. Ethical
behavior is an important topic of these discussions.

Personnel and Growth Challenges

Before starting the venture, the start-up team should ask these two questions:
 1. What happens if we are wildly successful?
 2. What happens if we are horribly unsuccessful?

The purpose of these questions is to consider how resources and debts will be resolved before the venture
begins to use or acquire resources. If your relative or friend contributed by letting you use her living room for
your planning meetings and bought pizza to keep the team energized, does she have a stake in your venture?
If your venture is wildly successful, she might believe that she should receive financial remuneration for her
contributions. The point is, people often change when there is lots of money or when the venture is on the
edge of disaster. Planning for both extremes provides a framework for the entrepreneurial team to consider
their own expectations and the expectations of other people involved in the project before these types of
situations happen.
This discussion should also address the agreed-upon method for making difficult personnel decisions. Is there
a severance package? If so, who is entitled to the severance package? Does the exit of employees, and even
people on the start-up team, exclude them from future expectations if the venture is successful? If the funding
source includes contractual liabilities, how is the release of a start-up team member resolved? If new team
members or employees are added, will these people be considered employees who earn wages, or are some
positions identified as receiving equity positions with financial gains through the harvesting of the venture?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  657

Addressing these questions before starting the venture can preserve relationships by clearly stating and
agreeing to these sensitive decisions that can carry long-term consequences. In considering these questions
and awareness of how the venture's need will change in the future, you might want to revisit your founder's
agreement for clarity and alignment with any new information or concerns that arise in the start-up phase.

Lack of Sales and Customer-Base Challenges

Perhaps the biggest disappointment is when the entrepreneurial team has completed the pre-planning,
received funding, and opened the venture for business, only to find out that sales aren't realized. The target
market isn't rushing to the website or location to purchase the product or service.

There are many reasons this can happen, which can make finding a solution difficult. The first action is to bring
the team together to discuss possible reasons why the projected sales aren't being realized. This could result
from inadequate marketing, targeting the wrong market or audience, selecting the wrong distribution system,
communicating the wrong message or benefit within the marketing plan, or perhaps lack of training for sales
personnel or first responders who manage the venture-customer relationship.

Identifying the problem is one solution to consider. Some tools that help in problem identification include
brainstorming, creating mindmaps, and conducting additional research. Brainstorming provides a free flow of
ideas for further exploration and analysis. The most important part of brainstorming is not judging any ideas:
the more ideas that are shared, the higher the probability for identifying the problem. A mindmap taps into a
different approach to gaining a new perspective on thinking about the problem. A mindmap has a center that
states the problem, such as lack of sales. Next, you create branches identifying all the possible reasons why
the problem occurred, such as incorrect target market and incorrect marketing message. Then you create sub-
branches that relate to these first-level branches. Including pictures and color diagrams contributes to the
process. The goal in creating a mindmap is to be creative in exploring the problem rather than attempting to
hone in on a solution. Adding visuals encourages people's brains to think creatively. After creating the
mindmap, take a break from thinking about the problem. As strange as this seems, the process of focusing on
creating the mindmap alerts your mind that this is a problem that is important. As you walk away from the
problem, your mind is still thinking about the problem, but at a subconscious level. This opens the opportunity
for an "aha" moment where you're better able to figure out what is happening and understand what you need
to do.
658  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Figure 15.7 Example of a mindmap. Mindmaps can be created to inform and increase creativity in both
understanding the topic or problem, and in discovering connections. (attribution: Copyright Rice University,
OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Both brainstorming and mindmapping are excellent tools that lead to conducting more research. After
completing brainstorming and mindmapping, you should have a better understanding of the problem and a
clear picture of topics to research, and possible methods to gain new insights into the problem of lack of sales
or customer base, such as surveys, focus groups, or free samples. You can even go back to brainstorming and
creating a mindmap around this newly discovered area identified through the first round of brainstorming or
creating a mindmap. Or you might already have feedback that reveals a pivot for moving the venture in a new
direction, like Stacy Madison did in discontinuing the food cart and moving into the snack food industry.
Another response to lack of sales or customers is to use social networking sites to draw attention to your
business. You can offer short-term incentives to encourage your target market to react or provide feedback
about your product.

   ARE YOU READY?

   Mindmapping

   Practice either brainstorming or mindmapping by identifying a potential problem your venture might
   face. Include at least four branches and four sub-branches in your mindmap. After reviewing the
   completed mindmap, identify at least three methods you could use to research the most significant topic
   discovered through creating the mindmap. Was this activity beneficial? How might you use this method
   in the future?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  659

 15.3 Seeking Help or Support

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Identify sources for assistance
  · Explain the benefits provided through seeking assistance
  · Compare tools to assist in deciding what advice to follow

You've learned about some of the challenges in starting the venture and the types of decisions that the
entrepreneurial team must make, as well as the importance of recognizing when you don't know something or
that you have encountered a problem. Facing these issues is easier when you recognize that asking for help
should be part of the process. Given the wide range of variables involved in starting a new venture, it's just not
possible for one entrepreneur to have all the answers. Asking for help is an intelligent decision: It's an action
that recognizes the complexity of starting and managing a venture.

Types of Assistance

Fortunately, there are many types of assistance available in the field of entrepreneurship starting with your
own network of people. Additionally, there are local, regional, national, and even international groups
available to help you navigate the entrepreneurial journey.

Ideally, the entrepreneurial team conducted due diligence in their quest for funding (see Entrepreneurial
Finance and Accounting). For those entrepreneurs pursuing financing through angel investors, research on
what angel investors contribute to the funded entrepreneur beyond the actual dollars invested highlights the
importance of the angel investor's expertise and knowledge as a contributor to the venture's success.[10] While
many entrepreneurs focus solely or primarily on receiving funding to start the venture, this study points to the
importance in selecting an angel investor with knowledge of the industry, the distribution system, the
technology, product, or the target market, as imperative to the success of the venture.

We've discussed the importance of finding an angel investor who has a background and experience in a
similar area as your venture. Finding the right angel investor not only results in receiving the needed funding,
but also access to this person's knowledge and personal network. Ideally, the angel investor has knowledge
related to your industry, your target market, and your supply chain or distribution channel. This background
knowledge provides you with key resources that can give your venture expertise that contributes to the
venture's success. The angel investor's network also provides opportunities to gain key insights, seek advice,
and discuss ideas or solutions that benefit the venture as a network of well-informed and experienced people.

The other primary network is the entrepreneurial team's network. These people include spouses/partners,
family members, business associates, colleagues, and friends. These people can provide ideas and knowledge
from a variety of perspectives and backgrounds. Connecting and reaching out for help requires both the ability
to build relationships and the ability to recognize that seeking help reflects maturity and wisdom. As you tap
into your network and seek advice, consider each person from a long-term relationship-building perspective.
Consider how you might return the favor at a future time, if asked to help, or provide your expertise back to
the people you access for help.

As you work with your network, keep track of the person's name, your conversation, and any commitments

10 Karla Peterson and William Mayfield. "Knowledge Transference in the Angel-Entrepreneur Relationship." Frontiers of Entrepreneurship
Research: 27(2), Article 5.
660                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

made during the meeting. A commitment might be a follow-up message on how you used the advice or
response to the request, or an action that you will perform for someone else. Creating a formal network or
contact system helps in developing this network into a long-term relationship-based perspective.

When seeking advice, be respectful of the other person's time. This means identifying exactly what type of
help you want to request from the person. Are you requesting an introduction to someone else within that
person's network, or advice about solving a problem, or access to physical resources? Setting up an
appointment demonstrates respect, as does preparing for the meeting and explaining how you will use the
advice. Remember to thank the person and follow up with feedback on what happened from using the advice.

The types of assistance that can be provided through networking include:

  · advice or information
  · access to other people's networks
  · access to financial resources
  · business services such as legal, accounting, or administrative support
  · physical resources such as land, buildings, or equipment.

Other free sources of support are instructors of your business courses, other business owners, organizations
such as the SCORE (originally called the Service Corps of Retired Executives) and resources within the Small
Business Administration (SBA). SCORE is an organization with a network of volunteers across the U.S. and is a
resource partner with the SBA. SCORE offers mentor consultants, workshops, and other assistance to support
the success of small businesses.

The SBA is a federally funded organization charged with assisting small businesses from startup through their
continued existence. The SBA can help in reviewing and improving your business plan, providing assistance in
finding funding through loans or grants, and acting as a consultant throughout the venture's existence. The
SBA provides help in complying with both state and federal regulations. Depending on your business model,
you might need licenses or permits, and your local SBA office will be well informed on these topics and can
help you acquire what is needed to support the success of your venture.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   Watch this video explaining various services offered by the Small Business Administration
   (https://openstaxcollege.org/l/52SBAServices) to learn about resources to support your venture.

   Most states provide start-up help to small businesses, which can be found by searching the internet for
   your state's sponsored help in starting a business. In addition, there are often local meet-up groups and
   community-supported assistance to help you start your business. You might also find a virtual support
   group that provides advice from a diverse group of potential business owners.

   A paid source of help--legal assistance--can save anguish, time, and money for the entrepreneurial
   team. In selecting an attorney, look for one with experience in entrepreneurial ventures similar to yours.
   Resources to help you find an attorney include checking with your network or angel investor for a
   recommendation or contacting the local branch of the American Bar Association. Most states have an
   online directory of local member attorneys that you can use to search for a lawyer who fits your
   venture's needs. Once you have identified an attorney, research the best method for payment of these

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  661

   services. Some possibilities include a monthly retainer fee, payment for specific services, or payment on
   an hourly basis for work performed.

   Other paid-for services include accounting, tax reporting, and human resource management areas.
   Opening and managing a business takes time, and assigning a professional accountant the responsibility
   of preparing monthly financial statements and tax reports can provide you with expert support as well as
   provide you with time necessary to position your venture into a successful growing business, as does
   outsourcing personnel tasks such as processing payroll. These supporting companies can be either
   virtual companies, or a local business, depending on your needs. Especially for payroll and other human
   resource activities, virtual companies specialize in meeting the administrative needs in a fast and efficient
   manner. Oftentimes outsourcing administrative areas is a more accurate and cost-effective than
   completing these tasks within the venture. Although these services cost money, these activities
   performed require knowledge of laws and regulations that many business owners are not equipped to
   be experts in, nor can they reasonably stay on top of frequent changes in these matters. This can result
   in legal problems, as federal and state laws and regulations must be followed.

Support System Development

You learned about a variety of support systems in Building Networks and Foundations. Some entrepreneurs
may seek to work with a local incubator service. These incubator community groups provide a physical
location to offer working space as well as the opportunity for interactions with other new startup owners and
teams. The opportunity to be in a shared space with other inspired entrepreneurs can create excitement,
sharing of ideas, and opportunities to talk through challenges. Potentially, there could be synergies between
your venture and another venture realized through these discussions.

Companies like Y Combinator in Silicon Valley and Techstars in Boulder, Colorado, provide unique assistance to
new startup ventures (Figure 15.8). These types of organizations are considered accelerator entities intended
to fast track a select number of new ventures through information sharing, seed funding with a small equity
stake in the funded venture, mentoring, and offering formal angel investor "pitch" events. The selection
process makes being accepted into these organizations difficult. However, once accepted, your venture
becomes more credible for having been accepted, as well as for the wealth of connections and information
that will be received throughout the experience.
662  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Figure 15.8 Y Combinator provides support for new startup companies. (credit: modification of "Max
Levchin speaks to Startup School" by Robert Scoble/Flickr, CC BY 2.0)
Although each incubation program offers different--and sometimes uniquely specialized--help, they can be
generally categorized by the types of support potentially available through these programs. Some incubators
focus on one segment of an industry, or one segment of talent or interest. For example, there might be an
incubator intended only for marketing start-ups. In this example, the incubator might assist with providing
support in various marketing areas such as digital marketing, business-to-business marketing, global
marketing, sports marketing, video creation, or other areas that fit within the topic of marketing. Oftentimes,
incubators are sponsored by a municipality or government source.
Incubators are unique to a community's interests and available resources. Some communities have a vision for
the community and desire the growth of the community to align with this vision. If a community has this
perspective, their incubators would also align with this vision. Other communities create incubators around
available resources, such as access and support from specific groups. Figure 15.9 illustrates the wide variety of
approaches used in creating incubators. An incubator is supported by perhaps one or two of these sources,
depending on the goal of the incubator.

Figure 15.9 There are many potential contributors to business incubation programs. (attribution: Copyright
Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  663

As you build your support group, you might want to create an advisory group, which is a formal group of
people who provide you with advice. In building your advisory group, select people who demonstrate an
interest in your venture and your startup team. You want resources who have expertise related to your
industry, your target market, or your business model. You also want a diverse group of people who can
provide insights that reflect different backgrounds and knowledge. This diversity of experience and knowledge
provides you with the greatest breadth of advice, which leads to your difficult decision: what advice to follow.

Deciding What Advice to Follow

Once you have advice from a variety of sources, how do you decide which recommendations to pursue, which
to consider, and which to rule out? One approach is to identify what information is qualitative versus
quantitative, and evaluate one type first. Qualitative information is conceptual--about ideas--whereas
quantitative information is statistical or numerical. In both qualitative and quantitative areas, the entrepreneur
can create visualizations to clarify the information and support analysis and decision making. The
brainstorming and mindmaps discussed earlier, and illustrated in Figure 15.10, highlight the different types of
data you can work with.

Figure 15.10 Both qualitative and quantitative factors inform decisions through ideas and numbers. (credit
"left": modification of "Articulamos nuestras ideas" by Cultura de Red/Flickr, CC BY 2.0; attribution "right":
Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

Two other tools for sorting through advice are the Delphi method and the Nominal Group technique. Both
provide a structured methodology that can be applied to evaluate ideas. In the Delphi method, broad open-
ended questions related to the decision being addressed are put into a questionnaire sent out to participants.
For example, you might solicit input from your advisory group or another group closely connected to the topic.
As responses come in, the questions are updated to align better with the first set of responses. The process
repeats until there is a clear understanding of the participants' responses. Next, you create a list of possible
options and request each participant to rank the options. Depending on these results, you either fine tune the
list by dropping off low-ranked items, or, if the results are satisfactory, the options are narrowed to two or
three top choices.
664  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Figure 15.11 The Delphi process proceeds through repetitions of the process until an agreed-upon final
answer is identified. (attribution: Copyright Rice University, OpenStax, under CC BY 4.0 license)

The Nominal Group technique occurs in a group setting. Participants are presented with a question or topic
and write their thoughts in response on a card. The participants do not share their comments. Once everyone
has submitted the cards, the facilitator shares all feedback so that everyone can see all participants' input. The
participants discuss all of the ideas. Next, the participants again write down their responses on a new set of
cards. The comments are again recorded and shared so that everyone can see the results. The process
continues until there is agreement on a final filtered, or narrowed, list or set of options. At this point, the
participants vote or rank the remaining set of options with the goal of accepting one option.
Although these techniques and tools take time, the process of thinking through each decision and possible
action helps your mind pause to reflect and to be alerted to the importance of the decision. Taking a break at
this point allows you to process the information, perhaps while taking a walk or having a lunch break. At some
point, you might suddenly have a feeling of knowing the right answer-- the decision to make. Sometimes, this
experience is attributed to a "gut" feeling or intuition that tells you what you need to do. Resources like Gary
Klein's The Power of Intuition: How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work explains how this
process works in the human brain. Sometimes, this moment of recognition of the chosen decision results in a
decision that wasn't produced through our processes but that offers a new and creative solution.
Taking the time to evaluate and deeply think about the problem, the advice, and possible solutions is an
important part of decision making. Just as important are pausing and taking time to select a decision that is
not reactive and that you feel comfortable with, keeping in mind that the decision you make might be unique,
and the actual decision might not be within the advice provided to you by your support group. As the lead
entrepreneur whose goal is the success of the venture, you are ultimately responsible for the decision. If the
advice provided doesn't feel right, make the decision that does feel right and make sure you communicate
that decision with your team.

 15.4 Now What? Serving as a Mentor, Consultant, or Champion

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Evaluate potential next steps after exiting the venture
  · Explain the roles of mentors, consultants, and champions

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  665

Depending on your experience as a first-time entrepreneur, you have a new set of choices in front of you. If
you enjoyed the experience, felt the thrill and excitement of taking an idea from launch through to the
successful harvesting of the venture, you might want to become involved in another new venture--that is,
maybe your path is to become a serial entrepreneur. Or, after all that work, you might want to spend some
extended time traveling or with family. You might want to consider ideas for giving back to the entrepreneurial
community or becoming a social entrepreneur in your next venture. You might want to take some of your
earnings from the harvest and become an angel investor. These decisions depend on your experience as an
entrepreneur and money and less-tangible resources you gained through harvesting the venture. Having
undergone a positive experience, gained significant learning, and harvested substantial funds often leads an
entrepreneur into becoming a mentor, consultant, or champion for another entrepreneurial project. Think
back to all the people who helped you get to where you are today. Where would you be without their help?
Giving back to others continues the creation of social capital, the goodwill we create by giving back to
individuals, organizations, and communities.

Mentors

Mentor motivation includes the satisfaction of helping and guiding other entrepreneurs through the
challenges of starting, growing, and harvesting their venture. Mentors can participate through formal
government organizations such as SCORE, or organizations similar to Y Combinator, or from an internal aspect
such as an advisory group membership. Mentors provide assistance and advice based on their previous
experience as an entrepreneur, or as a content expert within a narrowly defined area related to the new
venture's product or service. Specific areas of expertise might include commercialization of a new technology,
safeguarding intellectual property, marketing, or funding sources for a nonprofit social entrepreneurship
venture. Just as there can be an alignment between an angel investor's knowledge and skill set to the
entrepreneurial venture, mentors should also seek ventures where they can provide key insights and
knowledge. Mentoring in this capacity as a former entrepreneur is more rewarding when there is an interest in
the opportunity and the entrepreneurial team.

Identifying exactly what the mentor can provide and what the entrepreneurial team needs is an important part
of this relationship. Both parties should discuss time commitments and expectations as part of this
relationship. Mentoring requires considerable commitment and can include support for complex topics and
difficult decisions. In return for this help, mentors receive satisfaction, rejuvenation, personal growth, new
relationships and connections, and a feeling of philanthropic motivation.

There are also risks in taking on the role of a mentor. One risk relates to providing advice that later proves to
be detrimental to the venture. Another risk is the perception that the mentor provided direction when the
mentor in fact provided suggested options that the entrepreneurial team should consider in its decision. A
third risk concerns confidentiality and non-compete covenants. New ideas generate additional ideas, and as a
startup team fine-tunes its opportunity and venture, some ideas will be rejected. From your perspective as a
mentor and former entrepreneur, you might realize that you could develop one of the rejected ideas into a
successful business. This situation can present conflicts of interest between you as the mentor and the venture
that you are mentoring.

Because of these risks, as well as the contributions made by the mentor, some sources believe that the mentor
should receive financial compensation and enter into a contractual relationship that addresses these risks.
Possible financial payments include equity in the venture, profit sharing, or a retainer fee.
666                                                                                                 Chapter 15 Next Steps

Consultants

Another role you might want to consider is becoming a consultant, a position more formally defined than
mentorship. You might even want to create your own consulting company focused on entrepreneurs as your
target market, or select a narrower target market such as a segment within the entrepreneurial world. In
considering starting your own consultant business, your start-up process is similar to the topics addressed
throughout this book. Identify your own strengths and interests, identify other needs that your target market
would value, and develop a business plan. Acting as a consultant contributes back to the entrepreneurial
world, provides you with the enjoyment of active involvement in areas where you excel, and bolsters to your
financial worth.

Champions

Great Britain offers an Entrepreneur Champion of the Year award in recognition of the importance of having
support in starting a new venture. Although we don't have that award in the United States, we recognize how
important support is to become successful. The Startup Champions Network is a startup organization located
in Boulder, Colorado. This organization supports and connects entrepreneur-related champions: people who
build and lead coalitions that create and advance resources for entrepreneurs. The Startup Champions
Network seeks people who support a history of supporting entrepreneurship and innovation within their
communities, recognize and model inclusiveness and collaboration skills, enjoy helping other people and work
well with people, embrace humility, are action oriented, and focus on possibilities. Forbidden behaviors include
being driven by self-interest, being focused on earnings or control of earnings, and lacking experience or a
long-term focus.[11]

Regardless of your interest in joining a formal champion group or acting in an individual capacity, becoming a
champion to promote and assist another entrepreneur provides personal growth, satisfaction, and rewarding
involvement within the entrepreneurial community. Many of the characteristics desired by the Startup
Champions Network reflect research related to effective leaders. Most states have organizations that support
entrepreneurs, from business plan development and decision making through opportunities to give back to
the entrepreneurial world in whatever capacity a person desires. Take a few minutes to research opportunities
in your state and community, and consider how your own future might align with these organizations.

These choices give you some ideas on what you might want to do now that you have harvested your venture.
After tasting the excitement of starting, growing, and harvesting your venture, you have a new set of options
to consider from becoming a serial entrepreneur through adding value to other entrepreneur's potential
successes to becoming a social entrepreneur.

     ENTREPRENEUR IN ACTION

     Solving Global Health Issues

     The American Society of Tropical Medicine & Hygiene (ASTMH) is the largest international scientific
     organization dedicated to reducing tropical infectious diseases and improving world health.[12] Diseases
     like malaria, Dengue fever and Zika are transmitted by mosquitoes and are increasing in frequency.

11 Startup Champions Network. http://www.championsnetwork.co/
12 American Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene. https://www.astmh.org/about-astmh/who-we-are

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps                                                                                        667

These diseases reduce an infected person's quality of life and can impact their ability to earn a living by
reducing energy and the capacity to carry out day-to-day activities. These afflictions can also result in
other painful complications, coma, and even death through kidney failure. According to ASTMH, close to
half of the world's population lives in areas at risk of contracting malaria. The map in Figure 15.12
provides a view of how vast the potential area is for malaria infestation. Even noting the shaded light
green areas as formerly malarious, these areas could once again be infested with malaria-carrying
mosquitoes. As the planet's temperature increases, disease-carrying insects become more pervasive,
entering geographical areas where some of these tropical diseases never existed. Read this article about
major tropical diseases (https://openstax.org/l/52TropDisease) to learn more.

Figure 15.12 What can you do to help solve this global problem? What potential solutions might also be
entrepreneurial opportunities?

 15.5 Reflections: Documenting the Journey

Learning Objectives
By the end of this section, you will be able to:

  · Examine the value of journaling and reflection
  · Experiment with reflection as a daily habit
668  Chapter 15 Next Steps

Figure 15.13 Taking the time to record your thoughts and activities provides new learning opportunities.
(credit: "Journaling" by Vic/Flickr, CC B 2.0)

Consider the journey of learning about entrepreneurship and of becoming an entrepreneur. What new
knowledge have you gained about the world of entrepreneurship? What have you learned about your own
interests in becoming an entrepreneur? Discovering your interest in specific areas helps to inform the possible
entrepreneurial opportunities you might want to pursue and informs you of specific processes and actions
where you might excel within an entrepreneurial endeavor. Consider how you can add value to an
entrepreneurial team as a team member, or in the capacity of a mentor, consultant, or champion, as you
reflect on your own interests, goals, passions and desires.

The Power of Journaling

Reflection supports personal growth through identifying actions that worked well and actions that didn't work
out as well as hoped. A formal reflection journal for capturing daily thoughts, experiences, lessons learned,
and other material, can lead to insights and identify patterns in thinking and in behaviors that may be helpful
to recognize--both for personal growth and for growth as an entrepreneur.
In daily life, people seldom have the time or training to be mindful of their actions--to be aware of how they
interact with others, or how they act in the variety of situations that fill their days. A daily practice of reflection
can improve your ability to be mindful throughout the day and to grow through your documented reflections.
Being mindful is the action of being in the moment, being aware of surroundings and fully engaged in
awareness of the people around us, hearing their communications and understanding the complexity of their
messages. Mindfulness moves us out of our reaction to situations from our own personal perspective into a
more objective awareness--a bit like viewing your life as though you were watching it as a spectator on the
sidelines. This change in perspective moves us away from reacting to situations and toward a clearer,
unbiased, and focused understanding of the situation with awareness of the situation's nuances. As we
develop the practice of mindfulness, we become skilled at being aware of our own emotions and patterns,
which can make us aware of more options about how we want to respond: Rather than acting in a habitual or
reactive manner, we can consider responses before we react. Reflection is the first step in developing this skill.
Take a few minutes to reflect on your life up to this point. Can you identify milestones, significant decision
points, and understand why you made these decisions? Forming a daily habit of writing down your thoughts

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  669

about the day, challenges you faced and how you responded to each, tracking what went well and what didn't
go well is the process of reflection. Over time, you will begin to see patterns in your behaviors. Identifying
these patterns or habits provides key insights into how you think, process information, make decisions, and
react to decisions. Once you notice these patterns, you have the power to analyze them and decide which are
helpful and which are not. The patterns that are not helpful should be removed and replaced with better
patterns. You can write down the new patterns that you want to develop as a goal in your daily reflection
journal. You can then identify if you're moving closer to following the new pattern and achieving this goal.

This type of journaling activity might seem like busy work, or you might think that you don't have time for
reflection. If this is how you feel, try following this advice for a couple of weeks and then reconsider, or
conduct your own research to find articles that discredit reflection. There is a vast body of research that
supports reflection as an important part of self-growth and self-realization. Some documented benefits in
these studies include learning from mistakes, discovering new insights and ideas, and increases in reported
happiness and satisfaction with life and relationships, increased mindfulness, and increased self-
understanding resulting in feeling more power to choose how one interacts with the world--feeling
empowered rather than the victim of a situation.[13],[14],[15]

The Impact of Reflection

Gino and Staats noted four categories that hinder success; "biases cause people to focus too much on success,
take action too quickly, try too hard to fit in, and depend too much on experts."[16] Their point is that the focus
on action and success can get in the way of being successful, or of even knowing what success looks like. Gino
and Staats' research identified challenges related to the category of the focus on success. The first three
challenges related to the bias toward success include the fear of failure, a fixed mindset, and overreliance on
past performance, topics discussed earlier as impediments to the entrepreneurial team's success and ability to
recognize the need for adaptability[17]. Under the concept of a bias toward action, Gino and Staats identified
two challenges: exhaustion and lack of reflection. Exhaustion prevents entrepreneurs from contributing at
top--or even normal--levels, while a lack of reflection reduced performance by 20 percent, according to their
findings.[18] Lack of reflection not only decreased performance but also decreased individual, team, and
organizational learning. The U.S. Army uses a system of after-action reviews to reflect on actions, successes,
and opportunities for improvement. Another common name for this type of reflection in the business world is
post-mortem or lessons learned: the action of reflecting on projects or decisions to identify best practices and
areas for improvement. Consider the medical community: What would happen if after every surgery or
medical diagnosis, no one analyzed the consequences of the surgery or diagnosis? Might we still be using
mercury to kill germs or leeches for bloodletting?

The last two biases identified by Gino and Staats are a bias toward fitting in and a bias toward experts, with
two sub-challenges within each area. Under bias toward fitting in, the first challenge is believing you need to
conform, and the second challenge is failure to use your strengths.[19] The pressure to conform is present
throughout our lives. We are taught to form a line to enter the kindergarten class, the movie theater, or the

13 Cable Neuhaus. "The Multimedia Journal: More Than Just a Notebook." Saturday Evening Post, 289(6), 16. December 5, 2017.
14 Deborah L. Starczewski. "Encouraging Students to Think Beyond the Course Material: The Benefits of Using Reflective Journals". Teaching
Professor, 30(8), 5. October 2016.
15 J. L. Nelson. Express Yourself. Scholastic Parent & Child, 19(1), 52-54. 2011.
16 Francesca Gino and Bradley Staats. "Why Organizations Don't Learn." Harvard Business Review, 93(11), 112. November 2015.
17 Francesca Gino and Bradley Staats. "Why Organizations Don't Learn." Harvard Business Review, 93(11), 112-113. November 2015.
18 Francesca Gino and Bradley Staats. "Why Organizations Don't Learn." Harvard Business Review, 93(11), 114. November 2015.
19 Francesca Gino and Bradley Staats. "Why Organizations Don't Learn." Harvard Business Review, 93(11), 116. November 2015.
670                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

cafeteria. We are taught to raise our hand to ask or answer a question. This training to conform makes perfect
sense in some situations, but we also need to feel comfortable following a different path or approach to living
our lives. Again, reflection can help entrepreneurs recognize when they feel pressured to conform through a
closer awareness of inner thoughts and feelings. Increased awareness of our thoughts and feelings often
leads to more confidence in expressing our thoughts. Following this process also contributes to recognizing
your strengths.

In the findings about bias toward experts, the two challenges identified are an overly narrow view of expertise
and inadequate frontline involvement. The dependence on experts can create a situation where entrepreneurs
assign responsibility for the information and/or decision-making to someone who might have an area of
expertise, without realizing that an expert would not be aware of the complexities present within the venture.
The expert likely has a pattern or system that has been success for other companies and in other situations,
but this advice might not represent the best information or advice for your venture. Involving the frontline
team, as well as other sectors of your venture, in discussions and decision-making presents multiple
perspectives well worth accessing.

As you build the habit of reflection in your life, and even within your venture, consider how the challenges
discussed frame your reflections. Have you made decisions because you wanted to fit in? Do you and your
team have a narrow definition of expertise? Did someone give you a key insight that you disregarded because
this person did not fit your picture of an expert or informed person? Are you involving the right people in
discussions?

Documenting Your Journey

As part of your reflection activity, another benefit is to document your journey. If you have identified an
opportunity or have started to build your venture, now is the perfect time to keep a journal and document
your journey. Each day you face new challenges and exciting ideas that stretch your own learning and growth.
Tracking the daily events provides you with a roadmap to use for your next venture, or as a guide to build your
knowledge base in moving into a mentor or consultant role. Have you ever asked yourself, why didn't I write
that down? We assume that important and insightful ideas will stick in our minds and that we will readily
remember them. But in reality we often forget these key insights and ideas. Through journaling, we can record
and reflect on our daily activities and key insights.

   LINK TO LEARNING

   This TED Talk on creatives by Adam Grant (https://openstax.org/l/52ThinkersTED) presents some of the
   concepts of this chapter, framed around Dr. Grant's research as a professor at the Wharton School of
   Business at the University of Pennsylvania, on creatives. His book, Originals: How Non-Conformists Move
   the World, shares more of his findings.

   Are there biases and habits that hold you back from being a creative, as defined in this chapter and by
   Dr. Grant? If so, what methods can you use to break through these biases and habits?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  671

     Key Terms

burn rate rate at which cash outflow exceeds cash inflow
buyback clause legal agreement regarding an exit by a founding team member prior to the harvesting of

     the venture
code of conduct formal statement that provides guidance on how ethical conduct is demonstrated
company culture shared beliefs, values and assumptions held by people regarding how to behave or

     conduct themselves within the context of fitting into an organization
Delphi method group decision-making process that includes a diverse group of people who are located at

     different locations and willing to respond to a series of questionnaires to assist in providing ideas,
     information or solutions to a defined question or problem
escalation of commitment tendency to continue with a predetermined action based on the past efforts and
     contributions to the project rather than an analysis of the current realities that disclose a new solution or
     approach is necessary
fail-safe point identified point that triggers the entrepreneur to consider what actions are needed to bring
     the venture back to a healthy position and whether this action is reasonable and feasible
founders' agreement written document that addresses contractual topics such as division of equity,
     compensation, contributions to the venture, and commitments to the venture with timelines included
Gannt chart bar chart used to organize and plan sequential steps in a process
hindsight bias belief that, in retrospect, the outcome was predictable when the outcome wasn't predictable
     due to various uncontrollable factors
hubris overinflated belief in oneself
lifestyle business business that provides incomes similar to other forms of employment
Nominal Group technique group decision-making process that requests multiple rounds of responses and
     discussions of response
noncompete agreement formal agreement that the person signing the document will not work for another
     organization that is a direct competitor of their current employer during employment and usually for a
     specified length of time after employment ends
nondisclosure agreement formal agreement that the person signing the document will not sharing
     proprietary information with outside sources
planning fallacy creation of a plan that is too optimistic and not aligned with conservative assumptions
serial entrepreneur entrepreneur who becomes involved in starting multiple entrepreneurial ventures
social capital goodwill that is created through helping someone else
status quo bias pattern of relying on previous actions and results as the accepted pattern and outcome with
     a bias against change or new information or new results

     Summary

15.1 Launching Your Venture

Before launching a venture, the entrepreneurial team should ensure its members agree on the vision and then
develop a founder's agreement. The company culture should be defined, and a code of conduct developed.
The team should identify all operational tasks needed to launch the venture and their associated time
requirements and dependencies. Staying openminded and flexible at launch can help support the venture's
success.
672                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

15.2 Making Difficult Business Decisions in Response to Challenges
Some of the same characteristics that make entrepreneurs successful (such as confidence and optimism) can
sabotage success. Entrepreneurs should be aware of potential biases or thinking patterns that obfuscate the
current reality of the venture so they are able to recognize key problem indicators and put solutions in place.
Some of the more difficult decisions an entrepreneur makes are difficult because of the emotional connection
to previous decisions or decisions that affect other people involved in the venture. Early agreement that the
success of the venture is the primary focus can help to work through these difficult decisions.

15.3 Seeking Help or Support
Entrepreneurs should recognize the wisdom in seeking help and support as they plan, launch, and grow their
ventures. Sources of advice include the entrepreneur's own network, the connections of the start-up team,
and angel investors and their resources. Tools to assist in decision making include the Delphi method and the
Nominal Group technique.

15.4 Now What? Serving as a Mentor, Consultant, or Champion
Once you become an entrepreneur, you can consider giving back to the entrepreneurial community by
becoming a mentor, consultant, or champion to support other people in their ventures.

15.5 Reflections: Documenting the Journey
Reflection and journaling are useful tools for entrepreneurial growth. These practices can help you to identify
patterns that act as obstacles, to brainstorm solutions, to set goals, and to document ideas that may lead to
your next venture.

     Review Questions

1. A nondisclosure agreement protects the venture by ________.
    A. outlining confidential information or knowledge that the parties do not want to share with outside, or
          third, parties and is considered a legally binding contract
    B. sharing information that is not confidential
    C. identifying key people who can access confidential information
    D. identifying disclosed information for outsider use

2. Which of the following documents should be discussed and agreed upon prior to the start of the venture?
    A. nondisclosure and noncompete agreements
    B. nondisclosure and founder's agreements
    C. founder's agreement and a code of conduct
    D. founder's, nondisclosure, noncompete agreements, and code of conduct

3. The founder's agreement includes which of the following content items?
    A. non-disclosure clause
    B. personnel plan
    C. buyback clause
    D. marketing plan

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps                                                                                673

4. According to some research on entrepreneurs, what is/are the most significant bias(es)?
    A. small numbers allow for niche markets
    B. entrepreneurs prefer taking action rather than planning
    C. entrepreneurs tend to be over confident and optimistic
    D. entrepreneurs fall for the planning fallacy

5. The law of small numbers refers to:
    A. an inability to attract a large target market
    B. a target market that is too small to lead to success
    C. a target market that aligns with key stakeholders
    D. both a and b

6. Why is it important to keep track of your assumptions?
    A. Knowing the assumptions provides background information related to the projected outcomes or
          numerical projections.
    B. Knowing the assumptions provides an opportunity support your biases.
    C. Assumptions are never accurate and are therefore discredited.
    D. Assumptions constantly change and therefore do not need to be tracked.

7. The Nominal Group technique ________.
    A. is only used in complex decisions
    B. has multiple uses for gaining feedback from participants
    C. can be used with only one participant
    D. restricts participant participation

8. The Delphi technique ________.
    A. requires participants to be in one location
    B. requires participants to come prepared to the activity by researching the problem
    C. requires time and commitment
    D. requires collaboration in answering the questionnaire

9. Acting as a mentor provides ________.
    A. expert assistance to the venture startup team and self-growth for the mentor
    B. opportunities to diminish relationships
    C. the mentor with professional development
    D. the mentee with peer recognition

10. A serial entrepreneur is someone who ________.
    A. wants to retire
    B. creates a pattern of starting multiple ventures
    C. plans for a low stress future
    D. plans to start the first venture

11. Benefits of a reflection journal include which of the following?
    A. identifying patterns, biases, habits and discovering new insights
    B. assigning new work responsibilities
    C. identifying wasted time
    D. avoid reviewing decisions that can't be changed
674                                                             Chapter 15 Next Steps

12. Reflection journal is similar to ________.
    A. a post mortem
    B. a time log of your activities
    C. a scrapbook of pictures
    D. a record of assumptions

13. According to Dr. Grant, creatives are people who ________.
    A. are procrastinators
    B. act on multiple ideas
    C. plan out each detail
    D. are highly confident with no doubts about their success

     Discussion Questions

1. Why should the entrepreneurial team begin with the end in mind?
2. How can a Gantt chart help in the preparation for starting the new venture?
3. Why would an angel investor stress to the startup team the importance of not getting too attached to the
venture?
4. Should employees who are not part of the startup team receive an equity position in the venture? What are
the benefits and drawbacks that inform this decision?
5. What biases might an entrepreneur encounter in starting the venture?
6. What actions can the entrepreneur take to avoid these biases?
7. What can be done to avoid personnel problems that occur after the venture has opened?
8. How can brainstorming and creating a mindmap improve problem recognition and follow through actions?
9. What are three methods you could use to find support for your new venture?
10. Why is it important to analyze and discuss decisions?
11. Why is it important to feel comfortable with a decision?
12. What are the benefits in becoming a mentor, consultant or champion?
13. What are the risks or drawbacks in becoming a mentor, consultant or champion?
14. How does a philanthropic desire align with entrepreneurship?
15. What can you do to avoid the challenges presented through Gino and Staats' research?
16. What can you do to role model behavior that reflects your learning of the material in this chapter?

     Case Questions

1. Review the information on YouTube in this section of the chapter and conduct your own research. What
evidence is there that beginning with the end in mind was part of YouTube's founders original plan?

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Chapter 15 Next Steps  675

2. Review the LuminAid story. Why did Sreshta and Stork focus on light as their business idea instead of a
focus on other areas needed by survivors of a natural disaster?

3. Refer to Stacy Madison's food cart story. What was the most important insight you gained from reading
about Stacy's food cart business?

4. Everlane started as an online clothing store focused on ethical business practices. Part of their commitment
to ethical practices includes regular visits to their factories to ensure people receive fair wages and work
reasonable hours, addressing environmental concerns, and being transparent in decisions and transactions,
such as disclosing the cost to produce an article of clothing. With $100 million in revenue in 2016 and over
44,000 people on the waiting list for a new line of denim available this September 2018, Everlane is shaking up
the fashion industry. If your new venture faced this type of competition, what actions would you take?
Consider if you would adopt this same transparency strategy, become more involved in the supply chain to
determine how clothing factory workers were treated at your offshore factories owned by other entities,
increase brand name marketing to support the profit markup on your clothing, or some other action? What
process would you use to make these decisions?

     Suggested Resources

15.1 Launching Your Venture
R. Nanda, L. Kind, K. Laws, & J. Lum. "Case Study: Is a Start-up's Strength Becoming Its Weakness?" Harvard

  Business Review 93, no. 11 (2015): 145.
Ablebit's instructions for making a Gantt chart in Microsoft Excel: https://www.ablebits.com/office-addins-

  blog/2014/05/23/make-gantt-chart-excel/
Smartsheet's step-by-step instructions for making a Gantt chart in Microsoft Excel:

  https://www.smartsheet.com/blog/gantt-chart-excel
Project Manager's Ultimate Guide to Gantt Charts: https://www.projectmanager.com/gantt-chart
The Startup Checklist by David Rose, founder of NY Angels and GUST.com
Shortcut: How Analogies Reveal Connections, Spark Innovation, and Sell Our Greatest Ideas by John Pollock

  discusses using analogies to think about unmet needs and innovative solutions.

15.2 Making Difficult Business Decisions in Response to Challenges
"How Fast Can Your Company Afford to Grow?" Harvard Business Review, 1998. Classic article serves as a good

  reference on cash flow and self-financed growth, covering key levers to help manage profitable growth
  without having to go "hat in hand" to investors again.
The Undoing Project by Michael Lewis provides a good reference on biases through the story of psychologists
  Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman.
"3 Steps to Determine Product-Market Fit", Entrepreneur Magazine, August 2014. Good reference on product-
  market fit.
What Customers Want, by Ullrich, discusses "Jobs to be Done" theory created by Clayton Christensen and
  practice by Strategyn.
https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this
676                                                                               Chapter 15 Next Steps

15.3 Seeking Help or Support
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE): https://www.score.org/
Small Business Administration: https://www.sba.gov/
Y Combinator: http://www.ycombinator.com/
Techstars: www.techstars.org
G. Klein. The Power of Intuition: How to Use Your Gut Feelings to Make Better Decisions at Work. (New York:

  Doubleday, 2004)

15.4 Now What? Serving as a Mentor, Consultant, or Champion
The Case Foundation: https://casefoundation.org/
Startup Champions Network: http://www.championsnetwork.co/

15.5 Reflections: Documenting the Journey
F. T. Evers. Journaling: A Path to Our Innermost Self. Interbeing, 2, no.2 (2008): 53-56.
D. Ciampa. The More Senior Your Job Title, the More You Need to Keep a Journal. Harvard Business Review

  Digital Articles (2017): 2-4.
Worklife TED-sponsored podcasts: https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/worklife-with-adam-grant/

  id1346314086?mt=2
NPR podcast "How I Built This" founder/CEO podcasts: https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510313/how-i-built-this

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Appendix A  677

 A Suggested Resources

These suggested resources can help you review and refine your entrepreneurial plans.

Entrepreneurial and Small Business Support (General)

Small Business Administration (SBA): www.sba.gov
Small Business Administration site of local organizations that might assist you in launching or managing a
venture: https://www.sba.gov/tools/local-assistance
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE): https://www.score.org/
Small Business Development Center (SBDC): https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/osbdc/resources
International Franchise Association: https://www.franchise.org/
US government contracts: https://www.sba.gov/federal-contracting/contracting-guide/basic-requirements
US Department of Commerce: https://www.commerce.gov/
US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis: https://www.bea.gov/
US Department of Labor: https://www.dol.gov/
US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/bls/blswage.htm
US Chamber of Commerce: https://www.uschamber.com/
Global Entrepreneurship Monitor: http://www.gemconsortium.org/

Entrepreneurial and Small Business Support (Specific Groups)

Women's Business Center (WBC): https://www.sba.gov/local-assistance/
find/?type=Women%27s%20Business%20Center&pageNumber=1
Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC): https://veteransoutreachcenter.org/
National Association of Women Business Owners: https://www.nawbo.org/resources/women-business-owner-
statistics
Asian American Chamber of Commerce: http://www.asian-americanchamber.org/
Black Chamber of Commerce: https://www.nationalbcc.org/
Hispanic Chamber of Commerce: https://ushcc.com/
Ladies Who Launch: https://www.ladieswholaunch.org/
Minority Business Development Agency: https://www.mbda.gov/
National Association of Professional Women: http://womenforhire.com/company/national-association-of-
professional-women-napw/
The Female Entrepreneur Association: https://femaleentrepreneurassociation.com/
Women's Business Enterprise National Council: https://www.wbenc.org/

Vision Statement, Mission Statement, and Goal Setting

Website with ideas for developing your vision: https://www.executestrategy.net/blog/write-good-vision-
678                                                                               Appendix A

statement
Video with walkthrough for crafting your mission statement: https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/65230
Eleven Free Goal Setting Software and Tools You Can Use: http://www.goal-setting-college.com/goal-setting-
software/11-goal-setting-software-tools-you-can-use-for-free/

YouTube: Achieve More by Setting Smart Goals: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yA53yhiOe04

Business Models and Business Plans

SBA Business Plan resources: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-your-business/write-your-business-
plan
Business Model Canvas: https://strategyzer.com/canvas/business-model-canvas
Business model canvas and resources: Strategyzer.com
Lean canvas and associated resources: Leanstack.com
Social business model canvas and related resources: Socialbusinessmodelcanvas.com
YouTube Video: Business Model Canvas Explained: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QoAOzMTLP5s
The Four Lenses Strategy Framework website: www.4lenses.org
List of Social Enterprise Business Models or Frameworks: http://www.thesedge.org/socent-spotlights/
22-awesome-social-enterprise-business-ideas
YouTube Video: We have a dream, B-corp overview and mission: https://www.youtube.com/
watch?time_continue=3&v=V-VFZUFJwt4

Sample business plans-www.bizplans.com: www.bplans.com

Funding, Finances, and Accounting

Small Business Administration (SBA) lending program: https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans
Small Business Administration (SBA) calculation of startup costs: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/plan-
your-business/calculate-your-startup-costs#section-header-6
Small Business Administration, "How to Start a Non-Profit": https://www.sba.gov/blogs/how-start-non-profit
US Department of Labor: https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/statistics/wagesearnings
Tax information for charitable organizations from the Internal Revenue Service: https://www.irs.gov/charities-
non-profits/charitable-organizations
Grant information by state: https://www.grants.gov/
Information from the National Institutes of Health on grants and the application process:
https://grants.nih.gov/grants/about_grants.htm
G-Startup Worldwide's global startup competition: https://www.f6s.com/g-startupworldwide/
Extending Credit to Your Customers: https://fitsmallbusiness.com/invoicing-extending-credit-to-customers/
7 Ways to Bootstrap Your Business to Success: https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/254217
Small Business Administration Introduction to Accounting Course: https://www.sba.gov/tools/learning-center-
view-course/364071

Khan Academy Accounting and Financial Statements Course: https://www.khanacademy.org/economics-

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Appendix A  679

finance-domain/core-finance/accounting-and-financial-stateme
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission: https://www.sec.gov/reportspubs/investor-publications/
investorpubsbegfinstmtguidehtm.html
US Securities and Exchange Commission Regulatory Actions: https://www.sec.gov/rules.shtml
SEC Information on crowdfunding portals: https://www.sec.gov/divisions/marketreg/tmcompliance/
fpregistrationguide.htm
Link to SEC (FINRA) crowdfunding portals: https://www.finra.org/about/funding-portals-we-regulate
Money and Interest Rates: https://www.federalreserve.gov/data.htm
Y Combinator: http://www.ycombinator.com/
Techstars: www.techstars.org
Kickstarter: www.kickstarter.com
Indiegogo, "The Essential Guide to Crowdfunding": https://learn.indiegogo.com/the-essential-guide-to-
crowdfunding/
Startupfest, "The $100K Investment Prize": http://www.startupfestival.com/news/100k-investment-prize/
Circleup: http://circleup.com
Exilend: https://www.exilend.com
Fundable: http://fundable.com
LendingKarma: http://www.lendingkarma.com
LoanBack: http://loanback.com
Trade Show News Network: http://www.tsnn.com
ZimpleMoney: http://www.zimplemoney.com

Legal Issues in Entrepreneurship

SBREFA Small Business Resource Center's site on legal requirements and regulatory compliance:
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/business-operations-center/osdbu/compliance-assistance
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office: https://www.uspto.gov/
Nondisclosure (NDA) templates: https://www.rocketlawyer.com/
US Small Business Administration on licenses and permits: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/launch-your-
business/apply-licenses-permits
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) information on taxation in partnerships: https://www.irs.gov/businesses/small-
businesses-self-employed/partnerships
Information on variation between all 50 states in forming or incorporating a business from Cornell Law School:
https://www.law.cornell.edu/wex/corporations
US Copyright Office: https://www.copyright.gov/help/faq/faq-protect.html
Federal Communications Commission on cybersecurity for small businesses: https://www.fcc.gov/general/
cybersecurity-small-business
North Carolina State University Poole College of Management's risk management initiative:
https://erm.ncsu.edu/library/article/coso-erm-framework
680                                                                               Appendix A

US Copyright Office: https://www.copyright.gov/

Marketing

Small Business Administration information on marketing and sales: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/
manage-your-business/marketing-sales

American Marketing Association (AMA): https://www.ama.org
American Marketing Association (AMA) digital marketing certification: https://www.ama.org/events-training/
Certification/Pages/digital-marketing-certification.aspx
American Marketing Association (AMA) on-demand course: Digital Marketing: Delivering a Custom Experience:
https://www.ama.org/events-training/virtual-events/Pages/digital-marketing-virtual-conference-051717.aspx

Google Ads: https://ads.google.com/home/

Pitching

Harvard Business Review's how to craft a corporate narrative: https://hbr.org/2016/03/how-to-build-a-
strategic-narrative
Pitch deck templates: https://articles.bplans.com/what-to-include-in-your-pitch-deck/ and
https://www.forbes.com/sites/allbusiness/2017/03/04/how-to-create-a-great-investor-pitch-deck-for-startups-
seeking-financing/#630406bc2003 and https://www.startupgrind.com/blog/the-quick-and-dirty-guide-to-
creating-a-winning-pitch-deck/

Operational Resources

Society for Human Resource Management: https://www.shrm.org
Scheduling programs and templates: https://getsling.com/blog/category/scheduling/,
https://wheniwork.com/features, and https://schedulebuilder.org/
Employer hiring costs of employee: https://gusto.com/tools/employer-tax-calculator
Payroll program: https://onpay.com/payroll-calculator-tax-rates
Smartsheet's step-by-step instructions for making a Gantt chart in Microsoft Excel:
https://www.smartsheet.com/blog/gantt-chart-excel
Project Manager's ultimate guide to Gantt charts: https://www.projectmanager.com/gantt-chart

FindLaw Small Business Center (business forms): https://smallbusiness.findlaw.com/

Research Sources for Demographic and Marketing Data

Small Business Administration (SBA) guide on researching your market: https://www.sba.gov/business-guide/
plan-your-business/market-research-competitive-analysis#section-header-5
American Fact Finder (market research): http://factfinder2.census.gov/main.html

FedStats (statistics from more than 100 federal agencies): www.fedstats.gov
National Federation of Independent Business: https://www.nfib.com/business-resources
The Small Business National Center: https://sites.google.com/a/uca.edu/sbanc/home

Bureau of Labor Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/bls/demographics.htm

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Appendix A  681

North American Industry Classification System: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/
Statistical Abstract of the United States: https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2011/compendia/statab/
131ed.html
US Census Bureau site on where to locate your business: https://cbb.census.gov/sbe/#
Consumer credit data: https://www.federalreserve.gov/releases/G19/
Consumer product safety: https://www.cpsc.gov/
Consumer price index: https://www.bls.gov/cpi/
Bureau of Economic Analysis: https://www.bea.gov/
Employment Statistics: https://stats.bls.gov/bls/employment.htm
Income Statistics: https://www.bls.gov/cps/earnings.htm
American Customer Satisfaction Index: https://www.theacsi.org/
North American Industry Classification System: https://www.census.gov/eos/www/naics/
US Census Bureau: https://www.census.gov/

Tools for Creativity and Problem Solving

Twenty-four essential mindmapping and brainstorming tools: http://mashable.com/2013/09/25/mind-
mapping-tools/#jP47h7Q818qM
Open Innovation Community: http://openinnovation.net/
Ideation techniques: http://www.innovationmanagement.se/2013/05/30/the-7-all-time-greatest-ideation-
techniques/ and https://www.ideou.com/pages/ideation-method-mash-up and http://www.designkit.org/
methods/15
LUMA Institute's LUMA System of Innovation: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qDyElJ0xe2o
Analyze your problem-solving abilities: https://www.mindtools.com
IDEO Design Kit: http://www.designkit.org/resources/1.
Design Thinking Mix Tapes from Stanford's Design School: https://dschool.stanford.edu/resources/chart-a-
new-course-put-design-thinking-to-work.

Lean Startup and Pivoting

Lean startup: http://theleanstartup.com/#principles
Toyota's Way: https://vimeo.com/44328452
14 Management Principles of Toyota: http://www.panview.nl/en/lean-production/toyota-way-j-liker-summary
Tim Berry's Lean Business Planning Guide: https://leanplan.com/
Lean canvas and associated resources: Leanstack.com
The International Business Model Competition that focuses on lean startup models, sponsored by BYU and
Harvard: http://www.businessmodelcompetition.com/

Networking and Trade Organizations

LinkedIn: www.linkedin.com
682                                                                               Appendix A

Association of Chamber of Commerce Executives: acce.org
BNI: Business Network International: https://www.bni.com
HUBZone: https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ohp
Tradeshows: http://www.tsnn.com/
Industry research publications: http://www.newslink.org

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                    683

Index                                American Association of             B
                                     Advertising Agencies, 501
Symbols                              American Association of             B corporation, 561, 565, 586
                                     Franchisees and Dealers, 501        B-corp, 90
1-for-1 business model, 460          American Micro Devices, 110         B-corporation, 120
16PF, 515                            American Red Cross, 259             balance sheet, 377, 386, 464, 486
3-D printing, 620                    American Retirement Association,    Bank loans, 610
3DR', 234                            501                                 Barna, 297
3M, 67, 77                           American Top 40, 507                Bartering, 368
7 Ps, 300                            AmeriCorps, 563                     bartering, 386
8a certification, 421                Amirite.com, 223                    Basecamp, 620
                                     Amtrak, 563                         baselining, 524, 541
A                                    Anand, 242                          Bautista, 574
                                     anchoring strategies, 126, 141      Bayh-Dole Act, 109
AARP, 501                            Andreesen, 444                      Baylor University New Venture
Absolute capacity, 529               Andreessen, 271                     Competition, 286
absolute capacity, 541               Andreessen Horowitz, 271            Beauchamp, 297, 625
Accounting, 374                      angel investor, 15, 386             Bed Bath & Beyond, 404
accounting, 386                      angel investors, 78                 Bee Love, 200, 204
accounting equation, 374, 377,       Angel investors, 270, 358, 611      Beiler, 627
381, 386                             Anheuser-Busch InBev, 435           Benchmark Capital, 362
Accounts payable, 378                Antitrust laws, 109                 Benchmarking, 49
accounts payable, 386                antitrust laws, 141                 benchmarking, 91, 524, 541
accounts receivable, 382, 386        Apple, 67, 74, 149, 156, 238, 259,  benefactors, 365
action plan, 83, 91                  278, 298, 307, 325, 400, 411, 426,  benefit corporation, 561
adaptive model, 219, 248             429, 452, 601, 603, 630             Berry, 426
Adidas, 302, 338                     AquaPodkit, 319                     Best Buy, 404
Adler, 22                            Aristotle, 57                       Betabrand, 577
Adobe, 172                           Arm & Hammer, 431                   Bezos, 224, 576
Advertising, 302                     Arrieta, 593                        Bill and Melinda Gates
advertising, 348                     Arrington, 110                      Foundation, 365
advisory board, 628, 637             articles of formation, 571          Billboard, 507
Aetna, 435                           articles of incorporation, 557      Bing, 327, 620
AGW Group, 225                       articles of partnership, 567        Birchbox, 297, 301, 325, 612, 619,
Air Jordan, 266                      ask, 269, 284, 287                  625
Air New Zealand, 435                 assembly line, 528                  Birth Stage, 428
Airbnb, 32, 34, 156, 201, 274, 401,  assessment, 245, 248                Birthday Party Project, 461
445                                  Assets, 374, 594                    BitGiving, 242
algae energy pavilion, 8             assets, 377, 386                    Blakely, 188, 218
Alibaba, 404                         Association of American             Blank, 444, 492
Alphabet, 67                         Educators, 501                      Blockbuster, 195, 407, 449
AlphaGamma.com, 285                  Association of Licensed             Blogger.com, 411
Alsever, 233                         Architects, 501                     Blogging, 329
alumni association, 499              AT&T, 161                           Bloomberg, 403
Alzheimer's Association, 256         Autocratic, 536                     Blumenthal, 10, 307
Amazon, 52, 81, 190, 203, 208, 224,  Automotive Maintenance Repair       BMW, 569
234, 330, 382, 404, 429, 432, 546,   Association, 501                    board of directors, 560
563, 576, 579, 597, 600, 619         avatar platform, 394                Bombardier, 234
Amazon Instant Video, 52             Avon, 90, 400                       Bombas, 116, 564
Amazon Mom, 52                                                           Bootcamp, 598
Amazon Web Services, 52
684                                                                               Index

bootstrapping, 52, 72, 78, 91, 370,  Business Network International,              Chevron, 117
373, 386, 628                        502                                          Chick-Fil-A, 435
Bootstrapping, 609                   business plan, 54, 83, 406, 422,             Chocolate Factory, 435
born global, 433, 437                453, 462, 466, 486, 519, 553                 Christensen, 34, 159, 448, 450
born versus made, 57                 business process patent, 600                 Cialdini, 347
Boston Beer Company, 372             business purpose, 553, 586                   clarify, 230, 248
bottom-up approach, 321              Business Roundtable, 98, 101                 Claritas Research, 194
Brabham, 233                         business structure, 553, 586                 Clark, 430
Brainstorming, 25, 156, 235          buyback clause, 645, 671                     Clarke Inc., 430
brainstorming, 151, 178, 222, 248                                                 Clayton Act, 109
brand, 331, 348                      C                                            Clicks, 326
brand advocate, 266, 336, 348                                                     Clorox Co., 11
brand image, 272                     C corporation, 561, 586                      close, 345, 348
brand strategy, 331, 348             C corporations, 566                          close corporation, 563
Branson, 122                         CAD, 620                                     closed corporation, 560
breach of contract, 583              Cadabra, Inc., 576                           closed group, 500, 541
breakeven point, 54, 91, 384, 386,   calculated risk, 10                          closely held corporation, 560, 563
463, 486                             California Pizza Kitchen, 432                Coastal Tractor, 38
breaking even, 428                   CAM, 620                                     Coca-Cola, 257, 298, 331, 599
Brown, 238                           Campbell, 226                                code of conduct, 644, 646, 671
build-measure-learn loop, 394,       Campbell Soup, 122                           code of ethics, 101
399, 407, 422, 437                   Cancel, 56                                   codes of conduct, 101
build-measure-learn model, 166       Cantillon, 62                                collaborative economy, 42
bundling, 307, 348                   capital, 407, 559, 575, 586                  collaborative methodologies, 233
burn rate, 383, 386, 671             capital expense, 529, 541                    Collateral, 361
Burn rate, 654                       capital improvements, 510, 541               collateral, 386, 529
Burt's Bees, 27                      capital purchase, 529                        Collegiate Entrepreneurs'
Burt's Bees Corporation, 11          capitalism, 61, 91                           Organization, 284
business accelerator, 541            career entrepreneur, 27, 35                  commingle, 571
Business accelerators, 503           Cargill, 563                                 Committee of Sponsoring
business ethics, 100, 141            Carlson, 186                                 Organizations of the Treadway
Business failure, 404                Carnegie, 63                                 Commission, 583
business failure, 437                Cash, 525                                    Communication skills, 222
Business for Social Responsibility,  cash flow, 73, 91, 407, 541                  communication skills, 248
101                                  Cash flow, 509                               Community Supported
business incubator, 541              cash management, 52, 91                      Agriculture, 627
Business incubators, 503             cash on delivery, 527                        company culture, 646, 671
Business learning, 166               Cattell, 515                                 competition, 415
business lifecycle, 427, 437         CATWOE, 229                                  competition laws, 109
business model, 72, 91, 209, 212,    causal research, 314, 348                    competitive advantage, 208, 212,
453, 486                             CB Insights, 404                             343, 405
business model canvas, 222, 452,     Census data, 194                             competitive analysis, 204, 476
454, 466, 486                        chamber of commerce, 501, 622,               competitive analysis grid, 204
Business Model Canvas, 341           632                                          competitive matrix, 476, 486
Business Model Canvas (BMC), 80      Chang, 337                                   computer-aided design, 620
business model canvas (BMC),         charette, 228                                computer-aided manufacture,
273                                  charitable organization, 386                 620
Business model innovation, 451       Charitable organizations, 363                Confinity, 400
business model innovation, 486       checklist, 607                               conflict of interest, 110, 141
                                     Chen, 199                                    conjoint analysis, 314, 348
                                     Chenault, 461
                                     Chesbrough, 153

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                                                  685

Conrad Levinson, 323                Crowdsourcing, 233               design patents, 175
Constant Contact, 325, 597          Crowley, 323                     design thinking, 150, 178, 248
Constituents, 303                   Cuban, 160, 183, 373             Design thinking, 156, 238
consultant, 666                     Curie, 227                       Design Thinking Process, 81
Consumer Financial Protection       Currency, 525                    design thinking process, 239
Bureau (CFPB), 113                  current asset value, 596         design thinking tools, 241
Content marketing, 329              current liabilities, 526         develop, 232, 248
Continental Edison Company, 109     Current Population Survey, 316   DICEE, 171
contract, 611                       customer empathy map, 456, 486   diffusion chasm, 165, 178
Contracts, 109                      Customer service, 333            diffusion of innovations, 165
contribution margin, 384, 386       customer service, 346            Digital ads, 327
Cooke, 452                          customer value, 458              Digital marketing, 327
cooperative venture, 119            customer value proposition, 210  digital marketing, 348
copyright, 106, 141, 604, 637       Customer-led pricing, 307        Direct channels, 308
Corcoran, 371                       customer-led pricing, 348        Direct mail, 303
corporate entrepreneurship, 66,     Customers, 210                   direct mail, 348
91                                  customers, 212                   directors, 555
corporate narrative, 265, 287       CVS, 435                         DirectTV, 307
corporate social responsibility,                                     Disclosure, 111
112                                 D                                disclosure, 141
corporate social responsibility                                      discrimination, 135
(CSR), 141                          da Silva, 145                    Disney, 74, 298, 402, 434, 449
corporation, 511, 557, 572, 586     Dallas Cowboys, 546              Disney Corporation, 192
Corporation for Public              Daryani, 18, 20                  Disruptive innovation, 159
Broadcasting, 563                   Data analysis, 224               disruptive innovation, 178, 447,
corporations, 553                   data analysis, 248               451, 486
COSO, 583                           David Kelley Design, 238         disruptive technology, 34, 35
cost of goods sold, 379, 386, 628   DBA, 573                         distributed partnership profits,
Cost-led pricing, 306               debt, 407                        569
cost-led pricing, 348               Debt financing, 360              distribution, 308
Costello, 220                       debt financing, 386              distribution channels, 308, 432
couchsurfing.com, 274               Debt service, 510                divergent thinking, 25, 35
CPA, 598                            debt service, 541                diversifying, 435
Craigslist, 274                     decision tree, 606, 637          Diversity, 136
Cratejoy, 53                        Decisiveness, 223                diversity, 141
Creative Commons, 256               decisiveness, 248                Dodd-Frank Act, 113
creative destruction, 66, 91, 185,  Decline Stage, 429               Dodge, 98
212                                 Decline/Rebirth Phase, 630       Dodge Motor Company, 98
creative thinking process, 24       Delgado, 406                     Dodgeball, 323
creativity, 155, 178, 230, 248      Dell, 298                        Dodgen, 319
credit, 373, 386                    Deloitte Consulting LLP, 507     doing business as, 573
Creditworthiness, 510               Delphi method, 663, 671          Dollar Shave Club, 166
creditworthiness, 541               Demand, 186                      Dominion Harbor Group, 189
Critical thinking, 221              demand, 212                      donation, 365, 386
critical thinking, 248              Democratic, 536                  Donegan, 87
Croatia Airlines, 435               demographic, 311                 DoorDash, 201
Cross-Disciplinary Team, 516        Demographics, 194                Dorsey, 453
Crowdcube, 368                      demographics, 212                DoSomething.org, 217
crowdfunding, 242, 367, 386, 612    deontology, 103                  DoSomething.Org, 492
crowdsourcing, 189, 248             Department of Commerce, 505      Dove, 326
                                    Descriptive analytics, 224
                                    design patent, 106, 141, 601
686                                                                               Index

Dow Chemical, 435                  Enron, 113, 138                                evaluation, 248
Dow Jones, 116                     enterprise risk management, 581,               Evernote, 7, 33
down time, 530, 541                586                                            Excel, 520
Draper Competition for Collegiate  entity selection, 553                          executive summary, 339, 348, 469,
Women Entrepreneurs, 286           entrepreneur, 8, 23, 30, 35, 64                471, 486
Draw.io, 597                       Entrepreneur.com, 277, 282, 294                Expeditionary marketing, 325
Drew, 58                           entrepreneur.com, 403                          expeditionary marketing, 348
Drexel Burnham Lambert, 113        entrepreneurial contest, 282, 287              expenses, 380, 386
Dropbox, 320, 325, 391, 392, 395,  entrepreneurial journey, 47, 91                Export-Import Bank, 505
597                                entrepreneurial marketing, 299,                External communications, 222
Drucker, 132, 158, 201, 447        325, 348                                       external environment, 243, 248
Drybar, 299                        entrepreneurial mindset, 31, 33,               external locus of control, 536
due diligence, 10, 35, 72, 91      35, 48, 55, 68                                 Exxon, 563
Due diligence, 192                 Entrepreneurial opportunity, 184
DuFour, 237                        entrepreneurial opportunity, 186,              F
Dunkin, 18                         192, 212, 218
Dunkin' Donuts, 18                 Entrepreneurial problem solving,               Fab.com, 400
DuPont, 435                        218                                            Fabulis, 400
duty-based ethics, 103             entrepreneurial problem solving,               Facebook, 190, 209, 236, 303, 326,
Dyson, 409                         248                                            329, 333, 420, 546, 563, 620
                                   entrepreneurial process, 67, 91                Fact Finder, 316
E                                  entrepreneurial spirit, 32, 66, 91             fail-safe point, 671
                                   entrepreneurial venture, 9, 35, 44,            fail-safe points, 652
e-commerce, 67, 77, 91             91                                             Fairchild, 77
E2, 116                            entrepreneurial vision, 22, 35                 Fairchild Semiconductor, 77
Earle, 609                         Entrepreneurial vision, 28                     Fairness, 111
Early adopters, 395                entrepreneurship, 62                           fairness, 141
early adopters, 437                environmental entrepreneurship,                Fannie Mae, 563
early stage, 358, 386              116, 141                                       Fashion 21, 337
Ebay, 330, 400, 432                Environmental Protection Agency                Fast Works, 397
eBay, 445, 546                     (EPA), 618                                     fear of failure, 413
Eberhard, 492                      EPA, 618                                       Fear of missing out (FOMO), 266
Economic causes of risk, 581       Equifax, 103                                   fear of missing out (FOMO), 287
Economic factors, 619              Equity, 374                                    feasibility analysis, 461, 486
economic factors, 637              equity, 377, 386, 559, 610                     Federal Aviation Administration
economic nexus, 579, 586           Equity crowdfunding, 577                       (FAA), 627
Edgar, 120                         equity crowdfunding, 586                       Federal Communications
Edison, 17                         equity financing, 362, 386                     Commission, 585
El Paso Disaster Room 915, 406     equity investment, 503                         Federal Emergency Management
elaboration, 169                   equity share, 575                              Agency (FEMA), 319
elevator pitch, 275, 287           ergonomics, 527, 541                           Federal Express, 187
Eli Lilly, 111                     escalation of commitment, 652,                 Federal Trade Commission Act,
Email marketing, 329               671                                            109
Embrace Innovations, 120           Esnard, 468                                    Female Entrepreneur Association,
Emerging growth companies          ethics, 100, 101, 141                          420
(EGCs), 577                        Ethnographic research, 313                     Ferdowsi, 391, 392
Emerson, 618                       ethnographic research, 348                     Ferraro, 177
Empathy, 151                       Etsy, 67, 77, 432                              Fidler, 493
empathy, 178                       evaluate, 232, 248                             financial analysis, 463, 486
employee handbook, 633             Evaluation, 169, 245                           Financial Industry Regulatory
Empowerment Through                                                               Authority (FINRA), 113
Integration (ETI), 253                                                            financial plan, 482

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                  687

financial risk, 583, 586            G                                  Greene, 59, 64
financial statement, 386, 509                                          Greenwood, 199
financial statements, 374, 377      Gannt chart, 671                   Griffin, 199
Financial viability, 211            Gantt chart, 648                   gross profit, 379, 386
financial viability, 212, 365, 386  Gap, 619                           growth phase, 629
financing, 357, 386                 Gates, 74                          growth stage, 428
Financing, 526                      GE, 243, 429                       GrubHub, 42, 574
financing activities, 383, 386      Gearhead Outfitters, 356           Gucci, 338
First Industrial Revolution, 62     GEICO, 603                         guerrilla marketing, 302, 323, 348
fishbone diagram, 230               gender equality, 137               Guidewell Innovation Center, 491
Fit4Mom, 435                        General Electric, 135, 574         Guillebeau, 467
FitBit, 302                         General Electric (GE), 397         Gutenberg, 173
Fitbit, 429                         General Motors, 114                GW New Venture Competition,
Fixed assets, 361                   general partner, 568               286
fixed assets, 386                   general partnership, 567, 586
Fixed costs, 384, 463               Geoscape, 317                      H
fixed costs, 386, 486               gig economy, 42, 201, 212, 572
flat organization, 517, 541         gig worker, 572                    H&M, 337
Flock, 175                          Gilboa, 10, 307                    hackathon, 222, 248
focus group, 313, 348               Glass, 452                         Hagler, 593
for-profit business, 554, 586       Glip, 175                          Hancock, 60
for-profit corporations, 564        Global Entrepreneurship Index,     Harper, 369
Forbes, 540                         14                                 Harry's Shave Club, 166
Ford, 162, 246                      Global Entrepreneurship Monitor    Harsh, 419
Ford Motor Company, 98              (GEM), 67, 410, 437                harvest, 11, 35
Forever 21, 337                     Globalization, 189                 hashtags, 303
founders' agreement, 644, 671       GM, 136, 140                       Heart Move Collective, 419
Four Lenses Strategic Framework,    go-or-no-go decision, 466, 486     Heath, 564
82                                  GoDaddy Bookkeeping, 620           Heffern, 237
Foursquare, 323                     GoFundMe, 577                      Heinz, 435
framework, 80, 91                   Goldberg, 564                      HERE WeGo, 54
franchise, 8, 77                    Goldman Sachs, 359                 Hersey Company, 74
franchisee, 8                       Good Sports, 491                   Hershey, 74
franchisees, 435                    Goodyear, 331                      Hewlett, 265
franchising, 91, 437                Google, 67, 193, 325, 326, 327,    Hewlett-Packard Corporation
Franchising, 435                    411, 435, 546, 570, 620, 648, 650  (HP), 265
franchisor, 435                     Google Earth, 570                  Hilton, 34
Franklin, 60                        Google Maps, 54                    hindsight bias, 653, 671
Freddie Mac, 563                    Google Ventures, 241, 242          Hippocrates, 102
freelancer, 42                      GoPro, 429                         Hippocratic Oath, 102
FRESH Books, 620                    Grameen Bank, 120                  Hirabayashi, 217
friends and family financing, 357   grander purpose, 129, 132          Hispanic, Black, and Asian
Frost & Sullivan, 318               Granovetter, 222                   American Chambers, 421
Fryman, 146                         grant, 365, 386                    Honor societies, 498
functional skills, 516              grants, 613                        Hootsuite, 598
Fundera, 197                        graphic user interface (GUI), 278  Hopkins, 63
Funding resources, 608              Graves, 635                        Houston, 391, 392, 395
funding sources, 637                Gravity Payments, 556              How I Built This, 371
Funds, 356                          Great Depression, 65               Howe, 62
funds, 386                          Green Business Network at Green    HQ Raleigh, 281
                                    America, 501                       Hsieh, 396
                                                                       Huang, 8, 13
688                                                                               Index

hubris, 653, 671                  Infrastructure, 210                             Isaacs, 223
Hubspot, 346                      infrastructure, 212                             iteration, 398
HUBZone, 507                      initial public offering (IPO), 70,              iterations, 396, 437
Huizenga, 407                     359, 386, 576                                   iterative development, 166, 178
Human causes of risk, 581         innovation, 62, 91, 155, 178, 447,              iTunes, 400, 411
Human resources, 630              486
human resources, 637              Innovation, 407                                 J
human-centered design, 248        innovation accounting, 396, 437
human-centered design (HCD),      innovation flowchart, 241                       Jackman, 484
239                               innovative model, 219, 248                      Jawbone, 302
human-centric design, 151         Insider Trading and Securities                  JCPenney, 429, 619
hybrid group, 541                 Fraud Enforcement Act, 113                      Jennings, 64
hybrid groups, 500                Insight, 169                                    Jibo, 234
hybrid venture, 120               Insightly, 175, 325                             Jiffy Lube, 547
                                  Instagram, 303, 314, 329, 333                   Jimenez, 123
I                                 insurance, 584, 586                             jingle, 333, 348
                                  insurance premiums, 514                         Jitterbug smartphone, 50
IA, 546                           Intangible resources, 599                       Jobs, 74, 149, 259, 406
iBackPack, 355, 367               intangible resources, 637                       JOBS Act, 612
IBISWorld, 320                    integrity, 101, 141                             jobs-to-be-done theory, 450
IBM, 67                           Intel, 77                                       John, 469, 493
iceberg principle, 282, 287       Intel Corporation, 110                          John Deere Company, 292
ICON, 594                         Intellectual property, 105, 277,                Johnny Cupcakes, 609
ID Two, 238                       599                                             Johnson, 183, 546
ideate, 232, 248                  intellectual property, 141, 435, 604            Johnson & Johnson, 140, 170
ideation, 150, 178, 255, 287      interest, 576                                   Johnson Security, 430
Ideation, 156, 239                interests, 554                                  joint venture, 435, 437, 567, 569,
IDEO, 238, 240, 242               Internal communications, 222                    586, 626
Idilbi, 493                       internal environment, 243, 248                  joint ventures (JVs), 553
IKEA, 256, 336                    internal locus of control, 536                  Jones, 546
illumination, 25                  Internal Revenue Service, 363                   Jordan, 409
Imbellus, 221                     Internal Revenue Service (IRS),                 journaling, 669
Impact Hub, 371                   618                                             Juicero, 444
implement, 232, 248               International Franchise                         Jumpstart Our Business Startups
IMVU, 394, 398, 411               Association, 501                                (JOBS) Act, 577
incentives, 304                   Internet Association, 546                       junior associates, 511
income (profit-and-loss)          intrapreneur, 91                                Juniper, 117
statement, 386                    intrapreneurial, 77                             just-in-time inventory system, 528
income statement, 379, 509        intrapreneurs, 67
incremental innovation, 159, 178  Introductory offers, 307                        K
incubation, 25                    introductory offers, 348
Incubation, 168                   invention, 155, 161, 178                        Kaizen, 108
independent contractor, 42, 91    Inventory management, 510                       Kant, 57
Independent contractors, 633      inventory management, 541                       Kantar, 221
independent contractors, 637      Investing activities, 382                       Kantian, 103
Indiegogo, 355, 367               investing activities, 386                       Kasem, 507
Indirect channels, 308            investor, 575                                   Kashoo, 620
Individual investors, 270         investors, 611                                  Kaufman, 404
IndUS Entrepreneurs, 471          invisible hand, 61                              Kawasaki, 171
influencers, 303, 329             iPhone, 601                                     Kelley, 238
information and communication                                                     Kelley Blue Book, 596
technologies (ICTs), 267                                                          Kentucky Fried Chicken, 599
                                                                                  Kentucky Fried Chicken (KFC), 496
                                                                                  Keurig, 484

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                       689

Key, 176                              Liker, 393                            Madam C. J. Walker Hair
key performance indicators, 342       limited liability, 571                Culturists Union of America, 58
Kickstarter, 120, 176, 355, 362, 367  limited liability companies (LLCs),   Madison, 201
Kies, 64                              553                                   Mail Chimp, 597
Kirban, 443                           limited liability company, 570        MailChimp, 325
Kirton, 219                           limited liability company (LLC),      majority stake, 435
Kirton Adaption-Innovation (KAI)      586                                   MakerBot, 234
Inventory, 219                        limited liability limited             Mallavarupu, 419
Knight-Ridder, 493                    partnership (LLLP), 568               Man Crates, 75
Koch, 372                             limited liability partnership (LLP),  manager, 536
Kraft, 435                            586                                   March of Dimes, 260
                                      limited liability partnerships, 568   market analysis, 320, 348, 464, 486
L                                     limited liability partnerships        market opportunity, 318, 348
                                      (LLPs), 553                           market research, 311, 348, 406
Ladies Who Launch, 420                limited partner, 568                  Marketing, 298
Lafci, 593                            limited partnership, 568              marketing, 348
Laissez-faire, 536                    limited partnership (LP), 586         marketing mix, 300, 335, 341, 348
Landry, 546                           limited personal liability, 583       marketing plan, 338, 348, 406
lateral thinking, 157, 178            Lindell, 184                          marketing strategy, 338, 349
Laughing Man Coffee, 484              line of credit, 610, 637              Marketo, 325, 597
Laughing Man Foundation, 484          line of credit (LOC), 526, 541        marketresearch.com, 318
Lay, 138                              Linear thinking, 157                  Markides, 451
leader, 536                           linear thinking, 178                  Marriott, 34
leadership style inventory, 174       LinkedIn, 303, 412, 499, 632          Mars, 563
lean manufacturing, 243               Liquidity, 526                        Marshall, 593
lean manufacturing process, 393       liquidity, 541                        Marvel, 449
lean methodology, 422                 Liran, 443                            Mary Kay, 90
lean model canvas, 455, 459, 486      LivePerson, 42, 574                   Masters, 60, 63
lean pitch, 398, 437                  loan, 361                             Mattel, 434
lean plan, 422, 424, 437              loan principal, 576                   mature stage, 359, 387
lean problem-solving process, 244     Locke, 57                             Maturity Phase, 629
lean process, 243, 248                Locus of control, 536                 Maturity Stage, 429
lean startup, 392, 398, 437           Long-term debts, 526                  Maurya, 445, 454, 459
Lean Strategy Canvas, 80              Loss leader pricing, 307              McBean, 226
Lee, 446                              loss leader pricing, 348              McDonalds, 18, 30
Legal risk, 583                       Love Beyond Walls, 466                McDonald's, 108, 159, 407, 435,
legal risk, 586                       Lovepop, 651                          528, 603
lenders, 575                          Lufthansa, 435                        Mechanical Turk, 234
Lester, 466                           Lula, 145                             Meetup, 502
liabilities, 377                      Lululemon Athletica, 261              Meltzer, 322
liability, 374, 387                   LUMA Institute, 239                   member-managed LLCs, 571
Libin, 7                              LuminAID, 643                         members, 571
Library of Congress, 604              Luxottica, 30                         mentor, 21, 665
Licensing, 434                        Lyft, 42, 185, 201, 451, 574          Mentors, 635
licensing, 437                                                              mergers and acquisitions, 435,
Lidey, 217                            M                                     437
lifecycle stages, 428                                                       Merkadoteknia Research and
lifelong development plan, 130        Ma, 404                               Consulting, 313, 316
LifeStraw, 203                        Mackey, 360                           metaverse, 394
lifestyle business, 644, 671          Macy's, 298, 619                      Method, 334
lifestyle venture, 10, 35             Mad Mimi, 325
Light and Motion, 618
690                                                                               Index

Metropolitan Museum of Art, 363      N                                            Niantic, Inc, 279
Microloans, 237                                                                   Nic & Luc, 574
Microsoft, 67, 135, 175, 574, 597    Nag, 156                                     Nielsen/Arbitron, 317
Microsoft Excel, 597                 NASA, 435, 570                               Nike, 266, 302, 603, 621
Microsoft PowerPoint, 597            Nasdaq National Market System,               Nintendo, 160, 402, 630
Microsoft Teams, 175                 577                                          Nintendo Games, 402
Microsoft Word, 597                  Nasdaq SmallCap, 577                         Noguera, 611
milestone, 91                        National Aeronautics and Space               Nohbo Drops, 160
milestones, 54                       Administration, 613                          Nolo, 603
Milken, 113                          National Association for the                 Nominal Group, 664
mind map, 85                         Education of Young Children, 501             Nominal Group technique, 671
Mind mapping, 26                     National Association for Women               noncompete agreement, 278, 287,
mindmap, 657                         Owners, 420                                  646, 671
minimum viable product, 459          National Association of                      nondisclosure agreement, 646,
minimum viable product (MVP),        Broadcasters, 491                            671
170, 178, 394, 437                   National Association of                      nondisclosure agreement (NDA),
Minkara, 253, 258                    Professional Women, 420                      278, 287, 469
Minority Business and                National Institutes of Health                Nonlinear thinking, 518
Development Agency (MBDA),           (NIH), 365                                   Nonprofit organization, 119
421                                  National Kidney Foundation of                normative ethical theories, 103
Minority Business Development        Arizona, 119                                 North American Industry
Agency, 420                          National Negro Cosmetics                     Classification System (NAICS),
Minshew, 412, 468                    Manufacturers Association, 58                513, 541
Miracle Messages, 22, 38             National Science Foundation, 613             Not-for-profit corporations, 564
mission statement, 21, 32, 35, 121,  Natural causes of risk, 581                  not-for-profit organization
259, 287                             nature versus nurture, 57                    (NFPO), 554, 586
MobileArq, 419                       nav.com, 197                                 Noyce, 77
ModCloth, 321, 619                   NBA, 434
Monahan, 355                         NBC, 333                                     O
Money, 525                           need awareness, 230, 248
moonlighting, 372, 387               Nelson, 209                                  Observation, 245
Moore, 77                            Nepotism, 532                                observation, 249
MooseJaw, 325                        nepotism, 541                                Occupational Safety and Hazard
moral compass, 104, 131              Nesta, 240                                   Association, 618
morals, 101                          net income, 379, 387                         Ocean Cleanup, 116
Morrison, 122                        net worth, 510                               odd numbers strategy, 307, 349
Morse, 62                            Netflix, 255, 449                            Odeo, 400, 411, 452
Mosquito Squad, 435                  network, 222                                 offering, 210, 212
Mothers Against Drunk Drivers        Networking, 222                              Office of the US Trade
(MADD), 500                          networking, 497, 541                         Representative, 505
Motorola, 243                        networking groups, 502                       officers, 560
Mozart, 169                          New Balance Company, 245                     open group, 500, 541
Musk, 117, 163, 196                  New Belgium Brewing Company,                 open innovation, 153, 178
MVP, 396, 423                        112                                          open-ended NDA, 278
My Pasta Art, 11                     New Story, 593, 612, 620                     operating activities, 382, 387
My Pillow, 184                       New York City Public Library, 369            operational business plan, 520
Mycoskie, 119, 123, 366              New York StartUP! Business Plan              Operational capacity, 529
Myler, 170                           Competition, 369                             operational capacity, 542
mystery shopper, 313                 New York Stock Exchange, 359,                operational expenses, 529, 542
                                     563                                          operational reserve, 529, 542
                                     Newsom, 572                                  Opportunity screening, 191
                                                                                  opportunity screening, 212

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                691

opportunity-identifying           Pinrose, 431                       private-public partnerships, 501
perspective, 12, 35               Pinterest, 303                     privately held corporation, 563,
Oracle, 67                        pioneering innovation, 159, 178    586
organizational roadmap, 468       Pipeline Angels, 611               privately owned, 554
Osterwalder, 453, 456, 460        pitch, 255, 267, 287               pro forma, 509, 542
Outsourcing, 533, 629             pitch competition, 268, 287        proactive approach, 127
outsourcing, 542, 637             pitch competitions, 283            probability value, 315
Overseas Private Investment       pitch deck, 271, 274, 287          Problem solving, 219
Corporation, 505                  Pitching, 398                      problem-solution narrative, 254,
                                  Pivoting, 399                      287
P                                 pivoting, 437                      Process, 310
                                  Place, 308                         process, 349
P value, 315                      place, 349                         Process Excellence, 243
Packard, 265                      Plank, 302                         Procter & Gamble, 170, 429
pain point, 159, 178              planning fallacy, 653, 671         product, 301, 349
Palm Computing, 400               plant patent, 603                  product liability lawsuits, 583
Palms Barber, 199, 204            Plato, 57                          Product Life Cycle, 68
paralegals, 511                   Pokémon GO, 160, 279               product-based business, 594
partnership, 511, 567, 572, 586   Polaroid, 430, 630                 production time, 530, 542
partnership agreement, 567        policyholders, 584                 professional advisors, 515
partnerships, 553                 Political factors, 617             professional groups, 501
pass-through entities, 569        political factors, 637             profit, 379
Patagonia, 116, 259               Poppy, 523                         profit margin, 306, 349, 379, 387
patent, 63, 91, 175, 277, 599     PopUp Business School, 87          profit-and-loss statement, 379
Payless, 429, 619                 Positioning, 321                   Program services, 364
Payment Card Industry Data        positioning, 349                   program services, 387
Security Standard, 585            Postmates, 201                     Projected cash flow, 464
PayPal, 163, 400, 650             Potential Rating Index for Zip     projected cash flow, 486
peer economy, 42                  Markets (PRIZM), 195               projection, 383, 387
penetration pricing, 306, 349     Powell, 220                        Promoting Women in
Penn, 60                          Pre-launch costs, 623              Entrepreneurship Act, 87
People, 310                       pre-launch costs, 637              promotion, 302, 349
people, 349                       predictive analytics, 224          Prospecting, 344
People for the Ethical Treatment  Prejudice, 135                     Prospurly, 53
of Animals (PETA), 500            prejudice, 141                     Protestant work ethic, 103
PepsiCo, 234, 298                 premium pricing, 306, 349          prototype, 72, 176
perceived value pricing, 306      Preparation, 25, 168               prototyping, 620
Personal selling, 304             Pretty Young Professional, 468,    Public Company Accounting
personal selling, 349             493                                Oversight Board (PCAOB), 113,
personally liable, 573            Pretty Young Professionals (PYP),  563
PEST, 637                         412                                public corporation, 563, 586
PEST analysis, 207                Price, 306, 556                    Public relations, 303
PEST framework, 617               price, 349                         public relations, 349
Petitioner problem solvers, 228   price wars, 306                    publicly held corporation, 563,
petitioner problem solvers, 249   Pridham, 189                       586
Petrobras, 145                    Primary research, 191, 312         publicly owned, 554
Pew Research Center, 316          primary research, 212, 349         publicly traded corporation, 563
Phlur, 431                        Prime, 52                          Puma, 338
physical environment, 310, 349    Private equity investment, 359
piece price, 596                  private label, 619                 Q
piercing the corporate veil, 559
Pigneur, 453, 456                                                    Qualitative data, 280
692                                                                               Index

Qualitative research, 313         SAB Miller, 435                                 self-regulating problem solvers,
qualitative research, 349         sales, 380                                      249
quantifiable manner, 29, 35       sales force, 533                                Senior Core of Retired Executives,
Quantitative data, 280            sales promotion, 349                            636
Quantitative research, 314        Sales promotions, 304                           serial entrepreneur, 19, 35, 75, 91,
quantitative research, 349        sales strategy, 343, 349                        671
QuickBooks, 597, 620              sales territory, 535                            Service Corps of Retired
Quimby, 11, 27                    Salesforce, 325, 346, 597                       Executives (SCORE), 191, 226, 503
Quinn, 176                        SAM, 474                                        service mark, 603, 637
Quirky, 404                       Samit, 507                                      service-based business, 595
quota, 637                        sample, 315, 349                                serviceable available market
Quotas, 618                       Samsung, 431, 601                               (SAM), 320, 349, 464, 486
QVC, 625                          Samsung Electronics, 146                        sexism, 419
                                  Sandberg, 420                                   shadow, 79
R                                 Sanders, 496                                    Shane, 57
                                  Sarbanes-Oxley Act, 113, 138                    shared economy, 201, 212
Rackham, 345                      Say, 59                                         shareholder primacy, 98
radical innovations, 452          SBA, 197, 284, 505, 577, 584, 625,              shareholders, 98, 554, 557, 558
Radio Shack, 619                  635                                             sharing economy, 42
Radisson, 60                      SBDCs, 506                                      Shark Tank, 160, 183, 264, 370, 384,
Rapid Brands, 183                 Schick, 166                                     468, 564
reactive approach, 127            Schultz, 18                                     SharkBot 3D Printer, 19
Real-time marketing, 326          Schumpeter, 66, 184, 446                        Sharkits, 19
real-time marketing, 349          Schurr, 251                                     Sherman Act, 109
Rebirth or Death Stage, 429       scientific management, 520                      Shine, 217
Red Bull, 433                     scientific method, 163, 178                     Shine Talks, 218
Red Cross, 365                    SCORE, 284, 497, 503, 622, 629,                 Shkreli, 97, 103
Red Hen Bakery, 627               635, 636, 660                                   Shockley Semiconductor, 77
relationship marketing, 324, 349  Search ads, 327                                 Shopify, 77
reliability, 315                  search engine optimization (SEO),               shrinking, 400
resource dependence theory        327                                             Significance, 315
(RDT) model, 626, 637             Sears, 429, 619                                 Silicon Valley Bank (SVB) Financial
Resourcefulness, 226              Second Industrial Revolution, 64                Group, 190
resourcefulness, 249              secondary research, 191, 212, 349               Simmons, 317
return on investment (ROI), 74    Secondary research, 316                         situation analysis, 340, 349
revenue, 380, 387                 Securities and Exchange                         situational opportunity, 76, 92
reward structure, 367             Commission, 358, 563                            Six Sigma, 243
Ries, 393, 396, 401, 411          Securities and Exchange                         Six Thinking Hats, 152
Ring, 33                          Commission (SEC), 113                           six-step sales process, 344
Rise Products, 123                seed stage, 387                                 Sixteen Personality Factor
Risk appetite, 582                seed-stage, 357                                 Questionnaire, 515
Robbins, 409                      SeedInvest, 368                                 Skilling, 138
Rogers, 165                       Segmenting, 321                                 skimming, 307, 349
Rogers Adoption Curve, 164        segmenting, 349                                 Skype, 597
Roomify, 29                       self-employment, 43                             Slack, 175, 260, 325
Rose, 270                         Self-performing, 533                            Slaughter, 292
Rousseff, 145                     self-performing, 542                            Small Business Administration,
royalty payment, 434              Self-regulating problem solvers,                298, 403
run rate, 383, 387                227                                             Small Business Administration
Ryver, 175                                                                        (SBA), 226, 316, 361, 421, 503, 660

S

S corporation, 561, 566, 586

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                                                                     693

Small Business Association (SBA),    Spotify, 576                         Sweet Beginnings, 199
610                                  Stacy's Pita Chips, 654              Swinmurn, 396
Small Business Development           stagnating, 400                      SWOT analysis, 205, 212, 340, 476,
Center, 635                          stakeholders, 98, 100                486
Small Business Development           Standard Industrial Classification/
Centers (SBDCs), 506                 North American Industry              T
Small Business Innovation            Classification System (SIC/NAICS),
Research Program, 613                473                                  Taaluma Totes, 237
small business owner, 8, 23          Stanford Design School, 240          tagline, 349
Small Business Technology            Star Alliance, 435                   taglines, 331
Transfer Program, 613                Starbucks, 18, 603                   TAM, 474
SMART goals, 29, 35, 261             start-ups, 299                       Tandemic, 459
Smith, 61, 187, 528                  startup, 42                          Tangible resources, 594
Snapchat, 303                        Startup Champions Network, 666       tangible resources, 637
Soccer Shots, 435                    startup phase, 628                   Target, 298, 334
social business model canvas,        state of incorporation, 557          target customer, 456
459, 486                             State Street, 359                    target market, 50, 92, 300, 312,
social capital, 665, 671             statement of cash flows, 381, 387    320, 349, 405
Social clubs, 499                    statement starters, 153              targeting, 321, 349
social enterprises, 119              status quo bias, 653, 671            Tariffs, 618
social entrepreneur, 18, 35          Stella & Dot, 90                     tariffs, 637
Social entrepreneurship, 115, 366    Sterett, 226                         TaskRabbit, 42, 574
social entrepreneurship, 141         Stern, 160                           Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, 618
Social impact, 459                   Stitch Fix, 452                      tax-exempt, 555
Social media, 302                    stock, 554, 558                      tax-exempt status, 363, 387
social media, 333, 349               Stone, 452                           Taylor, 520, 525
social networking, 498               Storyboarding, 236                   Teach for America, 256
social purpose businesses, 119       storyboarding, 249                   Team creativity, 236
Society for Human Resource           strategic alliance, 437              team creativity, 249
Management, 126                      Strategic alliances, 435             Tech Talent South, 493
sociocultural factors, 619, 637      Strategyzer, 235, 457                TechCrunch, 110
soft launch, 73, 79, 92              Strong ties, 222                     technological factors, 620, 637
soft open, 73                        Stumpf, 145                          TechStars, 283
soft skill, 499                      Subscribe & Save, 52                 Techstars, 446
Solar City, 163                      Subscriptions, 52                    Tesla, 108, 117, 163, 492
sole proprietor, 572                 Subway, 528                          Tesla Electric Light, 109
sole proprietorship, 511, 572, 572,  super angels, 358                    Texaco, 117
586                                  SuperGlass Windshield Repair,        Texas State Data Center, 316
sole proprietorships, 553            547                                  Textbooks for Change, 485
Sook, 337                            superior value proposition, 405      The Balance, 578
Sourcify.com, 173                    Supply, 186                          The Cut Buddy, 468, 493
South by Southwest, 323              supply, 212                          The Entrepreneur Next Door, 58
SpaceX, 163, 196                     support bias, 314                    The Muse, 412, 468
Spanx, 218, 261                      support network, 23                  The Wander Girls, 11
Spanx, Incorporated, 188             Support Startup Businesses Act,      The Wealth of Nations, 528
Spark, 281                           87                                   Theorist problem solvers, 227
special interest group, 499          Surfdog LA, 322                      theorist problem solvers, 249
Specialization, 528                  SurveyMonkey, 209                    Theta Omega Gamma, 499
Spencer, 187                         sustainability, 117, 141             Think of Us, 56
SPIN, 345                            sustainable strategy, 363, 387       Thompson, 430, 523
                                                                          three circles tool, 207
                                                                          TOMS, 116, 119, 123, 365
694                                                                               Index

Toms Shoes, 460                     Unstated needs, 313                           Veterans Community Project, 203
top-down approach, 320              up time, 530                                  Veteran's Business Outreach
tort, 583                           UPS, 243                                      Center (VBOC), 507
Torts, 109                          UpWork, 42, 574, 631                          Viacom, 407
total available market (TAM), 320,  US Bureau of Labor, 622                       vicarious liability, 109
349, 464, 487                       US Census, 191                                Victoria's Secret, 429, 619
total cost of ownership, 542        US Census Bureau, 316                         Viner, 322
total costs of ownership (TCO),     US Copyright Office, 604                      viral marketing, 302, 350
529                                 US Internal Revenue Service (IRS),            Viral marketing, 326
total user experience, 172          555                                           Virgin Group, 122
Toyoda, 247                         US Patent and Trademark Office                virtue ethics, 103
Toyota, 108, 243, 393, 528, 569     (USPTO), 599                                  Visa, 629
Toyota Motor Corporation, 247,      US Postal Service, 563                        Vision, 20
528                                 US Small Business Administration,             vision statement, 20, 23, 28, 35,
trade association, 542              191                                           255, 644
Trade associations, 501             US Small Business Administration              Vita Coco, 443
trade secret, 107, 141              (SBA), 52                                     Vital Vio, 220
trademark, 106, 141, 603, 637       US Trade and Development                      Vodafone, 125
Traf-O-Data, 74                     Agency, 505                                   Volkswagen, 145, 140
Transparency International, 17      useful life, 596
trial run, 53                       user interface, 172, 178                      W
truthfulness, 111, 141              user interface (UI), 278, 287
Turing Pharmaceuticals, 97          USPTO, 599, 603                               Wag!, 321
Turkish Airlines, 435               Utilitarian ethics, 103                       Walker, 58
Twitter, 209, 242, 303, 326, 333,   utilitarianism, 103                           Walmart, 183, 204, 298, 625
400, 412, 453                       utility patent, 106, 141, 599                 Warby Parker, 10, 30, 116, 214,
Twttr, 453                          Utility patents, 175                          256, 306, 460
                                                                                  Warner Brothers, 434
U                                   V                                             Watkins, 138
                                                                                  Waze, 54
UAttend, 620                        Valdes-Depena, 136                            WBC, 506
Uber, 31, 42, 70, 159, 185, 201,    Validation, 320                               Weak ties, 222
294, 362, 401, 432, 451, 574        validation, 350                               Webb, 299
Uber Black, 432                     Validity, 315                                 Weber, 453
Uber Copter, 451                    valuation, 362, 387                           WeFunder, 368
Uber Eats, 451                      value proposition, 21, 35, 257, 287,          Welch, 135
Ulwick, 159                         321, 452, 487                                 Wells Fargo, 145, 140
Under Armour, 302                   value proposition canvas, 457, 487            WeWork, 281, 371
UNESCO Global Action                Variable costs, 384, 463                      whistleblower, 138
Programme on Education for          variable costs, 387, 487                      Whiteboarding, 246
Sustainable Development, 13         VBOC, 507                                     whiteboarding, 249
UNESCO's Global Action              venture, 42, 47, 50, 52, 67, 84, 92           Whitney, 59, 64
Programme on Education for          Venture, 76                                   Whole Foods, 200
Sustainable Development, 7          venture capitalist, 15, 358, 387              Whole Foods Market, 360
Unilever, 132, 327                  venture capitalists, 78                       Whyte, 66
unique selling proposition, 207,    Venture capitalists, 270, 612                 Williams, 411, 452
212                                 Venture Life Cycle, 68                        Windows, 278
United Airlines, 435                verification, 25                              Wink, 404
United Nations Children's Fund      Verizon, 597                                  Winslow, 60
(UNICEF), 235                       vertical integration, 63, 92, 626             Winterkorn, 145
United Way, 555                     vertical thinking, 157                        wireframing, 84
Unity One Credit Union, 119         Vestergaard, 203                              Witkin, 225

This OpenStax book is available for free at https://cnx.org/content/col29104/1.9
Index                              695

Wix, 333
Women's Business Center (WBC),
506
Women's Business Center of the
Small Business Administration,
420
Women's Business Enterprise
National Council, 420
Word-of-mouth (WOM)
marketing, 329
word-of-mouth (WOM)
marketing, 350
work-for-hire agreement, 278, 287
work-life balance, 27
Working capital, 361
working capital, 387
workplace culture, 124
World Bank, 320
World Factbook, 320
World War I, 65
World War II, 65
World's Most Ethical Companies,
101
Wozniak, 259

X

X.com, 400
Xerox, 195
XEROX Corporation, 186

Y

Y Combinator, 283, 593, 661
Yahoo, 556
Yahoo!, 327
Yamauchi, 402
Yellin, 136
Yelp, 310, 330
YouTube, 70, 193, 326, 329, 333,
620, 650
Yunus, 120

Z

Zappos, 293, 396
Zara, 433
Ziglar, 347
Zipline, 44
ZOHO Books, 620
Zoom, 70, 597
Zuckerberg, 236
