AN INTRODUCTION TO
BUSINESS

LibreTexts
LibreTexts
Exploring Business

           LibreTexts
This text is disseminated via the Open Education Resource (OER) LibreTexts Project
(https://LibreTexts.org) and like the thousands of other texts available within this powerful platform, it is
freely available for reading, printing, and "consuming."
The LibreTexts mission is to bring together students, faculty, and scholars in a collaborative effort to
provide an accessible, and comprehensive platform that empowers our community to develop, curate,
adapt, and adopt openly licensed resources and technologies; through these efforts we can reduce the
financial burden born from traditional educational resource costs, ensuring education is more accessible
for students and communities worldwide.
Most, but not all, pages in the library have licenses that may allow individuals to make changes, save,
and print this book. Carefully consult the applicable license(s) before pursuing such effects. Instructors
can adopt existing LibreTexts texts or Remix them to quickly build course-specific resources to meet the
needs of their students. Unlike traditional textbooks, LibreTexts' web based origins allow powerful
integration of advanced features and new technologies to support learning.

LibreTexts is the adaptable, user-friendly non-profit open education resource platform that educators
trust for creating, customizing, and sharing accessible, interactive textbooks, adaptive homework, and
ancillary materials. We collaborate with individuals and organizations to champion open education
initiatives, support institutional publishing programs, drive curriculum development projects, and more.
The LibreTexts libraries are Powered by NICE CXone Expert and was supported by the Department of
Education Open Textbook Pilot Project, the California Education Learning Lab, the UC Davis Office of
the Provost, the UC Davis Library, the California State University Affordable Learning Solutions
Program, and Merlot. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation
under Grant No. 1246120, 1525057, and 1413739.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation nor the US
Department of Education.
Have questions or comments? For information about adoptions or adaptions contact
info@LibreTexts.org or visit our main website at https://LibreTexts.org.

                                        This text was compiled on 01/05/2026
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Licensing

1: The Foundations of Business

    1.1: Introduction
    1.2: Getting Down to Business
    1.3: What Is Economics?
    1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
    1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Monopoly
    1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
    1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
    1.8: Cases and Problems

2: Business Ethics and Social                    Responsibility

    2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
    2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
    2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
    2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics
    2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
    2.6: Environmentalism
    2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
    2.8: Cases and Problems

3: Business in a Global Environment

    3.1: The Globalization of Business
    3.2: Opportunities in International Business
    3.3: The Global Business Environment
    3.4: Trade Controls
    3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
    3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business
    3.7: Cases and Problems

4: Selecting a Form of Business                  Ownership

    4.1: Factors to Consider
    4.2: Sole Proprietorship
    4.3: Partnership
    4.4: Corporation
    4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
    4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
    4.7: Cases and Problems

5: The Challenges of Starting a Business

    5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
    5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S. Economy
    5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?

                                                            1    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10127
5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business Ownership
5.5: Starting a Business
5.6: The Business Plan
5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
5.8: Cases and Problems

6: Managing for Business       Success

    6.1: What Do Managers Do?
    6.2: Planning
    6.3: Organizing
    6.4: Directing
    6.5: Controlling
    6.6: Managerial Skills
    6.7: Cases and Problems

7: Recruiting, Motivating, and              Keeping      Quality  Employees

    7.1: Human Resource Management
    7.2: Developing Employees
    7.3: Motivating Employees
    7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
    7.5: Performance Appraisal
    7.6: Labor Unions
    7.7: Cases and Problems

8: Teamwork and Communications

    8.1: The Team and the Organization
    8.2: Why Teamwork Works
    8.3: The Team and Its Members
    8.4: The Business of Communication
    8.5: Communication Channels
    8.6: Forms of Communication
    8.7: Cases and Problems

9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers

    9.1: 0 Cases and Problems
    9.2: What Is Marketing?
    9.3: The Marketing Mix
    9.4: Pricing a Product
    9.5: Placing a Product
    9.6: Promoting a Product
    9.7: Interacting with Your Customers
    9.8: The Product Life Cycle
    9.9: The Marketing Environment
    9.10: Careers in Marketing

10: Product Design and Development

    10.1: What Is a Product?
    10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?

                                            2                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10127
10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
10.4: Understand Your Industry
10.5: Forecasting Demand
10.6: Breakeven Analysis
10.7: Product Development
10.8: Protecting Your Idea
10.9: Cases and Problems

11: Operations Management in Manufacturing                            and      Service  Industries

    11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
    11.2: Facility Layouts
    11.3: Managing the Production Process in a Manufacturing Company
    11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts
    11.5: The Technology of Goods Production
    11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
    11.7: Producing for Quality
    11.8: Cases and Problems

12: The Role of Accounting in Business

    12.1: The Role of Accounting
    12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
    12.3: Accrual Accounting
    12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
    12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
    12.6: Cases and Problems

13: Managing Financial Resources

    13.1: The Functions of Money
    13.2: Financial Institutions
    13.3: The Federal Reserve System
    13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
    13.5: Understanding Securities Markets
    13.6: Financing the Going Concern
    13.7: Careers in Finance
    13.8: Cases and Problems

14: Personal Finances

    14.1: Financial Planning
    14.2: Time Is Money
    14.3: The Financial Planning Process
    14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons from the Subprime Crisis
    14.5: Cases and Problems

15: Managing Information and Technology

    15.1: Data versus Information
    15.2: Managing Data
    15.3: Types of Information Systems
    15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing

                                             3                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10127
    15.5: Data Communications Networks
    15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication
    15.7: Careers in Information Management
    15.8: Cases and Problems

16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business

    16.1: Law and the Legal System
    16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
    16.3: Negligence Torts
    16.4: Product Liability
    16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
    16.6: Cases and Problems

Index

Glossary

Detailed Licensing

4                                                      https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/10127
Licensing

A detailed breakdown of this resource's licensing can be found in Back Matter/Detailed Licensing.

1                                                                                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/90839
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

1: The Foundations of Business

  1.1: Introduction
  1.2: Getting Down to Business
  1.3: What Is Economics?
  1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
  1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Monopoly
  1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
  1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
  1.8: Cases and Problems
This page titled 1: The Foundations of Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
1.1: Introduction

As the story of Apple suggests, today is an interesting time to study business. Advances in technology are bringing rapid changes in
the ways we produce and deliver goods and services. The Internet and other improvements in communication (such as
smartphones, video conferencing, and social networking) now affect the way we do business. Companies are expanding
international operations, and the workforce is more diverse than ever. Corporations are being held responsible for the behavior of
their executives, and more people share the opinion that companies should be good corporate citizens. Plus--and this is a big plus
--businesses today are facing the lingering effects of what many economists believe is the worst financial crisis since the Great
Depression (Hilsenrath, et. al., 2008). Economic turmoil that began in the housing and mortgage industries as a result of troubled
subprime mortgages quickly spread to the rest of the economy. In 2008, credit markets froze up and banks stopped making loans.
Lawmakers tried to get money flowing again by passing a $700 billion Wall Street bailout, yet businesses and individuals were still
denied access to needed credit. Without money or credit, consumer confidence in the economy dropped and consumers cut back
their spending. Businesses responded by producing fewer products, and their sales and profits dropped. Unemployment rose as
troubled companies shed the most jobs in five years, and 760,000 Americans marched to the unemployment lines1. The stock
market reacted to the financial crisis and its stock prices dropped by 44 percent while millions of Americans watched in shock as
their savings and retirement accounts took a nose dive. In fall 2008, even Apple, a company that had enjoyed strong sales growth
over the past five years, began to cut production of its popular iPhone. Without jobs or cash, consumers would no longer flock to
Apple's fancy retail stores or buy a prized iPhone (Gallagher, 2008). Things have turned around for Apple, which reported
blockbuster sales for 2011 in part because of strong customer response to the iPhone 4S. But not all companies or individuals are
doing so well. The economy is still struggling, unemployment is high (particularly for those ages 16 to 24), and home prices remain
low.

As you go through the course with the aid of this text, you'll explore the exciting world of business. We'll introduce you to the
various activities in which businesspeople engage--accounting, finance, information technology, management, marketing, and
operations. We'll help you understand the roles that these activities play in an organization, and we'll show you how they work
together. We hope that by exposing you to the things that businesspeople do, we'll help you decide whether business is right for
you and, if so, what areas of business you'd like to study further.

1"How the Economy Stole the Election," CNN.com,
http://money.cnn.com/galleries/2008/news/0810/gallery.economy_election/index.html (accessed January 21, 2012).

References

Gallagher, D., "Analyst says Apple is cutting back production as economy weakens," MarketWatch, November 3, 2008,
http://www.marketwatch.com/news/story/apple-cutting-back-iphone-production/story.aspx?guid=%7B7F2B6F99-D063-4005-
87AD-D8C36009F29B%7D&dist=msr_1 (accessed January 21, 2012).

Hilsenrath, J., Serena Ng, and Damian Paletta, "Worst Crisis Since '30s, With No End Yet in Sight," Wall Street Journal, Markets,
September 18, 2008, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB122169431617549947.html (accessed January 21, 2012).

This page titled 1.1: Introduction is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3971
1.2: Getting Down to Business

  Learning Objective

       Identify the main participants of business, the functions that most businesses perform, and the external forces that influence
       business activities.

A business is any activity that provides goods or services to consumers for the purpose of making a profit. When Steve Jobs and
Steve Wozniak created Apple Computer in Jobs's family garage, they started a business. The product was the Apple I, and the
company's founders hoped to sell their computers to customers for more than it cost to make and market them. If they were
successful (which they were), they'd make a profit.

Before we go on, let's make a couple of important distinctions concerning the terms in our definitions. First, whereas Apple
produces and sells goods (Mac, iPhone, iPod, iPad), many businesses provide services. Your bank is a service company, as is your
Internet provider. Hotels, airlines, law firms, movie theaters, and hospitals are also service companies. Many companies provide
both goods and services. For example, your local car dealership sells goods (cars) and also provides services (automobile repairs).

Second, some organizations are not set up to make profits. Many are established to provide social or educational services. Such
not-for-profit (or nonprofit) organizations include the United Way of America, Habitat for Humanity, the Boys and Girls Clubs, the
Sierra Club, the American Red Cross, and many colleges and universities. Most of these organizations, however, function in much
the same way as a business. They establish goals and work to meet them in an effective, efficient manner. Thus, most of the
business principles introduced in this text also apply to nonprofits.

Business Participants and Activities

Let's begin our discussion of business by identifying the main participants of business and the functions that most businesses
perform. Then we'll finish this section by discussing the external factors that influence a business's activities.

Participants

Every business must have one or more owners whose primary role is to invest money in the business. When a business is being
started, it's generally the owners who polish the business idea and bring together the resources (money and people) needed to turn
the idea into a business. The owners also hire employees to work for the company and help it reach its goals. Owners and
employees depend on a third group of participants--customers. Ultimately, the goal of any business is to satisfy the needs of its
customers in order to generate a profit for the owners.

This page titled 1.2: Getting Down to Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3972
1.3: What Is Economics?

  Learning Objectives

       Define economics and identify factors of production.
       Explain how economists answer the three key economics questions.
       Compare and contrast economic systems.

To appreciate how a business functions, we need to know something about the economic environment in which it operates. We
begin with a definition of economics and a discussion of the resources used to produce goods and services.

Resources: Inputs and Outputs

Economics is the study of the production, distribution, and consumption of goods and services. Resources are the inputs used to
produce outputs. Resources may include any or all of the following:

    Land and other natural resources
    Labor (physical and mental)
    Capital, including buildings and equipment
    Entrepreneurship

Resources are combined to produce goods and services. Land and natural resources provide the needed raw materials. Labor
transforms raw materials into goods and services. Capital (equipment, buildings, vehicles, cash, and so forth) are needed for the
production process. Entrepreneurship provides the skill and creativity needed to bring the other resources together to produce a
good or service to be sold to the marketplace.

Because a business uses resources to produce things, we also call these resources factors of production. The factors of production
used to produce a shirt would include the following:

    The land that the shirt factory sits on, the electricity used to run the plant, and the raw cotton from which the shirts are made
    The laborers who make the shirts
    The factory and equipment used in the manufacturing process, as well as the money needed to operate the factory
    The entrepreneurship skill used to coordinate the other resources to initiate the production process and the distribution of the
    goods or services to the marketplace

Input and Output Markets

Many of the factors of production (or resources) are provided to businesses by households. For example, households provide
businesses with labor (as workers), land and buildings (as landlords), and capital (as investors). In turn, businesses pay households
for these resources by providing them with income, such as wages, rent, and interest. The resources obtained from households are
then used by businesses to produce goods and services, which are sold to the same households that provide businesses with
revenue. The revenue obtained by businesses is then used to buy additional resources, and the cycle continues. This circular flow is
described in Figure 1.3, which illustrates the dual roles of households and businesses:

    Households not only provide factors of production (or resources) but also consume goods and services.
    Businesses not only buy resources but also produce and sell both goods and services.

1.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3973
                                                         Figure 1.3 The Circular Flow of Inputs and Outputs

This page titled 1.3: What Is Economics? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3973
1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand

  Learning Objective

    1. Describe perfect competition, and explain how supply and demand interact to set prices in a free market system.

Under a mixed economy, such as we have in the United States, businesses make decisions about which goods to produce or
services to offer and how they are priced. Because there are many businesses making goods or providing services, customers can
choose among a wide array of products. The competition for sales among businesses is a vital part of our economic system.
Economists have identified four types of competition--perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly.
We'll introduce the first of these--perfect competition--in this section and cover the remaining three in the following section.

Perfect Competition

Perfect competition exists when there are many consumers buying a standardized product from numerous small businesses.
Because no seller is big enough or influential enough to affect price, sellers and buyers accept the going price. For example, when a
commercial fisher brings his fish to the local market, he has little control over the price he gets and must accept the going market
price.

        Figure 1.5: Produce, like these apples, is a standardized product available from numerous businesses. (Mike Mozart - Apples - CC
        BY 2.0.)

The Basics of Supply and Demand

To appreciate how perfect competition works, we need to understand how buyers and sellers interact in a market to set prices. In a
market characterized by perfect competition, price is determined through the mechanisms of supply and demand. Prices are
influenced both by the supply of products from sellers and by the demand for products by buyers.

To illustrate this concept, let's create a supply and demand schedule for one particular good sold at one point in time. Then we'll
define demand and create a demand curve and define supply and create a supply curve. Finally, we'll see how supply and demand
interact to create an equilibrium price--the price at which buyers are willing to purchase the amount that sellers are willing to sell.

Demand and the Demand Curve

Demand is the quantity of a product that buyers are willing to purchase at various prices. The quantity of a product that people are
willing to buy depends on its price. You're typically willing to buy less of a product when prices rise and more of a product when
prices fall. Generally speaking, we find products more attractive at lower prices, and we buy more at lower prices because our
income goes further.

1.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3974
                                                                      Figure 1.6 The Demand Curve

Using this logic, we can construct a demand curve that shows the quantity of a product that will be demanded at different prices.
Let's assume that the diagram in Figure 1.6 represents the daily price and quantity of apples sold by farmers at a local market. Note
that as the price of apples goes down, buyers' demand goes up. Thus, if a pound of apples sells for $0.80, buyers will be willing to
purchase only fifteen hundred pounds per day. But if apples cost only $0.60 a pound, buyers will be willing to purchase two
thousand pounds. At $0.40 a pound, buyers will be willing to purchase twenty-five hundred pounds.

Supply and the Supply Curve

Supply is the quantity of a product that sellers are willing to sell at various prices. The quantity of a product that a business is
willing to sell depends on its price. Businesses are more willing to sell a product when the price rises and less willing to sell it
when prices fall. Again, this fact makes sense: businesses are set up to make profits, and there are larger profits to be made when
prices are high.

                                                                       Figure 1.7 The Supply Curve

Now we can construct a supply curve that shows the quantity of apples that farmers would be willing to sell at different prices,
regardless of demand. As you can see in Figure 1.7, the supply curve goes in the opposite direction from the demand curve: as
prices rise, the quantity of apples that farmers are willing to sell also goes up. The supply curve shows that farmers are willing to
sell only a thousand pounds of apples when the price is $0.40 a pound, two thousand pounds when the price is $0.60, and three
thousand pounds when the price is $0.80.

1.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3974
Equilibrium Price

We can now see how the market mechanism works under perfect competition. We do this by plotting both the supply curve and the
demand curve on one graph, as we've done in Figure 1.8 . The point at which the two curves intersect is the equilibrium price. At
this point, buyers' demand for apples and sellers' supply of apples is in equilibrium.

                                                                    Figure 1.8 The Equilibrium Price

You can see in Figure 1.8 that the supply and demand curves intersect at the price of $0.60 and quantity of two thousand pounds.
Thus, $0.60 is the equilibrium price: at this price, the quantity of apples demanded by buyers equals the quantity of apples that
farmers are willing to supply. If a farmer tries to charge more than $0.60 for a pound of apples, he won't sell very many and his
profits will go down. If, on the other hand, a farmer tries to charge less than the equilibrium price of $0.60 a pound, he will sell
more apples but his profit per pound will be less than at the equilibrium price.

What have we learned in this discussion? We've learned that without outside influences, markets in an environment of perfect
competition will arrive at an equilibrium point at which both buyers and sellers are satisfied. But we must be aware that this is a
very simplistic example. Things are much more complex in the real world. For one thing, markets rarely operate without outside
influences. Sometimes, sellers supply more of a product than buyers are willing to purchase; in that case, there's a surplus.
Sometimes, they don't produce enough of a product to satisfy demand; then we have a shortage.

Circumstances also have a habit of changing. What would happen, for example, if income rose and buyers were willing to pay
more for apples? The demand curve would change, resulting in an increase in equilibrium price. This outcome makes intuitive
sense: as demand increases, prices will go up. What would happen if apple crops were larger than expected because of favorable
weather conditions? Farmers might be willing to sell apples at lower prices. If so, the supply curve would shift, resulting in another
change in equilibrium price: the increase in supply would bring down prices.

Key Takeaways

In a free market system, buyers and sellers interact in a market to set prices.

    When the market is characterized by perfect competition, many small companies sell identical products. Because no company
    is large enough to control price, each simply accepts the market price. The price is determined by supply and demand.
    Supply is the quantity of a product that sellers are willing to sell at various prices.
    Demand is the quantity of a product that buyers are willing to purchase at various prices.
    The quantity of a product that people will buy depends on its price: they'll buy more when the price is low and less when it's
    high.
    Price also influences the quantity of a product that producers are willing to supply: they'll sell more of a product when prices
    are high and less when they're low.

1.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3974
    In a competitive market, the decisions of buyers and sellers interact until the market reaches an equilibrium price--the price at
    which buyers are willing to buy the same amount that sellers are willing to sell.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

You just ran across three interesting statistics: (1) the world's current supply of oil is estimated to be 1.3 trillion barrels; (2) the
worldwide use of oil is thirty billion barrels a year; and (3) at this rate of consumption, we'll run out of oil in forty-three years.
Overcoming an initial sense of impending catastrophe, you remember the discussion of supply and demand in this chapter and
realize that things aren't as simple as they seem. After all, many factors affect both the supply of oil and the demand for products
made from it, such as gasoline. These factors will influence when (and if) the world runs out of oil. Answer the following
questions, and provide explanations for your answers:

 1. What's the major factor that affects the supply of oil? (Hint: It's the same major factor affecting the demand for oil.)
 2. If producers find additional oil reserves, what will happen to the price of oil?
 3. If producers must extract oil from more-costly wells, what will happen to the price that you pay to fill up your gas tank?
 4. If China's economy continues to expand rapidly, what will happen to the price of oil?
 5. If drivers in the United States start favoring fuel-efficient cars over SUVs, will gas be cheaper or more expensive?
 6. In your opinion, will oil producers be able to supply enough oil to meet the increasing demand for oil-related products, such as

    gasoline?

This page titled 1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3974
1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Monopoly

  Learning Objective

       Describe monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly.

Economists have identified four types of competition--perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and monopoly.
Perfect competition was discussed in the last section; we'll cover the remaining three types of competition here.

Monopolistic Competition

In monopolistic competition, we still have many sellers (as we had under perfect competition). Now, however, they don't sell
identical products. Instead, they sell differentiated products--products that differ somewhat, or are perceived to differ, even though
they serve a similar purpose. Products can be differentiated in a number of ways, including quality, style, convenience, location,
and brand name. Some people prefer Coke over Pepsi, even though the two products are quite similar. But what if there was a
substantial price difference between the two? In that case, buyers could be persuaded to switch from one to the other. Thus, if Coke
has a big promotional sale at a supermarket chain, some Pepsi drinkers might switch (at least temporarily).

How is product differentiation accomplished? Sometimes, it's simply geographical; you probably buy gasoline at the station closest
to your home regardless of the brand. At other times, perceived differences between products are promoted by advertising designed
to convince consumers that one product is different from another--and better than it. Regardless of customer loyalty to a product,
however, if its price goes too high, the seller will lose business to a competitor. Under monopolistic competition, therefore,
companies have only limited control over price.

Oligopoly

Oligopoly means few sellers. In an oligopolistic market, each seller supplies a large portion of all the products sold in the
marketplace. In addition, because the cost of starting a business in an oligopolistic industry is usually high, the number of firms
entering it is low.

Companies in oligopolistic industries include such large-scale enterprises as automobile companies and airlines. As large firms
supplying a sizable portion of a market, these companies have some control over the prices they charge. But there's a catch:
because products are fairly similar, when one company lowers prices, others are often forced to follow suit to remain competitive.
You see this practice all the time in the airline industry: When American Airlines announces a fare decrease, Continental, United
Airlines, and others do likewise. When one automaker offers a special deal, its competitors usually come up with similar
promotions.

Monopoly

In terms of the number of sellers and degree of competition, monopolies lie at the opposite end of the spectrum from perfect
competition. In perfect competition, there are many small companies, none of which can control prices; they simply accept the
market price determined by supply and demand. In a monopoly, however, there's only one seller in the market. The market could
be a geographical area, such as a city or a regional area, and doesn't necessarily have to be an entire country.

There are few monopolies in the United States because the government limits them. Most fall into one of two categories: natural
and legal. Natural monopolies include public utilities, such as electricity and gas suppliers. Such enterprises require huge
investments, and it would be inefficient to duplicate the products that they provide. They inhibit competition, but they're legal
because they're important to society. In exchange for the right to conduct business without competition, they're regulated. For
instance, they can't charge whatever prices they want, but they must adhere to government-controlled prices. As a rule, they're
required to serve all customers, even if doing so isn't cost efficient.

A legal monopoly arises when a company receives a patent giving it exclusive use of an invented product or process. Patents are
issued for a limited time, generally twenty years (United States Patent and Trademark Office, 2006). During this period, other
companies can't use the invented product or process without permission from the patent holder. Patents allow companies a certain
period to recover the heavy costs of researching and developing products and technologies. A classic example of a company that

1.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3975
enjoyed a patent-based legal monopoly is Polaroid, which for years held exclusive ownership of instant-film technology (Bellis,
2006). Polaroid priced the product high enough to recoup, over time, the high cost of bringing it to market. Without competition, in
other words, it enjoyed a monopolistic position in regard to pricing.

Key Takeaways

There are four types of competition in a free market system: perfect competition, monopolistic competition, oligopoly, and
monopoly.

    Under monopolistic competition, many sellers offer differentiated products--products that differ slightly but serve similar
    purposes. By making consumers aware of product differences, sellers exert some control over price.
    In an oligopoly, a few sellers supply a sizable portion of products in the market. They exert some control over price, but
    because their products are similar, when one company lowers prices, the others follow.
    In a monopoly, there is only one seller in the market. The market could be a geographical area, such as a city or a regional area,
    and does not necessarily have to be an entire country. The single seller is able to control prices.
    Most monopolies fall into one of two categories: natural and legal.
    Natural monopolies include public utilities, such as electricity and gas suppliers. They inhibit competition, but they're legal
    because they're important to society.
    A legal monopoly arises when a company receives a patent giving it exclusive use of an invented product or process for a
    limited time, generally twenty years.

Exercise

Identify the four types of competition, explain the differences among them, and provide two examples of each. (Use examples
different from those given in the text.)

This page titled 1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and Monopoly is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3975
1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy

  Learning Objective

       Understand the criteria used to assess the status of the economy.

Every day, we are bombarded with economic news. We're told that the economy is struggling, unemployment is high, home prices
are low, and consumer confidence is down. As a student learning about business, and later as a business manager, you need to
understand the nature of the U.S. economy and the terminology that we use to describe it. You need to have some idea of where the
economy is heading, and you need to know something about the government's role in influencing its direction.

Economic Goals

All the world's economies share three main goals:

    Growth
    High employment
    Price stability

Let's take a closer look at each of these goals, both to find out what they mean and to show how we determine whether they're
being met.

Economic Growth

One purpose of an economy is to provide people with goods and services--cars, computers, video games, houses, rock concerts,
fast food, amusement parks. One way in which economists measure the performance of an economy is by looking at a widely used
measure of total output called gross domestic product (GDP). GDP is defined as the market value of all goods and services
produced by the economy in a given year. In the United States, it's calculated by the Department of Commerce. GDP includes only
those goods and services produced domestically; goods produced outside the country are excluded. GDP also includes only those
goods and services that are produced for the final user; intermediate products are excluded. For example, the silicon chip that goes
into a computer (an intermediate product) would not count, even though the finished computer would.

By itself, GDP doesn't necessarily tell us much about the state of the economy. But change in GDP does. If GDP (after adjusting
for inflation) goes up, the economy is growing. If it goes down, the economy is contracting.

The Business Cycle

The economic ups and downs resulting from expansion and contraction constitute the business cycle. A typical cycle runs from
three to five years but could last much longer. Though typically irregular, a cycle can be divided into four general phases of
prosperity, recession, depression (which the cycle generally skips), and recovery:

    During prosperity, the economy expands, unemployment is low, incomes rise, and consumers buy more products. Businesses
    respond by increasing production and offering new and better products.
    Eventually, however, things slow down. GDP decreases, unemployment rises, and because people have less money to spend,
    business revenues decline. This slowdown in economic activity is called a recession. Economists often say that we're entering a
    recession when GDP goes down for two consecutive quarters.

1.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3976
                                             Figure 1.9: Ian Lamont - Local and national newspapers - CC BY 2.0.

Generally, a recession is followed by a recovery in which the economy starts growing again. If, however, a recession lasts a long
time (perhaps a decade or so), while unemployment remains very high and production is severely curtailed, the economy could sink
into a depression. Though not impossible, it's unlikely that the United States will experience another severe depression like that of
the 1930s. The federal government has a number of economic tools (some of which we'll discuss shortly) with which to fight any
threat of a depression.

Full Employment

To keep the economy going strong, people must spend money on goods and services. A reduction in personal expenditures for
things like food, clothing, appliances, automobiles, housing, and medical care could severely reduce GDP and weaken the
economy. Because most people earn their spending money by working, an important goal of all economies is making jobs available
to everyone who wants one. In principle, full employment occurs when everyone who wants to work has a job. In practice, we say
that we have "full employment" when about 95 percent of those wanting to work are employed.

The Unemployment Rate

The U.S. Department of Labor tracks unemployment and reports the unemployment rate: the percentage of the labor force that's
unemployed and actively seeking work. The unemployment rate is an important measure of economic health. It goes up during
recessionary periods because companies are reluctant to hire workers when demand for goods and services is low. Conversely, it
goes down when the economy is expanding and there is high demand for products and workers to supply them.

Figure 1.10 traces the U.S. unemployment rate between 1970 and 2010. If you want to know the current unemployment rate, go to
the CNNMoney Web site (CNNMoney.com) and click on "Economy" and then on "Job Growth."

1.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3976
                                                       Figure 1.10 The U.S. Unemployment Rate, 1970-2010

Price Stability

A third major goal of all economies is maintaining price stability. Price stability occurs when the average of the prices for goods
and services either doesn't change or changes very little. Rising prices are troublesome for both individuals and businesses. For
individuals, rising prices mean you have to pay more for the things you need. For businesses, rising prices mean higher costs, and,
at least in the short run, businesses might have trouble passing on higher costs to consumers. When the overall price level goes up,
we have inflation. Figure 1.11 shows inflationary trends in the U.S. economy since 1960. When the price level goes down (which
rarely happens), we have deflation.

                                                           Figure 1.11 The U.S. Inflation Rate, 1960-2010

The Consumer Price Index

The most widely publicized measure of inflation is the consumer price index (CPI), which is reported monthly by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics. The CPI measures the rate of inflation by determining price changes of a hypothetical basket of goods, such as
food, housing, clothing, medical care, appliances, automobiles, and so forth, bought by a typical household.

The CPI base period is 1982 to 1984, which has been given an average value of 100. Table 1.1 "Selected CPI Values, 1950-2010"
gives CPI values computed for selected years. The CPI value for 1950, for instance, is 24. This means that $1 of typical purchases
in 1982 through 1984 would have cost $0.24 in 1950. Conversely, you would have needed $2.18 to purchase the same $1 worth of
typical goods in 2010. The difference registers the effect of inflation. In fact, that's what an inflation rate is--the percentage
change in a price index.

You can find out the current CPI by going to the CNNMoney Web site (CNNMoney.com) and click on "Economy" and then on
"Inflation (CPI)."

                                                              Table 1:1 Selected CPI Values, 1950-2010

1.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3976
Year  1950   1960   1970   1980   1990   2000   2001    2002

CPI   24.1   29.1   38.8   82.4   130.7  172.2  177.1   179.9

Year  2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009    2010

CPI   184.0  188.9  195.3  201.6  207.3  215.3  214.15  218.1

This page titled 1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                           1.6.4                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3976
1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy

  Learning Objective

    1. Discuss the government's role in managing the economy.

In every country, the government takes steps to help the economy achieve the goals of growth, full employment, and price stability.
In the United States, the government influences economic activity through two approaches: monetary policy and fiscal policy.
Through monetary policy, the government exerts its power to regulate the money supply and level of interest rates. Through fiscal
policy, it uses its power to tax and to spend.

Monetary Policy

Monetary policy is exercised by the Federal Reserve System ("the Fed"), which is empowered to take various actions that decrease
or increase the money supply and raise or lower short-term interest rates, making it harder or easier to borrow money. When the
Fed believes that inflation is a problem, it will use contractionary policy to decrease the money supply and raise interest rates.
When rates are higher, borrowers have to pay more for the money they borrow, and banks are more selective in making loans.
Because money is "tighter"--more expensive to borrow--demand for goods and services will go down, and so will prices. In any
case, that's the theory.

        Figure 1.12: The Fed will typically tighten or decrease the money supply during inflationary periods, making it harder to borrow
        money. (frankieleon - tight budget - CC BY 2.0.)

To counter a recession, the Fed uses expansionary policy to increase the money supply and reduce interest rates. With lower interest
rates, it's cheaper to borrow money, and banks are more willing to lend it. We then say that money is "easy." Attractive interest
rates encourage businesses to borrow money to expand production and encourage consumers to buy more goods and services. In
theory, both sets of actions will help the economy escape or come out of a recession.

Fiscal Policy

Fiscal policy relies on the government's powers of spending and taxation. Both taxation and government spending can be used to
reduce or increase the total supply of money in the economy--the total amount, in other words, that businesses and consumers have
to spend. When the country is in a recession, the appropriate policy is to increase spending, reduce taxes, or both. Such
expansionary actions will put more money in the hands of businesses and consumers, encouraging businesses to expand and
consumers to buy more goods and services. When the economy is experiencing inflation, the opposite policy is adopted: the
government will decrease spending or increase taxes, or both. Because such contractionary measures reduce spending by
businesses and consumers, prices come down and inflation eases.

The National Debt

If, in any given year, the government takes in more money (through taxes) than it spends on goods and services (for things such as
defense, transportation, and social services), the result is a budget surplus. If, on the other hand, the government spends more than

1.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3977
it takes in, we have a budget deficit (which the government pays off by borrowing through the issuance of Treasury bonds).
Historically, deficits have occurred much more often than surpluses; typically, the government spends more than it takes in.
Consequently, the U.S. government now has a total national debt of more than $14 trillion.
As you can see in Figure 1.13, this number has risen dramatically in the last sixty-five years. The significant jump that starts in the
1980s reflects several factors: a big increase in government spending (especially on defense), a substantial rise in interest payments
on the debt, and lower tax rates. As of this writing, your share is $46,146.21. If you want to see what the national debt is today--
and what your current share is--go on the Web to the U.S. National Debt Clock (www.brillig.com/debt_clock).

                                                           Figure 1.13 The U.S. National Debt, 1940-2010
This page titled 1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3977
1.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

The "Economy" section of the CNNMoney Web site provides current information on a number of economic indicators. Go to
http://money.cnn.com and click on "Economy" and then on "Jobs," and find answers to the following questions:

You read in the chapter that an important goal of all economies is to make jobs available to everyone who wants one. Review the
CNNMoney discussion on job growth and then answer the following questions:

a. Is the current level of unemployment rising or falling?
b. What do economists expect will happen to unemployment rates in the near future?
c. Is the current level of unemployment a burden or an asset to the economy? In what ways?

Do you remember the first dollar you earned? Maybe you earned it delivering newspapers, shoveling snow, mowing lawns, or
babysitting. How much do you think that dollar is worth today? Go to the WestEgg site at http://www.westegg.com/inflation and
find the answer to this question. After determining the current value of your first dollar, explain how the calculator was created.
(Hint: Apply what you know about CPI.)

Career Opportunities

Is a Career in Economics for You?
Are you wondering what a career in economics would be like? Go to the U.S. Department of Labor Web site
(www.bls.gov/oco/ocos055.htm) and review the occupational outlook for economists. Look for answers to the following questions:

 1. What issues interest economists?
 2. What kinds of jobs do government economists perform? What about those who work in private industry? In education?
 3. What educational background and training is needed for these jobs?
 4. What is the current job outlook for economists?
 5. What is the entry-level salary for an economist with a bachelor's degree? With a master's degree?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

How Much Is That CD in the Window?
The early 1990s were a good time to buy CDs, mainly because discounters such as Wal-Mart and Best Buy were accumulating
customers by dropping prices from $15 to $10. They were losing money, but they figured that the policy still made good business
sense. Why? They reasoned that while customers were in the store to shop for CDs, they'd find other, more profitable products.

The policy was a windfall for CD buyers, but a real problem for traditional music retailers such as Tower Records. With discounters
slashing prices, CD buyers were no longer willing to pay the prices asked by traditional music retailers. Sales plummeted and
companies went out of business.

Ultimately, the discounters' strategy worked: stores such as Wal-Mart and Best Buy gained customers who once bought CDs at
stores like Tower Records.

Let's pause at this point to answer the following questions:

 1. Does selling a product at below cost make business sense?
 2. Whom does it hurt? Whom does it help?
 3. Is it ethical?

Let's continue and find out how traditional music retailers responded to this situation.

They weren't happy, and neither were the record companies. Both parties worried that traditional retailers would put pressure on
them to reduce the price that they charged for CDs so that retailers could lower their prices and compete with discounters. The
record companies didn't want to lower prices. They just wanted things to return to "normal"--to the world in which CDs sold for
$15 each.

1.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3978
Most of the big record companies and several traditional music retailers got together and made a deal affecting every store that sold
CDs. The record companies agreed with retail chains and other CD outlets to charge a minimum advertised price for CDs. Any
retailer who broke ranks by advertising below-price CDs would incur substantial financial penalties. Naturally, CD prices went up.

Now, think about the following:

 1. Does the deal made between the record companies and traditional retailers make business sense?
 2. Whom does it hurt? Whom does it help?
 3. Is it ethical?
 4. Is it legal?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Get together in groups of four selected by your instructor and pick any three items from the following list:

    Pint of milk
    Gallon of gas
    Roundtrip airline ticket between Boston and San Francisco
    Large pizza
    Monthly cost of an Internet connection
    CD by a particular musician
    Two-day DVD rental
    Particular brand of DVD player
    Quarter-pound burger

Outside of class, each member of the team should check the prices of the three items, using his or her own sources. At the next
class meeting, get together and compare the prices found by team members. Based on your findings, answer the following
questions as a group:

 1. Are the prices of given products similar, or do they vary?
 2. Why do the prices of some products vary while those of others are similar?
 3. Can any price differences be explained by applying the concepts of supply and demand or types of competition?

The Global View (AACSB)

Life Is Good in France (if You Have Le Job)

A strong economy requires that people have money to spend on goods and services. Because most people earn their money by
working, an important goal of all economies is making jobs available to everyone who wants one. A country has "full employment"
when 95 percent of those wanting work are employed. Unfortunately, not all countries achieve this goal of full employment.
France, for example, often has a 10 percent unemployment rate overall and a 20 percent unemployment rate among young people.

Does this mean that France isn't trying as hard as the United States to achieve full employment? A lot of people in France would
say yes.

Let's take a quick trip to France to see what's going on economically. The day is March 19, 2006, and more than a million people
are marching through the streets to protest a proposed new employment law that would make it easier for companies to lay off
workers under the age of twenty-six during their first two years of employment. Granted, the plan doesn't sound terribly youth-
friendly, but, as usual, economic issues are never as clear-cut as they seem (or as we'd like them to be).

To gain some further insight into what's going on in France, go to a BusinessWeek Web site
(http://www.businessweek.com/globalbiz/content/mar2006/gb20060321_896473.htm) and read the article "Job Security Ignites
Debate in France." Then answer the following questions:

 1. Why does the French government support the so-called First Employment Contract? Who's supposed to be helped by the law?
 2. Which two groups are most vocal in protesting the law? Why?
 3. If you were a long-time worker at a French company, would you support the new law? Why, or why not?

1.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3978
 4. If you were a young French person who had just graduated from college and were looking for your first job, would you support
    the law? Why, or why not?

 5. What do you think of France's focus on job security? Does the current system help or hurt French workers? Does it help or hurt
    recent college graduates?

 6. Does the French government's focus on job security help or hinder its economy? Should the government be so heavily involved
    in employment matters?

This page titled 1.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

1.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3978
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility

  2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
  2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
  2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
  2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics
  2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
  2.6: Environmentalism
  2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
  2.8: Cases and Problems
This page titled 2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview

  Learning Objectives

       Define business ethics and explain what it means to act ethically in business.
       Explain how you can recognize an ethical organization.

The WorldCom situation is not an isolated incident. The boom years of the 1990s were followed by revelations of massive
corporate corruption, including criminal schemes at companies such as Enron, Adelphia, and Tyco. In fall 2001, executives at
Enron, an energy supplier, admitted to accounting practices concocted to overstate the company's income over a period of four
years. In the wake of the company's collapse, stock prices plummeted from $90 to $1 a share, inflicting massive financial losses on
the investment community. Thousands of employees lost not only their jobs but their retirement funds, as well (Kadlec, 2002).
Before the Enron story was off the front pages, officials at Adelphia, the nation's sixth-largest cable company, disclosed that
founder and CEO John Rigas had treated the publicly owned firm as a personal piggy bank, siphoning off billions of dollars to
support his family's extravagant lifestyle and bankrupting the company in the process (Lieberman, 2004). Likewise, CEO Dennis
Koslowzki of conglomerate Tyco International was apparently confused about what was his and what belonged to the company.
Besides treating himself to a $30 million estate in Florida and a $7 million Park Avenue apartment, Koslowzki indulged in a taste
for expensive office accessories--such as a $15,000 umbrella stand, a $17,000 traveling toilette box, and a $2,200 wastebasket--
that eventually drained $600 million from company coffers1.

As crooked as these CEOs were, Bernie Madoff, founder of Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities and former chairman of the
NASDAQ stock exchange, makes them seem like dime-store shoplifters2. Madoff is alleged to have run a giant Ponzi scheme
(Langan, 2008) that cheated investors of up to $65 billion. His wrongdoings won him a spot at the top of Time Magazine's Top 10
Crooked CEOs. According to the SEC charges, Madoff convinced investors to give him large sums of money. In return, he gave
them an impressive 8 percent to 12 percent return a year. But Madoff never really invested their money. Instead, he kept it for
himself. He got funds to pay the first investors their return (or their money back if they asked for it) by bringing in new investors.
Everything was going smoothly until the fall of 2008, when the stock market plummeted and many of his investors asked for their
money back. As he no longer had their money, the game was over and he had to admit that the whole thing was just one big lie.
Thousands of investors, including many of his wealthy friends, not-so-rich retirees who trusted him with their life savings, and
charitable foundations, were financially ruined. All those harmed by Madoff either directly or indirectly were pleased when he was
sentenced to jail for one-hundred and fifty years.

Are these cases merely aberrations? A Time/CNN poll conducted in the midst of all these revelations found that 72 percent of those
surveyed don't think so. They believe that breach of investor and employee trust represents an ongoing, long-standing pattern of
deceptive behavior by officials at a large number of companies (Gibbs, et. al., 2002). If they're right, then a lot of questions need to
be answered. Why do such incidents happen (and with such apparent regularity)? Who are the usual suspects? How long until the
next corporate bankruptcy record is set? What action can be taken--by individuals, organizations, and the government--to
discourage such behavior?

The Idea of Business Ethics

It's in the best interest of a company to operate ethically. Trustworthy companies are better at attracting and keeping customers,
talented employees, and capital. Those tainted by questionable ethics suffer from dwindling customer bases, employee turnover,
and investor mistrust.

Let's begin this section by addressing one of the questions that we posed previously: What can individuals, organizations, and
government agencies do to foster an environment of ethical and socially responsible behavior in business? First, of course, we need
to define two terms: business ethics and social responsibility. They're often used interchangeably, but they don't mean the same
thing.

What Is Ethics?

You probably already know what it means to be ethical: to know right from wrong and to know when you're practicing one instead
of the other. At the risk of oversimplifying, then, we can say that business ethics is the application of ethical behavior in a business

2.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3979
context. Acting ethically in business means more than simply obeying applicable laws and regulations: It also means being honest,
doing no harm to others, competing fairly, and declining to put your own interests above those of your company, its owners, and its
workers. If you're in business you obviously need a strong sense of what's right and what's wrong (not always an easy task). You
need the personal conviction to do what's right, even if it means doing something that's difficult or personally disadvantageous.

This page titled 2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3979
2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics

  Learning Objective

       Specify the steps that you would take to solve an ethical dilemma and make an ethical decision.

Betty Vinson didn't start out at WorldCom with the intention of going to jail. She undoubtedly knew what the right behavior was,
but the bottom line is that she didn't do it. How can you make sure that you do the right thing in the business world? How should
you respond to the kinds of challenges that you'll be facing? Because your actions in the business world will be strongly influenced
by your moral character, let's begin by assessing your current moral condition. Which of the following best applies to you (select
one)?

    I'm always ethical.
    I'm mostly ethical.
    I'm somewhat ethical.
    I'm seldom ethical.
    I'm never ethical.

Now that you've placed yourself in one of these categories, here are some general observations. Few people put themselves below
the second category. Most of us are ethical most of the time, and most people assign themselves to category number two--"I'm
mostly ethical." Why don't more people claim that they're always ethical? Apparently, most people realize that being ethical all the
time takes a great deal of moral energy. If you placed yourself in category number two, ask yourself this question: How can I
change my behavior so that I can move up a notch? The answer to this question may be simple. Just ask yourself an easier question:
How would I like to be treated in a given situation (Maxwell, 2003)?

Unfortunately, practicing this philosophy might be easier in your personal life than in the business world. Ethical challenges arise
in business because business organizations, especially large ones, have multiple stakeholders and because stakeholders make
conflicting demands. Making decisions that affect multiple stakeholders isn't easy even for seasoned managers; and for new
entrants to the business world, the task can be extremely daunting. Many managers need years of experience in an organization
before they feel comfortable making decisions that affect various stakeholders. You can, however, get a head start in learning how
to make ethical decisions by looking at two types of challenges that you'll encounter in the business world: ethical dilemmas and
ethical decisions.

Addressing Ethical Dilemmas

An ethical dilemma is a morally problematic situation: You have to pick between two or more acceptable but often opposing
alternatives that are important to different groups. Experts often frame this type of situation as a "right-versus-right" decision. It's
the sort of decision that Johnson & Johnson (known as J&J) CEO James Burke had to make in 1982 (Kaplan, 2012). On September
30, twelve-year-old Mary Kellerman of Chicago died after her parents gave her Extra-Strength Tylenol. That same morning,
twenty-seven-year-old Adam Janus, also of Chicago, died after taking Tylenol for minor chest pain. That night, when family
members came to console his parents, Adam's brother and his wife took Tylenol from the same bottle and died within forty-eight
hours. Over the next two weeks, four more people in Chicago died after taking Tylenol. The actual connection between Tylenol and
the series of deaths wasn't made until an off-duty fireman realized from news reports that every victim had taken Tylenol. As
consumers panicked, J&J pulled Tylenol off Chicago-area retail shelves. Researchers discovered Tylenol capsules containing large
amounts of deadly cyanide. Because the poisoned bottles came from batches originating at different J&J plants, investigators
determined that the tampering had occurred after the product had been shipped.

So J&J wasn't at fault. But CEO Burke was still faced with an extremely serious dilemma: Was it possible to respond to the
tampering cases without destroying the reputation of a highly profitable brand? Burke had two options:

    He could recall only the lots of Extra-Strength Tylenol that were found to be tainted with cyanide. This was the path followed
    by Perrier executives in 1991 when they discovered that cases of bottled water had been poisoned with benzine. This option
    favored J&J financially but possibly put more people at risk.

2.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3980
    Burke could order a nationwide recall--of all bottles of Extra-Strength Tylenol. This option would reverse the priority of the
    stakeholders, putting the safety of the public above stakeholders' financial interests.

Burke opted to recall all 31 million bottles of Extra-Strength Tylenol on the market. The cost to J&J was $100 million, but public
reaction was quite positive. Less than six weeks after the crisis began, Tylenol capsules were reintroduced in new tamper-resistant
bottles, and by responding quickly and appropriately, J&J was eventually able to restore the Tylenol brand to its previous market
position. When Burke was applauded for moral courage, he replied that he'd simply adhered to the long-standing J&J credo that
put the interests of customers above those of other stakeholders. His only regret was that the tamperer was never caught (Weber,
1999).

If you're wondering what your thought process should be if you're confronted with an ethical dilemma, you could do worse than
remember the mental steps listed in Figure 2.2 --which happen to be the steps that James Burke took in addressing the Tylenol
crisis:

    Define the problem: How to respond to the tampering case without destroying the reputation of the Tylenol brand.
    Identify feasible options: (1) Recall only the lots of Tylenol that were found to be tainted with cyanide or (2) order a nationwide
    recall of all bottles of Extra-Strength Tylenol.
    Assess the effect of each option on stakeholders: Option 1 (recalling only the tainted lots of Tylenol) is cheaper but puts more
    people at risk. Option 2 (recalling all bottles of Extra-Strength Tylenol) puts the safety of the public above stakeholders'
    financial interests.
    Establish criteria for determining the most appropriate action: Adhere to the J&J credo, which puts the interests of customers
    above those of other stakeholders.
    Select the best option based on the established criteria: In 1982, Option 2 was selected, and a nationwide recall of all bottles of
    Extra-Strength Tylenol was conducted.

                                                             Figure 2.2 How to Face an Ethical Dilemma

This page titled 2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3980
2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues

  Learning Objective

       Identify ethical issues that you might face in business, and analyze rationalizations for unethical behavior.

Make no mistake about it: When you enter the business world, you'll find yourself in situations in which you'll have to choose the
appropriate behavior. How, for example, would you answer questions like the following?

    Is it OK to accept a pair of sports tickets from a supplier?
    Can I buy office supplies from my brother-in-law?
    Is it appropriate to donate company funds to my local community center?
    If I find out that a friend is about to be fired, can I warn her?
    Will I have to lie about the quality of the goods I'm selling?
    Can I take personal e-mails and phone calls at work?
    What do I do if I discover that a coworker is committing fraud?

Obviously, the types of situations are numerous and varied. Fortunately, we can break them down into a few basic categories:
bribes, conflicts of interest, conflicts of loyalty, issues of honesty and integrity, and whistle-blowing. Let's look a little more closely
at each of these categories.

Bribes versus Gifts

It's not uncommon in business to give and receive small gifts of appreciation. But when is a gift unacceptable? When is it really a
bribe? If it's OK to give a bottle of wine to a corporate client during the holidays, is it OK to give a case of wine? If your company
is trying to get a big contract, is it appropriate to send a gift to the key decision maker? If it's all right to invite a business
acquaintance to dinner or to a ball game, is it also all right to offer the same person a fully paid weekend getaway?

There's often a fine line between a gift and a bribe. The questions that we've just asked, however, may help in drawing it, because
they raise key issues in determining how a gesture should be interpreted: the cost of the item, the timing of the gift, the type of gift,
and the connection between the giver and the receiver. If you're on the receiving end, it's a good idea to refuse any item that's
overly generous or given for the purpose of influencing a decision. But because accepting even small gifts may violate company
rules, the best advice is to check on company policy.

JCPenney's "Statement of Business Ethics," for instance, states that employees can't accept any cash gifts or any noncash gifts
except those that have a value below $50 and that are generally used by the giver for promotional purposes. Employees can attend
paid-for business functions, but other forms of entertainment, such as sports events and golf outings, can be accepted only if it's
practical for the Penney's employee to reciprocate. Trips of several days can't be accepted under any circumstances (JCPenney Co.,
2006).

Conflicts of Interest

Conflicts of interest occur when individuals must choose between taking actions that promote their personal interests over the
interests of others or taking actions that don't. A conflict can exist, for example, when an employee's own interests interfere with,
or have the potential to interfere with, the best interests of the company's stakeholders (management, customers, owners). Let's say
that you work for a company with a contract to cater events at your college and that your uncle owns a local bakery. Obviously, this
situation could create a conflict of interest (or at least give the appearance of one--which, by the way, is a problem in itself). When
you're called on to furnish desserts for a luncheon, you might be tempted to throw some business your uncle's way even if it's not
in the best interest of the catering company that you work for.

What should you do? You should probably disclose the connection to your boss, who can then arrange things so that your personal
interests don't conflict with the company's. You may, for example, agree that if you're assigned to order products like those that
your uncle makes, you're obligated to find another supplier. Or your boss may make sure that someone else orders bakery products.

2.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3981
The same principle holds that an employee shouldn't use private information about an employer for personal financial benefit. Say
that you learn from a coworker at your pharmaceutical company that one of its most profitable drugs will be pulled off the market
because of dangerous side effects. The recall will severely hurt the company's financial performance and cause its stock price to
plummet. Before the news becomes public, you sell all the stock you own in the company. What you've done isn't merely
unethical: It's called insider trading, it's illegal, and you could go to jail for it.

Conflicts of Loyalty

Sometimes you find yourself in a bind between being loyal either to your employer or to a friend or family member. Perhaps you
just learned that a coworker, a friend of yours, is about to be downsized out of his job. You also happen to know that he and his
wife are getting ready to make a deposit on a house near the company headquarters. From a work standpoint, you know that you
shouldn't divulge the information. From a friendship standpoint, though, you feel it's your duty to tell your friend. Wouldn't he tell
you if the situation were reversed? So what do you do? As tempting as it is to be loyal to your friend, you shouldn't. As an
employee, your primary responsibility is to your employer. You might be able to soften your dilemma by convincing a manager
with the appropriate authority to tell your friend the bad news before he puts down his deposit.

Issues of Honesty and Integrity

Master investor Warren Buffet once told a group of business students the following:

       I cannot tell you that honesty is the best policy. I can't tell you that if you behave with perfect honesty and integrity
       somebody somewhere won't behave the other way and make more money. But honesty is a good policy. You'll do fine,
       you'll sleep well at night and you'll feel good about the example you are setting for your coworkers and the other people who
       care about you" (Gostick & Telford, 2003).

If you work for a company that settles for its employees' merely obeying the law and following a few internal regulations, you
might think about moving on. If you're being asked to deceive customers about the quality or value of your product, you're in an
ethically unhealthy environment.

Think about this story:

       A chef put two frogs in a pot of warm soup water. The first frog smelled the onions, recognized the danger, and immediately
       jumped out. The second frog hesitated: The water felt good, and he decided to stay and relax for a minute. After all, he could
       always jump out when things got too hot (so to speak). As the water got hotter, however, the frog adapted to it, hardly
       noticing the change. Before long, of course, he was the main ingredient in frog-leg soup" (Gostick & Telford, 2003).

So, what's the moral of the story? Don't sit around in an ethically toxic environment and lose your integrity a little at a time; get out
before the water gets too hot and your options have evaporated.

Fortunately, a few rules of thumb can guide you. We've summed them up in Figure 2.4 .

2.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3981
                                                          Figure 2.4 How to Maintain Honesty and Integrity

This page titled 2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3981
2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics

  Learning Objective

       Specify actions that managers can take to create and sustain ethical organizations.

Ethics is more than a matter of individual behavior; it's also about organizational behavior. Employees' actions aren't based solely
on personal values alone: They're influenced by other members of the organization, from top managers and supervisors to
coworkers and subordinates. So how can ethical companies be created and sustained? In this section, we'll examine some of the
most reasonable answers to this question.

Ethical Leadership

Organizations have unique cultures--ways of doing things that evolve through shared values and beliefs. An organization's culture
is strongly influenced by senior executives, who tell members of the organization what's considered acceptable behavior and what
happens if it's violated. In theory, the tone set at the top of the organization promotes ethical behavior, but sometimes (as at Enron)
it doesn't.

Before its sudden demise, Enron fostered a growth-at-any-cost culture that was defined by the company's top executives. Said one
employee, "It was all about taking profits now and worrying about the details later. The Enron system was just ripe for corruption."
Coupled with the relentless pressure to generate revenue--or at least to look as if you were generating it--was a climate that
discouraged employees from questioning the means by which they were supposed to do it. There may have been chances for people
to speak up, but no one did. "I don't think anyone started out with a plan to defraud the company," reflects another ex-employee.
"Everything at Enron seemed to start out right, but somewhere something slipped. People's mentality switched from focusing on
the future good of the company to `let's just do it today.'" (Fowler, 2002)

Exercising Ethical Leadership

Leaders should keep in constant touch with subordinates about ethical policies and expectations. They should be available to help
employees identify and solve ethical problems, and should encourage them to come forward with concerns. They're responsible for
minimizing opportunities for wrongdoing and for exerting the controls needed to enforce company policies. They should also think
of themselves as role models. Subordinates look to their supervisors to communicate policies and practices regarding ethical
behavior, and as a rule, actions speak more loudly than words: If managers behave ethically, subordinates will probably do the
same.

This is exactly the message that senior management at Martin Marietta (now a part of Lockheed Martin) sent to members of their
organization. A leading producer of construction components, the company at the time was engaged in a tough competitive battle
over a major contract. Because both Martin Marietta and its main competitor were qualified to do the work, the job would go to the
lower bid. A few days before bids were due, a package arrived at Martin Marietta containing a copy of the competitor's bid sheet
(probably from a disgruntled employee trying to sabotage his or her employer's efforts). The bid price was lower than Martin
Marietta's. In a display of ethical backbone, executives immediately turned the envelope over to the government and informed the
competitor. No, they didn't change their own bid in the meantime, and, no, they didn't get the job. All they got was an opportunity
to send a clear message to the entire organization (Augustine, 2006).

By the same token, leaders must be willing to hold subordinates accountable for their conduct and to take appropriate action. The
response to unethical behavior should be prompt and decisive. One CEO of a large company discovered that some of his employees
were "dumpster diving" in the trash outside a competitor's offices (which is to say, they were sifting around for information that
would give them a competitive advantage). The manager running the espionage operation was a personal friend of the CEO's, but
he was immediately fired, as were his "operatives." The CEO then informed his competitor about the venture and returned all the
materials that had been gathered. Like the top managers at Martin Marietta, this executive sent a clear message to people in his
organization: namely, that deviations from accepted behavior would not be tolerated (Austine, 2006).

It's always possible to send the wrong message. In August 2004, newspapers around the country carried a wire-service story titled
"Convicted CEO Getting $2.5 Million Salary While He Serves Time." Interested readers found that the board of directors of Fog

2.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3982
Cutter Capital Group had agreed to pay CEO Andrew Wiederhorn (and give him a bonus) while he served an eighteen-month
federal-prison term for bribery, filing false tax returns, and financially ruining his previous employer (from which he'd also
borrowed $160 million). According to the board, they couldn't afford to lose a man of Wiederhorn's ability. The entire episode
ended up on TheStreet.com's list of "The Five Dumbest Things on Wall Street This Week." (McCall, 2006)

Tightening the Rules

In response to the recent barrage of corporate scandals, more large companies have taken additional steps to encourage employees
to behave according to specific standards and to report wrongdoing. Even companies with excellent reputations for integrity have
stepped up their efforts.

Codes of Conduct

Like many firms, Hershey Foods now has a formal code of conduct: a document describing the principles and guidelines that all
employees must follow in the course of all job-related activities. It's available on the company intranet and in printed form and, to
be sure that everyone understands it, the company offers a training program. The Hershey code covers such topics as the use of
corporate funds and resources, conflict of interest, and the protection of proprietary information. It explains how the code will be
enforced, emphasizing that violations won't be tolerated. It encourages employees to report wrongdoing and provides instructions
on reporting violations (which are displayed on posters and printed on wallet-size cards). Reports can be made though a Concern
Line, by e-mail, or by regular mail; they can be anonymous; and retaliation is also a serious violation of company policy (Hershey
Foods, 2006).

Key Takeaways

Ethics is more than a matter of individual behavior; it's also about organizational behavior. Employees' actions aren't based solely
on personal values; they're also influenced by other members of the organization.

    Organizations have unique cultures--ways of doing things that evolve through shared values and beliefs.
    An organization's culture is strongly influenced by top managers, who are responsible for letting members of the organization
    know what's considered acceptable behavior and what happens if it's violated.
    Subordinates look to their supervisors as role models of ethical behavior. If managers act ethically, subordinates will probably
    do the same.
    Those in positions of leadership should hold subordinates accountable for their conduct and take appropriate action.
    Many organizations have a formal code of conduct that describes the principles and guidelines that all members must follow in
    the course of job-related activities.

Exercises

(AACSB) Analysis

You're the CEO of a company that sells golf equipment, including clubs, bags, and balls. When your company was started and had
only a handful of employees, you were personally able to oversee the conduct of your employees. But with your current workforce
of nearly fifty, it's time to prepare a formal code of conduct in which you lay down some rules that employees must follow in
performing job-related activities. As a model for your own code, you've decided to use Macy's Code of Business Conduct and
Ethics. Go to the company's Web site to view its posted code of business conduct. Your document won't be as thorough as Macy's,
but it will cover the following areas: (1) conflicts of interest; (2) acceptance of gifts, services, or entertainment; (3) protection of
confidential information; (4) use of company funds or assets for personal purposes; (5) competing fairly and ethically; and (6)
adherence to code. Draw up a code of conduct for your company.

(AACSB) Reflective Skills

Think of someone whom you regard as an ethical leader. It can be anyone connected with you--a businessperson, educator, coach,
politician, or family member. Explain why you believe the individual is ethical in his or her leadership.

This page titled 2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3982
2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility

  Learning Objective

    1. Define corporate social responsibility and explain how organizations are responsible to their stakeholders.

Corporate social responsibility refers to the approach that an organization takes in balancing its responsibilities toward different
stakeholders when making legal, economic, ethical, and social decisions. What motivates companies to be "socially responsible" to
their various stakeholders? We hope it's because they want to do the right thing, and for many companies, "doing the right thing" is
a key motivator. The fact is, it's often hard to figure out what the "right thing" is: What's "right" for one group of stakeholders isn't
necessarily just as "right" for another. One thing, however, is certain: Companies today are held to higher standards than ever
before. Consumers and other groups consider not only the quality and price of a company's products but also its character. If too
many groups see a company as a poor corporate citizen, it will have a harder time attracting qualified employees, finding investors,
and selling its products. Good corporate citizens, by contrast, are more successful in all these areas.

Figure 2.6 presents a model of corporate responsibility based on a company's relationships with its stakeholders. In this model, the
focus is on managers--not owners--as the principals involved in all these relationships. Here, owners are the stakeholders who
invest risk capital in the firm in expectation of a financial return. Other stakeholders include employees, suppliers, and the
communities in which the firm does business. Proponents of this model hold that customers, who provide the firm with revenue,
have a special claim on managers' attention. The arrows indicate the two-way nature of corporation-stakeholder relationships: All
stakeholders have some claim on the firm's resources and returns, and it's management's job to make decisions that balance these
claims (Baron, D. P., 2003).

                                                                    Figure 2.6 The Corporate Citizen

Let's look at some of the ways in which companies can be "socially responsible" in considering the claims of various stakeholders.

Owners

Owners invest money in companies. In return, the people who run a company have a responsibility to increase the value of owners'
investments through profitable operations. Managers also have a responsibility to provide owners (as well as other stakeholders
having financial interests, such as creditors and suppliers) with accurate, reliable information about the performance of the
business. Clearly, this is one of the areas in which WorldCom managers fell down on the job. Upper-level management purposely
deceived shareholders by presenting them with fraudulent financial statements.

2.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3983
Fiduciary Responsibilities

Finally, managers have a fiduciary responsibility to owners: They're responsible for safeguarding the company's assets and
handling its funds in a trustworthy manner. This is a responsibility that was ignored by top executives at both Adelphia and Tyco,
whose associates and families virtually looted company assets. To enforce managers' fiduciary responsibilities for a firm's financial
statements and accounting records, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 requires CEOs and CFOs to attest to their accuracy. The law
also imposes penalties on corporate officers, auditors, board members, and any others who commit fraud.

Employees

Companies are responsible for providing employees with safe, healthy places to work--as well as environments that are free from
sexual harassment and all types of discrimination. They should also offer appropriate wages and benefits. In the following sections,
we'll take a closer look at each of these areas of responsibility.

Safety and Health

                                                     Figure 2.7 Workplace Deaths by Event or Exposure, 2010
Though it seems obvious that companies should guard workers' safety and health, a lot of them simply don't. For over four
decades, for example, executives at Johns Manville suppressed evidence that one of its products, asbestos, was responsible for the
deadly lung disease developed by many of its workers (Gellerman, 2003). The company concealed chest X-rays from stricken
workers, and executives decided that it was simply cheaper to pay workers' compensation claims (or let workers die) than to create
a safer work environment. A New Jersey court was quite blunt in its judgment: Johns Manville, it held, had made a deliberate, cold-
blooded decision to do nothing to protect at-risk workers, in blatant disregard of their rights (Gellerman, 2003).
About four in one hundred thousand U.S. workers die in workplace "incidents" each year. The Department of Labor categorizes
deaths caused by conditions like those at Johns Manville as "exposure to harmful substances or environments." How prevalent is
this condition as a cause of workplace deaths? See Figure 2.7, which breaks down workplace fatalities by cause. Some jobs are
more dangerous than others. For a comparative overview based on workplace deaths by occupation, see Figure 2.8 .

Figure 2.8 Workplace Deaths by Industry, 2010

2.5.2                                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3983
        Figure 2.9: Requiring workers to wear protective clothing like gloves, hard hats, and goggles cuts down on accidents. It also helps
        the firm reduce time lost from work due to injuries. (State Library Victoria Collection - Men wearing gas masks and protective
        clothing - CC BY-NC 2.0.)

For most people, fortunately, things are better than they were at Johns Manville. Procter & Gamble (P&G), for example, considers
the safety and health of its employees paramount and promotes the attitude that "Nothing we do is worth getting hurt for." With
nearly one hundred thousand employees worldwide, P&G uses a measure of worker safety called "total incident rate per
employee," which records injuries resulting in loss of consciousness, time lost from work, medical transfer to another job, motion
restriction, or medical treatment beyond first aid. The company attributes the low rate of such incidents--less than one incident per
hundred employees--to a variety of programs to promote workplace safety (Procter & Gamble, 2003).

Freedom from Sexual Harassment

What is sexual harassment? The law is quite precise:

    Sexual harassment occurs when an employee makes "unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal
    or physical conduct of a sexual nature" to another employee who doesn't welcome the advances.
    It's also sexual harassment when "submission to or rejection of this conduct explicitly or implicitly affects an individual's
    employment, unreasonably interferes with an individual's work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive
    work environment." (U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2012)

To prevent sexual harassment--or at least minimize its likelihood--a company should adopt a formal anti-harassment policy
describing prohibited conduct, asserting its objections to the behavior, and detailing penalties for violating the policy (Grossman,
2012). Employers also have an obligation to investigate harassment complaints. Failure to enforce anti-harassment policies can be
very costly. In 1998, for example, Mitsubishi paid $34 million to more than three hundred fifty female employees of its Normal,
Illinois, plant to settle a sexual harassment case supported by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. The EEOC
reprimanded the company for permitting an atmosphere of verbal and physical abuse against women, charging that female workers
had been subjected to various forms of harassment, ranging from exposure to obscene graffiti and vulgar jokes to fondling and
groping (Grossman, 2012).

Equal Opportunity and Diversity

People must be hired, evaluated, promoted, and rewarded on the basis of merit, not personal characteristics. This, too, is the law--
namely, Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. Like most companies, P&G has a formal policy on hiring and promotion that
forbids discrimination based on race, color, religion, gender, age, national origin, citizenship, sexual orientation, or disability. P&G
expects all employees to support its commitment to equal employment opportunity and warns that those who violate company
policies will face strict disciplinary action, including termination of employment (Procter & Gamble, 2012).

Equal Pay and the Wage Gap

The Equal Pay Act of 1963 requires equal pay for both men and women in jobs that entail equal skill, equal effort, equal
responsibility, or similar working conditions. What has been the effect of the law after forty years? In 1963, women earned, on
average, $0.589 for every $1 earned by men. By 2010, that difference--which we call the wage gap--has been closed to $0.812 to

2.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3983
$1, or approximately 81 percent (Aamodt, 2011). Figure 2.10 provides some interesting numbers on the differences in annual
earnings based not only on gender but on race, as well. Figure 2.11 throws further light on the wage and unemployment gap when
education is taken into consideration.

                                                     Figure 2.10 Median Annual Earnings by Gender and Race

What accounts for the difference, despite the mandate of federal law? For one thing, the jobs typically held by women tend to pay
less than those typically held by men. In addition, men often have better job opportunities. For example, a man newly hired at the
same time as a woman will often get a higher-paying assignment at the entry level. Coupled with the fact that the same sort of
discrimination applies when it comes to training and promotions, women are usually relegated to a lifetime of lower earnings.

        Figure 2.11 Median Annual Earnings by Level of Education. Education pays in higher earnings and lower unemployment rates.
        Note: Data are 2010 annual averages for persons age 25 and over. Earnings are for full-time wage and salary workers. Source:
        Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population Survey.

Building Diverse Workforces

In addition to complying with equal employment opportunity laws, many companies make special efforts to recruit employees who
are underrepresented in the workforce according to sex, race, or some other characteristic. In helping to build more diverse
workforces, such initiatives contribute to competitive advantage for two reasons: (1) People from diverse backgrounds bring new
talents and fresh perspectives to an organization, typically enhancing creativity in the development of new products. (2) By
reflecting more accurately the changing demographics of the marketplace, a diverse workforce improves a company's ability to
serve an ethnically diverse population.

2.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3983
Wages and Benefits

At the very least, employers must obey laws governing minimum wage and overtime pay. A minimum wage is set by the federal
government, though states can set their own rates. The current federal rate, for example, is $7.25, while the rate in the state of
Washington is $8.67. When there's a difference, the higher rate applies (U.S. Department of Labor, 2012). By law, employers must
also provide certain benefits--social security (which provides retirement benefits), unemployment insurance (which protects
against loss of income in case of job loss), and workers' compensation (which covers lost wages and medical costs in case of on-
the-job injury). Most large companies pay most of their workers more than minimum wage and offer considerably broader benefits,
including medical, dental, and vision care, as well as pension benefits.

This page titled 2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.5.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3983
2.6: Environmentalism

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify threats to the natural environment, and explain how businesses are addressing them.
    2. Define sustainability and understand why companies are now focusing on environmental and socially responsibility issues.

Today, virtually everyone agrees that companies must figure out how to produce products without compromising the right of future
generations to meet their own needs. Clearly, protecting natural resources is the right thing to do, but it also has become a business
necessity. Companies' customers demand that they respect the environment. Let's identify some key environmental issues and
highlight the ways in which the business community has addressed them.

Land Pollution

The land we live on has been polluted by the dumping of waste and increasing reliance on agricultural chemicals. It's pockmarked
by landfills stuffed with the excess of a throwaway society. It's been strip-mined and deforested, and urban sprawl on every
continent has squeezed out wetlands and farmlands and destroyed wildlife habitats.

        Figure 2.12: Did you know your cozy fleece jacket is most likely made from recycled plastic bottles? (Steven Depolo - Bottled
        Water Macros December 02, 20106 - CC BY 2.0.)

Protecting the land from further damage, then, means disposing of waste in responsible ways (or, better yet, reducing the amount of
waste). At both national and global levels, we must resolve the conflicts of interest between those who benefit economically from
logging and mining and those who argue that protecting the environment is an urgent matter. Probably municipalities must step in
to save open spaces and wetlands.

Clothing manufacturer Patagonia has for years been in the forefront of efforts to protect the land. Each year, the company pledges
either 1 percent of sales revenue or 10 percent of profits (whichever is larger) to protect and restore the natural environment
(Patagonia Web site, 2011). According to its "Statement of Purpose," "Patagonia exists as a business to inspire and implement
solutions to the environmental crisis." Instead of traditional materials for making clothes (such as regular cotton and fleece),
Patagonia relies on organically grown cotton, which is more expensive, because it doesn't requires harmful chemicals (Patagonia
Web site "Fabric", 2011). Its fleece products are made with postconsumer recycled (PCR) fleece, which is actually made with
recycled plastic bottles. So far, the company's efforts to build a more sustainable system has saved 86 million plastic bottles from
ending up in landfills (Patagonia Web site, "Fabric", 2011).

Air Pollution

It's amazing what we can do to something as large as the atmosphere. Over time, we've managed to pollute the air with emissions
of toxic gases and particles from factories, power plants, office buildings, cars, trucks, and even farms. In addition, our preferred
method of deforestation is burning, a major source of air pollution. In some places, polluted air causes respiratory problems,
particularly for the young and elderly. Factory emissions, including sulfur and other gases, mix with air and rain to produce acid
rain, which returns to the earth to pollute forests, lakes, and streams. Perhaps most importantly, many experts--scientists,
government officials, and businesspeople--are convinced that the heavy emission of carbon dioxide is altering the earth's climate.

2.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3984
Predictions of the effect of unchecked global warming include extreme weather conditions, flooding, oceanic disruptions, shifting
storm patterns, droughts, reduced farm output, and even animal extinctions (Carey, 2004).

Curbing global warming will require international cooperation. More than 190 nations (though not the United States) have stated
their support for this initiative by endorsing the Kyoto Protocol, an agreement to slow global warming by reducing worldwide
carbon-dioxide emissions.

What can business do? They can reduce greenhouse emissions by making vehicles, factories, and other facilities more energy
efficient. In response to a government ban on chlorofluorocarbons, which damage the ozone layer, DuPont has cut its own
greenhouse emissions by 72 percent over the last twenty years through improvements in manufacturing processes and a
commitment to increased energy efficiency (Carey, 2004; DuPont Web site, 2011).

Several U.S. and Japanese car manufacturers now market electric and hybrid gas-electric cars (HybridCars, 2011). General Electric
is designing more energy-efficient appliances (General Electric Web site, 2011) and investing heavily to research wind power
(Carey, 2004).

Water Pollution

Water makes up more than 70 percent of the earth's surface, and it's no secret that without it we wouldn't be here. Unfortunately,
that knowledge doesn't stop us from polluting our oceans, rivers, and lakes and generally making our water unfit for use. Massive
pollution occurs when such substances as oil and chemicals are dumped into bodies of water. The damage to the water, to the
marine ecosystem, and to coastal wildlife from the accidental spilling of oil from supertankers and offshore drilling operations can
be disastrous, and the cleanup can cost billions. Most contaminants, however, come from agricultural fertilizers, pesticides,
wastewater, raw sewage, and silt that make their way into water systems over time (Krantz & Kifferstein, 2006). In some parts of
the world--including certain areas in this country--water supplies are dwindling, partly because of diminishing rainfall and partly
because of increased consumption.

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has been a major force in cleaning up U.S. waters. Companies are now held to stricter
standards in the discharge of wastes into water treatment systems. In some places, particularly where water supplies are
dangerously low, such as the Southwest, local governments have instituted conservation programs. In Arizona (which suffers a
severe shortage), Home Depot works with governmental and nongovernmental agencies on a $1.8 million water-conservation
campaign. From its forty stores, the company runs weekend workshops to educate consumers on conservation basics, including
drought-resistant gardening techniques (Kotler & Lee, 2004).

Sustainability

Did you ever read (or have read to you) The Lorax, a well-known children's book, written by Dr. Seuss in 1971?1 It tells the story
of how a business owners' greed destroyed an ecosystem. To manufacture and sell a product that the owner argued everyone
needed, he cut down the trees in the forest, polluted the river, and fouled the air. These actions destroyed the habitat for the bears
that lived on the fruit that fell from the trees, the fish that swam in the streams and the birds that flew high up in the sky. In 1971,
these actions were not viewed negatively; business owners believed that the purpose of business was to make a profit without
regard for the effect on the environment.

This book was written for young people, but it sends an important message to today's business executives. When it was written in
1971, few business people listened to its message. But, they seem to be listening now. Over the past ten to fifteen years, most of our
large corporations have adopted measures that would have pleased environmentalists. These initiatives fall under the umbrella
called "sustainability." But what does sustainability mean? There are, of course, many definitions, but here is one that should work
for us: sustainability--the principle of providing products today that don't compromise the ability of future generations to meet
their needs2. Companies that undertake sustainability initiatives believe that meeting business needs and protecting the environment
are not mutually exclusive. They must do both.

How would you like a job in the sustainability field? Well twenty-six-year-old Robyn Beavers has one. As Google's Chief
Sustainability Officer she runs the company's "Green Biz Ops" [Green Business Operations] and is responsible for reducing
Google's impact on the environment (Keefe, 2011).
The 9,200 solar panels that were recently installed at the company's corporate headquarters (the world's biggest solar power

2.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3984
system) will certainly reduce the company's use of electricity supplied from fossil fuels. When she's not finding ways to reduce
Google's footprint on the world, she keeps busy making sure Google's offices are green--energy efficient, built with cradle-to-
cradle products, and healthy. She gets to pick out carpeting that can be returned to the manufacturer when it's worn out so it can be
ground up and used to make other rugs, rather than sit in a landfill decaying. She OKs window shades and other textiles used in the
cubicles only after she is assured they are toxin-free. And she makes sure there is plenty of filtered water for everyone and 90
percent fresh air coming into the building during the day. Although she has a lot of leeway in making decisions, each project has to
be reviewed to be sure it adds value and makes financial sense.

Google, like many other companies who are proactive in environmental and social responsibility issues often have a "triple bottom
line" focus. They believe that the current reporting model of one bottom line--profit--does not capture all the dimensions of
performance. They argue instead that companies should measure performance using three separate bottom lines: profit, people, and
planet (or the 3Ps). In addition to reporting profit through their income statement, companies should also report their progress in
being socially responsible to other people (stakeholders, including employee, customers, owners) and to the planet (the
environment)3.

Key Takeaways

Companies bear a responsibility to produce products without compromising the right of future generations to meet their needs.

    Customers demand that companies respect the environment. Our land, air, and water all face environmental threats.
    Land is polluted by the dumping of waste and an increasing reliance on agricultural chemicals. It's pockmarked by landfills,
    shredded by strip mining, and laid bare by deforestation.
    Urban sprawl has squeezed out wetlands and farmlands and destroyed wildlife habitats.
    To protect the land from further damage, we must dispose of waste in responsible ways, control strip mining and logging, and
    save open spaces and wetlands.
    Emissions of toxic gases and particles from factories, power plants, office buildings, cars, trucks, and even farms pollute the air,
    which is also harmed by the burning associated with deforestation.
    Many experts believe that the heavy emission of carbon dioxide by factories and vehicles is altering the earth's climate: carbon
    dioxide and other gases, they argue, act as a "greenhouse" over the earth, producing global warming--a heating of the earth that
    could have dire consequences. Many companies have taken actions to reduce air pollution.
    Water is polluted by such substances as oil and chemicals. Most of the contaminants come from agricultural fertilizers,
    pesticides, wastewater, raw sewage, and silt.
    Also of concern is the dwindling supply of water in some parts of the world brought about by diminishing rainfall and increased
    consumption.
    The Environmental Protection Agency has been a major force in cleaning up U.S. waters.
    Many companies have joined with governmental and nongovernmental agencies alike in efforts to help people protect and
    conserve water.
    Sustainability can be defined as the principle of providing products today that don't compromise the ability of future
    generations to meet their needs.
    Companies that undertake sustainability initiatives believe that meeting business needs and protecting the environment are not
    mutually exclusive. They must do both.
    Those who support a "triple bottom line" approach to corporate performance evaluation believe that the current reporting model
    of one bottom line--profit--does not capture all the dimensions of performance. They argue instead that companies should
    measure performance using three separate bottom lines: profit, people, and planet (or the 3Ps).

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

It's very popular today for company spokespersons to brag about the great things their companies are doing to help the
environment. Cond Nast, a worldwide magazine publishing company, questioned whether many of these vocal companies have
earned bragging rights or whether they're merely engaging in self-serving marketing stunts. After extensive research, Cond Nast
created two lists: the "Green 11 roster of good guys" and the "Toxic 10" list of offenders that could be doing more to help the

2.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3984
environment. Review Cond Nast's findings in its article "The Toxic Ten" (at www.portfolio.com/news-market...rate-Polluters).
Select one of the companies spotlighted. Go to that company's Web site and read about its environmental efforts. Then answer the
following questions:

Based on the information provided in the Cond Nast article and on your selected company's Web site, how would you rate the
company's environmental initiatives?

    Do the statements on the company's Web site mesh with the criticism voiced by Cond Nast?
    In your opinion, does the company deserve to be on Cond Nast's "Toxic 10" list? Why, or why not?
    Why does the company promote its environmental efforts? Is this promotion effective?

This page titled 2.6: Environmentalism is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.6.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3984
2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility

  Learning Objective

       List the stages of corporate responsibility.

We expect companies to recognize issues of social importance and to address them responsibly. The companies that do this earn
reputations as good corporate citizens and enjoy certain benefits, such as the ability to keep satisfied customers, to attract capital,
and to recruit and retain talented employees. But companies don't become good corporate citizens overnight. Learning to identify
and develop the capacity to address social concerns takes time and requires commitment. The task is arduous because so many
different issues are important to so many different members of the public--issues ranging from the environment, to worker well-
being (both at home and abroad), to fairness to customers, to respect for the community in which a company operates.

The Five Faces of Corporate Responsibility

Faced with public criticism of a particular practice, how does a company respond? What actions does it take to demonstrate a
higher level of corporate responsibility? According to Harvard University's Simon Zadek, exercising greater corporate
responsibility generally means going through the series of five different stances summarized in Figure 2.13 (Zadek, 2004).

                                                            Figure 2.13 Stages of Corporate Responsibility

The Stages of Corporate Responsibility in Figure 2.13 are

    Defensive. When companies are first criticized over some problem or issue, they tend to take a defensive, often legalistic stance.
    They reject allegations of wrongdoing and refuse to take responsibility, arguing that fixing the problem or addressing the issue
    isn't their job.
    Compliant. During this stage, companies adopt policies that acknowledge the wishes of the public. As a rule, however, they do
    only what they have to do to satisfy their critics, and little more. They're acting mainly to protect brands or reputations and to
    reduce the risk of litigation.
    Managerial. When it becomes clear that the problem won't go away, companies admit that they need to take responsibility and
    action, so they look for practical long-term solutions.
    Strategic. At this point, they may start to reap the benefits of acting responsibly. They often find that responding to public needs
    gives them a competitive edge and enhances long-term success.
    Civil. Ultimately, many companies recognize the importance of getting other companies to follow their lead. They may promote
    participation by other firms in their industries, endorsing the principle that the public is best served through collective action.

2.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3985
Here's Your Salad--How About Fries?

Several years ago, McDonald's found itself in a public relations nightmare. The fast-food giant faced massive public criticism for
serving unhealthy food that contributed to a national epidemic of obesity. Let's look at McDonald's responses to these criticisms
and assess how far along the five-stage process the company has progressed.

The Defensive Stage

As the documentary film Super Size Me demonstrated, a steady diet of McDonald's burgers and fries will cause you to gain weight.
It was certainly inevitable that one day the public would make a connection between the rising level of obesity in the United States
and a diet heavy in fat-laden fast foods. McDonald's fast food/obesity link got a lot of attention in 2002 when obese adults and
teenagers filed suits against the company, claiming it was responsible for their excess pounds. McDonald's reaction to the public
outcry against the company's menu items was defensive. For example, an owner of seven McDonald's in midtown Manhattan said,
"We offer healthy choices. It is up to individuals to set limits and to be informed....McDonald's discloses nutritional information
about its foods in its restaurants" (Burritt, 2005).

The Compliant Stage

In early 2004, the public's attention was drawn to McDonald's "super-size" options. Despite the fact that a super-sized meal
delivered more than fifteen hundred calories, one in ten customers went for the upgrade. McDonald's faced daily criticisms on its
super-sizing campaign, from nutritionists, doctors, advocacy groups, and lawyers who held it up as a "grossly overweight" poster
child for U.S. obesity concerns. And the company feared public criticism would escalate when the movie Super Size Me hit the
theaters. The documentary tells the story of a young man who gained twenty-four pounds and wrecked his health by eating only
McDonald's food for a month. Even worse, one scene shows him getting sick in his car after trying to wolf down a super-size meal.
So McDonald's immediately moved from the defensive stage to the compliant stage and announced that it was eliminating its
super-size option by the end of 2004. The move, though small, was in the right direction. It was touted by the company as a "menu
simplification" process, but a spokesman did state, "It certainly is consistent with and on a parallel path with our ongoing
commitment to a balanced lifestyle" (Horovitz, 2004).

The Managerial Stage

Criticism of McDonald's continued as customers stayed away and its profits plummeted. The company searched for ways to win
back customers and keep them long-term. To do this, it would have to come up with a healthier menu. Though McDonald's had
served salads for years, they weren't very good. The company got serious about salads and introduced new, improved "premium
salads," complete with Newman's Own salad dressing (a nice public relations touch, as all profits on the salad dressings are
donated to charities). The company also improved the Happy Meal by letting kids substitute apple slices and low-fat milk for the
usual fries and soda. Oprah Winfrey's personal trainer was brought in to promote an adult version of the Happy Meal, called the
GoActive meal, which includes a salad, a bottle of water, a book on nutrition, and a clip-on pedometer that measures the number of
steps you take. The fat calories in Chicken McNuggets were lowered by coming out with all-white-meat McNuggets. And to
appease those between-meal munchies, the company added a fruit-and-walnut salad to its menu. McDonald's goal was to convince
customers that it had turned a corner and would forever more offer healthy choices to both adults and children.

The Strategic Stage

The new focus on healthy choices worked, and customers started returning. McDonald's salads were well received and accounted
for about 10 percent of sales. Overall, things improved financially for the company: Sales increased and profits rose. To complete
the transition to a healthier image, McDonald's came up with a new theme: helping adults and children live a balanced, active
lifestyle. To go along with the theme, it launched a new active-life public-awareness campaign with the tagline "It's what I eat and
what I do...I'm lovin' it." McDonald's demonstrated its concern for the health of its customers through permanent menu changes
and an emphasis on the value of physical fitness. Even Ronald McDonald, the company's mascot, helped out by shooting hoops
with NBA basketball star Yao Ming. The company launched a program called GoActive to help people find fun ways to build
physical activity and fitness into their daily lives.

2.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3985
The Civil Stage

McDonald's hasn't advanced to the final stage yet; it hasn't enlisted the cooperation of other fast-food companies in encouraging
children and adults to eat healthier foods. It's difficult to predict whether it will assume this role in the future, or even whether the
company will stick with its healthier lifestyle theme. Indeed, it's hard to reconcile McDonald's commitment to helping people eat
healthier with a promotion in the Chicago area that gave a free forty-two-ounce "super-size" soda to anyone buying a Big Mac and
fries. Given that a Big Mac and medium fries deliver 910 calories, it's hard to justify encouraging customers to pile on an
additional 410 calories for a big drink (at least, it's hard to justify this if you're promoting yourself as a company helping people eat
better) (Herman, 2005).

Key Takeaways

Faced with public criticism of a particular practice, a company is likely to progress through five different stages:

    Defensive. When first criticized over some problem, companies take a defensive stance. They reject allegations of wrongdoing
    and refuse to take responsibility.
    Compliant. During this stage, companies do only what they have to do to satisfy their critics, protect brands or reputations, and
    reduce the risk of litigation.
    Managerial. When it's clear that the problem won't go away, companies take responsibility and look for long-term solutions.
    Strategic. At this point, they may start to reap the benefits of acting responsibly. Responding to public needs gives them a
    competitive edge and enhances long-term success.
    Civil. Ultimately, companies recognize the importance of getting other companies to follow their lead. They enlist the
    cooperation of other companies in supporting the issue of concern to the public.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

This chapter discusses a five-stage process that companies go through in responding to public criticism. Consider the situation in
which McDonald's found itself when it faced massive public criticism for serving unhealthy food that contributed to a national
epidemic of obesity. Given what you know about the company's reaction, identify the steps that it took in response to this criticism.
In particular, show how its responses do or don't reflect the five stages of corporate responsibility outlined in the chapter. In your
opinion, how far along the five-stage process has McDonald's progressed?

This page titled 2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3985
2.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Lessons in Community Living

Executives consider it an honor to have their company named one of Business Ethics magazine's "100 Best Corporate Citizens."
Companies are chosen from a group of one thousand, according to how well they serve their stakeholders--owners, employees,
customers, and the communities with which they share the social and natural environment. Being in the top one hundred for five
years in a row is cause for celebration. Two of the twenty-nine companies that enjoy this distinction are Timberland and the New
York Times Company.

The two companies are in very different industries. Timberland designs and manufactures boots and other footwear, apparel, and
accessories; the New York Times Company is a media giant, with nineteen newspapers (including the New York Times and the
Boston Globe), eight television stations, and more than forty Web sites. Link to the Timberland Web site
(http://www.timberland.com/corp/index...ge=csroverview) and the New York Times Company Web site
(www.nytco.com/social_responsibility/index.html) to learn how each, in its own way, supports the communities with which it
shares the social and natural environment. Look specifically for information that will help you answer the following questions:

    How does each company assist its community? To what organizations does each donate money? How do employees volunteer
    their time? What social causes does each support?
    How does each company work to protect the natural environment?
    Are the community-support efforts of the two companies similar or dissimilar? In what ways do these activities reflect the
    purposes of each organization?
    In your opinion, why do these companies support their communities? What benefits do they derive from being good corporate
    citizens?

Career Opportunities

Is "WorldCom Ethics Officer" an Oxymoron?

As you found out in this chapter, WorldCom's massive accounting scandal cost investors billions and threw the company into
bankruptcy. More than one hundred employees who either participated in the fraud or passively looked the other way were indicted
or fired, including accountant Betty Vinson, CFO Scott Sullivan, and CEO Bernard Ebbers. With the name "WorldCom" indelibly
tarnished, the company reclaimed its previous name, "MCI." It was put on court-imposed probation and ordered to follow the
directives of the court. One of those directives called for setting up an ethics office. Nancy Higgins, a corporate attorney and
onetime vice president for ethics at Lockheed Martin, was brought in with the title of chief ethics officer.

Higgins's primary responsibility is to ensure that MCI lives up to new CEO Michael Capellas's assertion that the company is
dedicated to integrity and its employees are committed to high ethical standards. Her tasks are the same as those of most people
with the same job title, but she's under more pressure because MCI can't afford any more ethical lapses. She oversees the
company's ethics initiatives, including training programs and an ethics hotline. She spends a lot of her time with employees,
listening to their concerns and promoting company values.

Higgins is a member of the senior executive team and reports to the CEO and board of directors. She attends all board meetings and
provides members with periodic updates on the company's newly instituted ethics program (including information gleaned from the
new ethics hotline).

Answer the following questions:

 1. Would you be comfortable in Higgins's job? Does the job of ethics officer appeal to you? Why, or why not?
 2. Would you find it worthwhile to work in an ethics office for a few years at some point in your career? Why, or why not?
 3. What qualities would you look for if you were hiring an ethics officer?
 4. What factors will help (or hinder) Higgins's ability to carry out her mandate to bolster integrity and foster ethical standards?
 5. Would the accounting scandals have occurred at WorldCom if Higgins had been on the job back when Vinson, Sullivan, and

    Ebbers were still there? Explain your opinion.

2.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3986
Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

What Are the Stakes When You Play with Wal-Mart?

In resolving an ethical dilemma, you have to choose between two or more opposing alternatives, both of which, while acceptable,
are important to different groups. Both alternatives may be ethically legitimate, but you can act in the interest of only one group.

This project is designed to help you learn how to analyze and resolve ethical dilemmas in a business context. You'll work in teams
to address three ethical dilemmas involving Wal-Mart, the world's largest company. Before meeting as a group, every team member
should go to the BusinessWeek Web site (http://www.businessweek.com/magazine...2001_mz001.htm) and read "Is Wal-Mart Too
Powerful?" The article discusses Wal-Mart's industry dominance and advances arguments for why the company is both admired
and criticized.

Your team should then get together to analyze the three dilemmas that follow. Start by reading the overview of the dilemma and
any assigned material. Then debate the issues, working to reach a resolution through the five-step process summarized in Figure 2.2
:

 1. Define the problem and collect the relevant facts.
 2. Identify feasible options.
 3. Assess the effect of each option on stakeholders.
 4. Establish criteria for determining the most appropriate action.
 5. Select the best option based on the established criteria.

Finally, prepare a report on your deliberations over each dilemma, making sure that each report contains all the following items:

 1. The team's recommendation for resolving the dilemma
 2. An explanation of the team's recommendation
 3. A summary of the information collected for, and the decisions made at, each step of the dilemma-resolution process

Three Ethical Dilemmas

Ethical Dilemma 1: Should Wal-Mart Close a Store because It Unionizes?

Scenario:

In February 2005, Wal-Mart closed a store in Quebec, Canada, after its workers voted to form a union. The decision has
ramifications for various stakeholders, including employees, customers, and stockholders. In analyzing and arriving at a resolution
to this dilemma, assume that you're the CEO of Wal-Mart, but ignore the decision already made by the real CEO. Arrive at your
own recommendation, which may or may not be the same as that reached by your real-life counterpart.

Before analyzing this dilemma, go to the Washington Post Web site (www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn...2005Feb10.html) and
read the article "Wal-Mart Chief Defends Closing Unionized Store."

Ethical Dilemma 2: Should Levi Strauss Go into Business with Wal-Mart?

Scenario:

For years, the words jeans and Levi's were synonymous. Levi Strauss, the founder of the company that carries his name, invented
blue jeans in 1850 for sale to prospectors in the gold fields of California. Company sales peaked at $7 billion in 1996 but then
plummeted to $4 billion by 2003. Management has admitted that the company must reverse this downward trend if it hopes to
retain the support of its twelve thousand employees, operate its remaining U.S. factories, and continue its tradition of corporate-
responsibility initiatives. At this point, Wal-Mart made an attractive offer: Levi Strauss could develop a low-cost brand of jeans for
sale at Wal-Mart. The decision, however, isn't as simple as it may seem: Wal-Mart's relentless pressure to offer "everyday low
prices" can have wide-ranging ramifications for its suppliers' stakeholders--in this case, Levi Strauss's shareholders, employees,
and customers, as well as the beneficiaries of its various social-responsibility programs. Assume that, as the CEO of Levi Strauss,
you have to decide whether to accept Wal-Mart's offer. Again, ignore any decision already made by your real-life counterpart, and
instead work toward an independent recommendation.

2.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3986
Before you analyze this dilemma, go to the Fast Company Web site (http://www.fastcompany.com/magazine/77/walmart.html) and
read the article "The Wal-Mart You Don't Know."

Ethical Dilemma 3: Should You Welcome Wal-Mart into Your Neighborhood?

Scenario:

In 2002, Wal-Mart announced plans to build forty "supercenters" in California--a section of the country that has traditionally
resisted Wal-Mart's attempts to dot the landscape with big-box stores. Skirmishes soon broke out in California communities
between those in favor of welcoming Wal-Mart and those determined to fend off mammoth retail outlets.

You're a member of the local council of a California city, and you'll be voting next week on whether to allow Wal-Mart to build in
your community. The council's decision will affect Wal-Mart, as well as many local stakeholders, including residents, small
business owners, and employees of community supermarkets and other retail establishments. As usual, ignore any decisions already
made by your real-life counterparts.

Before working on this dilemma, go to the USA Today Web site (http://www.usatoday.com/money/indust...wal-mart_x.htm) and
read the article "California Tries to Slam Lid on Big-Boxed Wal-Mart."

The Global View (AACSB)

Was Nike Responsible for Compensating Honduran Factory Workers?

Honduras is an impoverished country in which 70% of its residents live in poverty. Jobs are scarce, particularly those that pay
decent wages along with benefits, such as health care. It is not surprising then that workers at two Honduran factories making
products for U.S. companies, including Nike, were extremely upset when their factories closed down and they lost their jobs. Even
worse, the owners of the factories refused to pay the 1,800 workers $2 million in severance pay and other benefits due to them by
law. Although the factory owners had been paid in full by Nike for the apparel they produced, the workers argued that Nike should
be responsible for paying the $2 million in severance that the factory owners had not received.

Nike's original response was to sympathize with the workers but refuse to pay the workers the severance pay they had not received
from the factory owners. This stance did not settle well with student groups around the country who rallied in support of the unpaid
workers. In the end Nike gave into pressure from the students and paid $1.5 million to a relief fund for the employees. In addition,
the company said it would provide vocational training and health coverage for the unemployed workers.

To learn more about this case, read the following:

    Nike Press Release: Nike Statement Regarding Vision Tex and Hugger (April 20, 2010)
    www.nikebiz.com/media/pr/2010...rHonduras.html
    Working in These Times: Honduran Workers Speak Out Against Nike's Labor Violations (April 21, 2010)
    http://inthesetimes.org/working/entr...or_violations/
    New York Times: Pressured, Nike to Help Workers in Honduras (July 26, 2010)
    http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/27/bu...al/27nike.html
    Time Magazine: Just Pay It: Nike Creates Fund for Honduran Workers (July 27, 2010)
    www.time.com/time/printout/0,...006646,00.html
    Nike Press Release: Nike and CGT Statement (July 26, 2010) www.nikebiz.com/media/pr/2010...statement.html
    Answer the following questions:
    Do you think Nike was responsible for compensating the workers in Honduras? Why did it change its stance?
    Did the students, universities, and workers themselves have all of the information they needed before becoming involved in the
    protest? Are their facts accurate?
    Should students be activists? Do companies such as Nike ignore them at their own peril?

This page titled 2.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

2.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3986
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

3: Business in a Global Environment

  3.1: The Globalization of Business
  3.2: Opportunities in International Business
  3.3: The Global Business Environment
  3.4: Trade Controls
  3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
  3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business
  3.7: Cases and Problems
This page titled 3: Business in a Global Environment is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
3.1: The Globalization of Business

  Learning Objectives
    1. Explain why nations and companies participate in international trade.
    2. Describe the concepts of absolute and comparative advantage.
    3. Explain how trade between nations is measured.

The globalization of business is bound to affect you. Not only will you buy products manufactured overseas, but it's highly likely
that you'll meet and work with individuals from various countries and cultures as customers, suppliers, colleagues, employees, or
employers. The bottom line is that the globalization of world commerce has an impact on all of us. Therefore, it makes sense to
learn more about how globalization works.

        Figure 3.1: World commerce has become increasingly international, so understanding how global business works is key to a
        successful career. (Richter Frank-Jurgen - Horasis Global China Business Meeting 2013 - CC BY-SA 2.0.)
This page titled 3.1: The Globalization of Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3987
3.2: Opportunities in International Business

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define importing and exporting.
    2. Explain how companies enter the international market through licensing agreements or franchises.
    3. Describe how companies reduce costs through contract manufacturing and outsourcing.
    4. Explain the purpose of international strategic alliances and joint ventures.
    5. Understand how U.S. companies expand their businesses through foreign direct investments and international subsidiaries.
    6. Understand the arguments for and against multinational corporations.

The fact that nations exchange billions of dollars in goods and services each year demonstrates that international trade makes good
economic sense. For an American company wishing to expand beyond national borders, there are a variety of ways it can get
involved in international business. Let's take a closer look at the more popular ones.

Importing and Exporting

Importing (buying products overseas and reselling them in one's own country) and exporting (selling domestic products to foreign
customers) are the oldest and most prevalent forms of international trade. For many companies, importing is the primary link to the
global market. American food and beverage wholesalers, for instance, import the bottled water Evian from its source in the French
Alps for resale in U.S. supermarkets (Fine Waters Media, 2006). Other companies get into the global arena by identifying an
international market for their products and become exporters. The Chinese, for instance, are increasingly fond of fast foods cooked
in soybean oil. Because they also have an increasing appetite for meat, they need high-protein soybeans to raise livestock (Gale,
2003). As a result, American farmers now export over $9 billion worth of soybeans to China every year (American Soybean
Association, 2010).

Figure 3.5: The United States exports billions of dollars of soybeans to China annually. (United Soybean Board - US Soybean
Exports Infographic - CC BY 2.0.)

3.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3988
Licensing and Franchising

A company that wants to get into an international market quickly while taking only limited financial and legal risks might consider
licensing agreements with foreign companies. An international licensing agreement allows a foreign company (the licensee) to sell
the products of a producer (the licensor) or to use its intellectual property (such as patents, trademarks, copyrights) in exchange for
royalty fees. Here's how it works: You own a company in the United States that sells coffee-flavored popcorn. You're sure that your
product would be a big hit in Japan, but you don't have the resources to set up a factory or sales office in that country. You can't
make the popcorn here and ship it to Japan because it would get stale. So you enter into a licensing agreement with a Japanese
company that allows your licensee to manufacture coffee-flavored popcorn using your special process and to sell it in Japan under
your brand name. In exchange, the Japanese licensee would pay you a royalty fee.

Another popular way to expand overseas is to sell franchises. Under an international franchise agreement, a company (the
franchiser) grants a foreign company (the franchisee) the right to use its brand name and to sell its products or services. The
franchisee is responsible for all operations but agrees to operate according to a business model established by the franchiser. In
turn, the franchiser usually provides advertising, training, and new-product assistance. Franchising is a natural form of global
expansion for companies that operate domestically according to a franchise model, including restaurant chains, such as McDonald's
and Kentucky Fried Chicken, and hotel chains, such as Holiday Inn and Best Western.

Contract Manufacturing and Outsourcing

Because of high domestic labor costs, many U.S. companies manufacture their products in countries where labor costs are lower.
This arrangement is called international contract manufacturing or outsourcing. A U.S. company might contract with a local
company in a foreign country to manufacture one of its products. It will, however, retain control of product design and
development and put its own label on the finished product. Contract manufacturing is quite common in the U.S. apparel business,
with most American brands being made in a number of Asian countries, including China, Vietnam, Indonesia, and India (Gereffi &
Frederick, 2010).

Thanks to twenty-first-century information technology, nonmanufacturing functions can also be outsourced to nations with lower
labor costs. U.S. companies increasingly draw on a vast supply of relatively inexpensive skilled labor to perform various business
services, such as software development, accounting, and claims processing. For years, American insurance companies have
processed much of their claims-related paperwork in Ireland. With a large, well-educated population with English language skills,
India has become a center for software development and customer-call centers for American companies. In the case of India, as you
can see in Table 3.1 "Selected Hourly Wages, United States and India", the attraction is not only a large pool of knowledge workers
but also significantly lower wages.

                                                     Table 3:1 Selected Hourly Wages, United States and India

Occupation                         U.S. Wage per Hour (per year)       Indian Wage per Hour (per year)

Middle-level manager               $29.40 per hour ($60,000 per year)  $6.30 per hour ($13,000 per year)

Information technology specialist  $35.10 per hour ($72,000 per year)  $7.50 per hour ($15,000 per year)
Manual worker                      $13.00 per hour ($27,000 per year)  $2.20 per hour ($5,000 per year)

Source: Data obtained from "Huge Wage Gaps for the Same Work Between Countries - June 2011," WageIndicator.com,
www.wageindicator.org/main/Wa...ries-June-2011 (accessed September 20, 2011).

This page titled 3.2: Opportunities in International Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                   3.2.2                               https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3988
3.3: The Global Business Environment

  Learning Objective

       Appreciate how cultural, economic, legal, and political differences between countries create challenges to successful
       business dealings.

In the classic movie The Wizard of Oz, a magically misplaced Midwest farm girl takes a moment to survey the bizarre landscape of
Oz and then comments to her little dog, "I don't think we're in Kansas anymore, Toto." That sentiment probably echoes the
reaction of many businesspeople who find themselves in the midst of international ventures for the first time. The differences
between the foreign landscape and the one with which they're familiar are often huge and multifaceted. Some are quite obvious,
such as differences in language, currency, and everyday habits (say, using chopsticks instead of silverware). But others are subtle,
complex, and sometimes even hidden. Success in international business means understanding a wide range of cultural, economic,
legal, and political differences between countries. Let's look at some of the more important of these differences.

The Cultural Environment

Even when two people from the same country communicate, there's always a possibility of misunderstanding. When people from
different countries get together, that possibility increases substantially. Differences in communication styles reflect differences in
culture: the system of shared beliefs, values, customs, and behaviors that govern the interactions of members of a society. Cultural
differences create challenges to successful international business dealings. We explain a few of these challenges in the following
sections.

Language

English is the international language of business. The natives of such European countries as France and Spain certainly take pride
in their own languages and cultures, but nevertheless English is the business language of the European community. Whereas only a
few educated Europeans have studied Italian or Norwegian, most have studied English. Similarly, on the South Asian subcontinent,
where hundreds of local languages and dialects are spoken, English is the official language. In most corners of the world, English-
only speakers--such as most Americans--have no problem finding competent translators and interpreters. So why is language an
issue for English speakers doing business in the global marketplace?

In many countries, only members of the educated classes speak English. The larger population--which is usually the market you
want to tap--speaks the local tongue. Advertising messages and sales appeals must take this fact into account. More than one
English translation of an advertising slogan has resulted in a humorous (and perhaps serious) blunder. Some classics are listed in
Table 3.2 "Lost in Translation".

3.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3989
                                                                       Table 3:2 Lost in Translation

 In Belgium, the translation of the slogan of an American auto-body company, "Body by Fisher," came out as "Corpse by Fisher."

 Translated into German, the slogan "Come Alive with Pepsi" became "Come out of the Grave with Pepsi."

 A U.S. computer company in Indonesia translated "software" as "underwear."

 A German chocolate product called "Zit" didn't sell well in the United States.

 An English-speaking car-wash company in Francophone Quebec advertised itself as a "lavement d'auto" ("car enema") instead of the
 correct "lavage d'auto."

 A proposed new soap called "Dainty" in English came out as "aloof" in Flemish (Belgium), "dimwitted" in Farsi (Iran), and "crazy
 person" in Korea; the product was shelved.

 One false word in a Mexican commercial for an American shirt maker changed "When I used this shirt, I felt good" to "Until I used this
 shirt, I felt good."

 In the 1970s, GM's Chevy Nova didn't get on the road in Puerto Rico, in part because Nova in Spanish means "It doesn't go."

 A U.S. appliance ad fizzled in the Middle East because it showed a well-stocked refrigerator featuring a large ham, thus offending the
 sensibilities of Muslim consumers, who don't eat pork.

Furthermore, relying on translators and interpreters puts you as an international businessperson at a disadvantage. You're privy
only to interpretations of the messages that you're getting, and this handicap can result in a real competitive problem. Maybe you'll
misread the subtler intentions of the person with whom you're trying to conduct business. The best way to combat this problem is
to study foreign languages. Most people appreciate some effort to communicate in their local language, even on the most basic
level. They even appreciate mistakes you make resulting from a desire to demonstrate your genuine interest in the language of your
counterparts in foreign countries. The same principle goes doubly when you're introducing yourself to non-English speakers in the
United States. Few things work faster to encourage a friendly atmosphere than a native speaker's willingness to greet a foreign
guest in the guest's native language.

Time and Sociability

Americans take for granted many of the cultural aspects of our business practices. Most of our meetings, for instance, focus on
business issues, and we tend to start and end our meetings on schedule. These habits stem from a broader cultural preference: we
don't like to waste time. (It was an American, Benjamin Franklin, who coined the phrase "Time is money.") This preference,
however, is by no means universal. The expectation that meetings will start on time and adhere to precise agendas is common in
parts of Europe (especially the Germanic countries), as well as in the United States, but elsewhere--say, in Latin America and the
Middle East--people are often late to meetings.

High- and Low-Context Cultures

Likewise, don't expect businesspeople from these regions--or businesspeople from most of Mediterranean Europe, for that matter
--to "get down to business" as soon as a meeting has started. They'll probably ask about your health and that of your family,
inquire whether you're enjoying your visit to their country, suggest local foods, and generally appear to be avoiding serious
discussion at all costs. For Americans, such topics are conducive to nothing but idle chitchat, but in certain cultures, getting started
this way is a matter of simple politeness and hospitality.

If you ever find yourself in such a situation, the best advice is to go with the flow and be receptive to cultural nuances. In high-
context cultures, the numerous interlocking (and often unstated) personal and family connections that hold people together have an
effect on almost all interactions. Because people's personal lives overlap with their business lives (and vice versa), it's important to
get to know your potential business partners as human beings and individuals.

By contrast, in low-context cultures, such as those of the United States, Germany, Switzerland, and the Scandinavian countries,
personal and work relationships are more compartmentalized: you don't necessarily need to know much about the personal context
of a person's life to deal with him or her in the business arena.

3.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3989
Intercultural Communication

Different cultures have different communication styles--a fact that can take some getting used to. For example, degrees of
animation in expression can vary from culture to culture. Southern Europeans and Middle Easterners are quite animated, favoring
expressive body language along with hand gestures and raised voices. Northern Europeans are far more reserved. The English, for
example, are famous for their understated style and the Germans for their formality in most business settings. In addition, the
distance at which one feels comfortable when talking with someone varies by culture. People from the Middle East like to converse
from a distance of a foot or less, while Americans prefer more personal space.

Finally, while people in some cultures prefer to deliver direct, clear messages, others use language that's subtler or more indirect.
North Americans and most Northern Europeans fall into the former category and many Asians into the latter. But even within these
categories, there are differences. Though typically polite, Chinese and Koreans are extremely direct in expression, while Japanese
are indirect: They use vague language and avoid saying "no" even if they do not intend to do what you ask. They worry that turning
someone down will result in their "losing face," and so they avoid doing this in public.

This discussion brings up two important points. First, avoid lumping loosely related cultures together. We sometimes talk, for
example, about "Asian culture," but such broad categories as "Asian" are usually oversimplifications. Japanese culture is different
from Korean, which is different from Chinese. Second, never assume that two people from the same culture will always act in a
similar manner. Not all Latin Americans are casual about meeting times, not all Italians use animated body language, and not all
Germans are formal.

In summary, learn about a country's culture and use your knowledge to help improve the quality of your business dealings. Learn to
value the subtle differences among cultures, but don't allow cultural stereotypes to dictate how you interact with people from any
culture. Treat each person as an individual and spend time getting to know what he or she is about.

This page titled 3.3: The Global Business Environment is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3989
3.4: Trade Controls

  Learning Objective

       Describe the ways in which governments and international bodies promote and regulate global trade.

The debate about the extent to which countries should control the flow of foreign goods and investments across their borders is as
old as international trade itself. Governments continue to control trade. To better understand how and why, let's examine a
hypothetical case. Suppose you're in charge of a small country in which people do two things--grow food and make clothes.
Because the quality of both products is high and the prices are reasonable, your consumers are happy to buy locally made food and
clothes. But one day, a farmer from a nearby country crosses your border with several wagonloads of wheat to sell. On the same
day, a foreign clothes maker arrives with a large shipment of clothes. These two entrepreneurs want to sell food and clothes in your
country at prices below those that local consumers now pay for domestically made food and clothes. At first, this seems like a good
deal for your consumers: they won't have to pay as much for food and clothes. But then you remember all the people in your
country who grow food and make clothes. If no one buys their goods (because the imported goods are cheaper), what will happen
to their livelihoods? Will everybody be out of work? And if everyone's unemployed, what will happen to your national economy?

That's when you decide to protect your farmers and clothes makers by setting up trade rules. Maybe you'll increase the prices of
imported goods by adding a tax to them; you might even make the tax so high that they're more expensive than your homemade
goods. Or perhaps you'll help your farmers grow food more cheaply by giving them financial help to defray their costs. The
government payments that you give to the farmers to help offset some of their costs of production are called subsidies. These
subsidies will allow the farmers to lower the price of their goods to a point below that of imported competitors' goods. What's even
better is that the lower costs will allow the farmers to export their own goods at attractive, competitive prices.

The United States has a long history of subsidizing farmers. Subsidy programs guarantee farmers (including large corporate farms)
a certain price for their crops, regardless of the market price. This guarantee ensures stable income in the farming community but
can have a negative impact on the world economy. How? Critics argue that in allowing American farmers to export crops at
artificially low prices, U.S. agricultural subsidies permit them to compete unfairly with farmers in developing countries. A reverse
situation occurs in the steel industry, in which a number of countries--China, Japan, Russia, Germany, and Brazil--subsidize
domestic producers. U.S. trade unions charge that this practice gives an unfair advantage to foreign producers and hurts the
American steel industry, which can't compete on price with subsidized imports.

Whether they push up the price of imports or push down the price of local goods, such initiatives will help locally produced goods
compete more favorably with foreign goods. Both strategies are forms of trade controls--policies that restrict free trade. Because
they protect domestic industries by reducing foreign competition, the use of such controls is often called protectionism. Though
there's considerable debate over the pros and cons of this practice, all countries engage in it to some extent. Before debating the
issue, however, let's learn about the more common types of trade restrictions: tariffs, quotas, and, embargoes.

Tariffs

Tariffs are taxes on imports. Because they raise the price of the foreign-made goods, they make them less competitive. The United
States, for example, protects domestic makers of synthetic knitted shirts by imposing a stiff tariff of 32.5 percent on imports
(Insider Online, 2009). Tariffs are also used to raise revenue for a government. Shoe imports are worth $2 billion annually to the
federal government (Carney, 2011).

Quotas

A quota imposes limits on the quantity of a good that can be imported over a period of time. Quotas are used to protect specific
industries, usually new industries or those facing strong competitive pressure from foreign firms. U.S. import quotas take two
forms. An absolute quota fixes an upper limit on the amount of a good that can be imported during the given period. A tariff-rate
quota permits the import of a specified quantity and then adds a high import tax once the limit is reached.

Sometimes quotas protect one group at the expense of another. To protect sugar beet and sugar cane growers, for instance, the
United States imposes a tariff-rate quota on the importation of sugar--a policy that has driven up the cost of sugar to two to three

3.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3990
times world prices (Edwards, 2007). These artificially high prices push up costs for American candy makers, some of whom have
moved their operations elsewhere, taking high-paying manufacturing jobs with them. Life Savers, for example, were made in the
United States for ninety years but are now produced in Canada, where the company saves $10 million annually on the cost of sugar
(Will, 2004).

An extreme form of quota is the embargo, which, for economic or political reasons, bans the import or export of certain goods to or
from a specific country. The United States, for example, bans nearly every commodity originating in Cuba.

Dumping

A common political rationale for establishing tariffs and quotas is the need to combat dumping: the practice of selling exported
goods below the price that producers would normally charge in their home markets (and often below the cost of producing the
goods). Usually, nations resort to this practice to gain entry and market share in foreign markets, but it can also be used to sell off
surplus or obsolete goods. Dumping creates unfair competition for domestic industries, and governments are justifiably concerned
when they suspect foreign countries of dumping products on their markets. They often retaliate by imposing punitive tariffs that
drive up the price of the imported goods.

The Pros and Cons of Trade Controls

Opinions vary on government involvement in international trade. Some experts believe that governments should support free trade
and refrain from imposing regulations that restrict the free flow of goods and services between nations. Others argue that
governments should impose some level of trade regulations on imported goods and services.

Proponents of controls contend that there are a number of legitimate reasons why countries engage in protectionism. Sometimes
they restrict trade to protect specific industries and their workers from foreign competition--agriculture, for example, or steel
making. At other times, they restrict imports to give new or struggling industries a chance to get established. Finally, some
countries use protectionism to shield industries that are vital to their national defense, such as shipbuilding and military hardware.

Despite valid arguments made by supporters of trade controls, most experts believe that such restrictions as tariffs and quotas--as
well as practices that don't promote level playing fields, such as subsidies and dumping--are detrimental to the world economy.
Without impediments to trade, countries can compete freely. Each nation can focus on what it does best and bring its goods to a fair
and open world market. When this happens, the world will prosper. Or so the argument goes. International trade hasn't achieved
global prosperity, but it's certainly heading in the direction of unrestricted markets.

Key Takeaways

Because they protect domestic industries by reducing foreign competition, the use of controls to restrict free trade is often called
protectionism.

 1. Though there's considerable debate over protectionism, all countries engage in it to some extent.
 2. Tariffs are taxes on imports. Because they raise the price of the foreign-made goods, they make them less competitive.
 3. Quotas are restrictions on imports that impose a limit on the quantity of a good that can be imported over a period of time.

    They're used to protect specific industries, usually new industries or those facing strong competitive pressure from foreign
    firms.
 4. An embargo is a quota that, for economic or political reasons, bans the import or export of certain goods to or from a specific
    country.
 5. A common rationale for tariffs and quotas is the need to combat dumping--the practice of selling exported goods below the
    price that producers would normally charge in their home markets (and often below the costs of producing the goods).
 6. Some experts believe that governments should support free trade and refrain from imposing regulations that restrict the free
    flow of products between nations.
 7. Others argue that governments should impose some level of trade regulations on imported goods and services.

Exercise

3.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3990
(AACSB) Analysis

Because the United States has placed quotas on textile and apparel imports for the last thirty years, certain countries, such as China
and India, have been able to export to the United States only as much clothing as their respective quotas permit. One effect of this
policy was spreading textile and apparel manufacture around the world and preventing any single nation from dominating the world
market. As a result, many developing countries, such as Vietnam, Cambodia, and Honduras, were able to enter the market and
provide much-needed jobs for local workers. The rules, however, have changed: as of January 1, 2005, quotas on U.S. textile
imports were eliminated, permitting U.S. companies to import textile supplies from any country they choose. In your opinion, what
effect will the new U.S. policy have on each of the following groups:

 1. Firms that outsource the manufacture of their apparel
 2. Textile manufacturers and workers in the following countries:

        China
        Indonesia
        Mexico
        United States

 3. American consumers

This page titled 3.4: Trade Controls is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3990
3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers

  Learning Objective

       Discuss the various initiatives designed to reduce international trade barriers and promote free trade.

A number of organizations work to ease barriers to trade, and more countries are joining together to promote trade and mutual
economic benefits. Let's look at some of these important initiatives.

Trade Agreements and Organizations

Free trade is encouraged by a number of agreements and organizations set up to monitor trade policies. The two most important are
the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and the World Trade Organization.

General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

After the Great Depression and World War II, most countries focused on protecting home industries, so international trade was
hindered by rigid trade restrictions. To rectify this situation, twenty-three nations joined together in 1947 and signed the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which encouraged free trade by regulating and reducing tariffs and by providing a forum
for resolving trade disputes. The highly successful initiative achieved substantial reductions in tariffs and quotas, and in 1995 its
members founded the World Trade Organization to continue the work of GATT in overseeing global trade.

World Trade Organization

Based in Geneva, Switzerland, with nearly 150 members, the World Trade Organization (WTO) encourages global commerce and
lower trade barriers, enforces international rules of trade, and provides a forum for resolving disputes. It is empowered, for
instance, to determine whether a member nation's trade policies have violated the organization's rules, and it can direct "guilty"
countries to remove disputed barriers (though it has no legal power to force any country to do anything it doesn't want to do). If the
guilty party refuses to comply, the WTO may authorize the plaintiff nation to erect trade barriers of its own, generally in the form
of tariffs.

Affected members aren't always happy with WTO actions. In 2002, for example, the Bush administration imposed a three-year
tariff on imported steel. In ruling against this tariff, the WTO allowed the aggrieved nations to impose counter-tariffs on some
politically sensitive American products, such as Florida oranges, Texas grapefruits and computers, and Wisconsin cheese.
Reluctantly, the administration lifted its tariff on steel (Buckley, 2006; Benjamin, 2003).

This page titled 3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3991
3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business

  Learning Objective

       Understand how to prepare for a career in international business.

No matter where your career takes you, you won't be able to avoid the reality and reach of international business. We're all
involved in it. Some readers may want to venture more seriously into this exciting arena. The career opportunities are exciting and
challenging, but taking the best advantage of them requires some early planning. Here are some hints.

Plan Your Undergraduate Education

Many colleges and universities offer strong majors in international business, and this course of study can be good preparation for a
global career. In planning your education, remember the following:

    Develop real expertise in one of the basic areas of business. Most companies will hire you as much for your skill and
    knowledge in accounting, finance, information systems, marketing, or management as for your background in the study of
    international business. Take courses in both areas.
    Develop your knowledge of international politics, economics, and culture. Take liberal arts courses that focus on parts of the
    world that especially interest you. Courses in history, government, and the social sciences offer a wealth of knowledge about
    other nations and cultures that's relevant to success in international business.
    Develop foreign-language skills. If you studied a language in high school, keep up with it. Improve your reading or
    conversational skills. Or start a new language in college. Recall that your competition in the global marketplace is not just other
    Americans, but also individuals from countries, such as Belgium, where everyone's fluent in at least two (and usually three)
    languages. Lack of foreign-language skills often proves to be a disadvantage for many Americans in international business.

Get Some Direct Experience

Take advantage of study-abroad opportunities, whether offered on your campus or by another college. There are literally hundreds
of such opportunities, and your interest in international business will be received much more seriously if you've spent some time
abroad. (As a bonus, you'll probably find it an enjoyable, horizon-expanding experience, as well.)

Interact with People from Other Cultures

Finally, whenever you can, learn about the habits and traits of other cultures, and practice interacting with the people to whom they
belong. Go to the trouble to meet international students on your campus and get to know them. Learn about their cultures and
values, and tell them about yours. You may initially be uncomfortable or confused in such intercultural exchanges, but you'll find
them great learning experiences. By picking up on the details, you'll avoid embarrassing mistakes later and even earn the approval
of acquaintances from abroad.

Whether you're committed to a career in global business, curious about the international scene, or simply a consumer of worldwide
products and services, you can't avoid the effects of globalization. Granted, the experience can be frustrating, maybe even troubling
at times. More often, however, it's likely to be stimulating and full of opportunities.

Key Takeaways

To prepare for a global career, you might want to consider doing some of the following while a student:

    Major in international business.
    Develop your knowledge of international politics, economics, and culture.
    Study a foreign language.
    Take advantage of study-abroad opportunities.
    Interact with fellow students from other cultures.

3.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3992
Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
If you had an opportunity to spend a summer working as an intern in a foreign country, which country would you select? Why? In
what ways would the internship be valuable to your future career in business? How would you prepare for the internship?

This page titled 3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3992
3.7: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Keeping Current About Currency
On a day-to-day basis, you probably don't think about what the U.S. dollar (US$) is worth relative to other currencies. But there
will likely be times when ups and downs in exchange rates will seem extremely important to you in your business career. The
following are some hypothetical scenarios that illustrate what these times may be. (Note: To respond to the questions raised in each
scenario, search Google for a currency converter.)

Scenario 1: Your Swiss Vacation
Your family came from Switzerland, and you and your parents visited relatives there back in 2007. Now that you're in college, you
want to make the trip on your own during spring break. While you're there, you also plan to travel around and see a little more of
the country. You remember that in 2007, US$1 bought 1.22 Swiss francs (Frs). You estimate that, at this rate, you can finance your
trip (excluding airfare) with the $1,200 that you earned this summer. You've heard, however, that the exchange rate has changed.
Given the current exchange rate, about how much do you think your trip would cost you? As a U.S. traveler going abroad, how are
you helped by a shift in exchange rates? How are you hurt?

Scenario 2: Your British Friends
A few years ago, you met some British students who were visiting the United States. This year, you're encouraging them to visit
again so that you can show them around New York City. When you and your friends first talked about the cost of the trip back in
2007, the British pound () could be converted into US$1.90. You estimated that each of your British friends would need to save up
about 600 to make the trip (again, excluding plane fare). Given today's exchange rate, how much will each person need to make
the trip? Have your plans been helped or hindered by the change in exchange rates? Was the shift a plus for the U.S. travel
industry? What sort of exchange-rate shift hurts the industry?

Scenario 3: Your German Soccer Boots
Your father rarely throws anything away, and while cleaning out the attic a few years ago, he came across a pair of vintage Adidas
soccer boots made in 1955. Realizing that they'd be extremely valuable to collectors in Adidas's home country of Germany, he
hoped to sell them for US $5,000 and, to account for the exchange rate at the time, planned to price them at $7,200 in euros.
Somehow, he never got around to selling the boots and has asked if you could sell them for him on eBay. If he still wants to end up
with US $5,000, what price in euros will you now have to set? Would an American company that exports goods to the European
Union view the current rate more favorably or less favorably than it did back in 2007?

Career Opportunities (AACSB)

Broadening Your Business Horizons
At some point in your life, you'll probably meet and work with people from various countries and cultures. Participating in a
college study-abroad program can help you prepare to work in the global business environment, and now is as good a time as any
to start exploring this option. Here's one way to go about it:

Select a study-abroad program that interests you. To do this, you need to decide what country you want to study in and your
academic field of interest. Unless you speak the language of your preferred country, you should pick a program offered in English.

If your school offers study-abroad programs, choose one that has been approved by your institution.

 1. If your school doesn't offer study-abroad programs, locate one through a Web search.
 2. Describe the program, the school that's offering it, and the country to which it will take you.
 3. Indicate why you've selected this particular program, and explain how it will help you prepare for your future business career.

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

3.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3993
The Right, Wrong, and Wisdom of Dumping and Subsidizing

When companies sell exported goods below the price they'd charge in their home markets (and often below the cost of producing
the goods), they're engaging in dumping. When governments guarantee farmers certain prices for crops regardless of market prices,
the beneficiaries are being subsidized. What do you think about these practices? Is dumping an unfair business practice? Why, or
why not? Does subsidizing farmers make economic sense for the United States? What are the effects of farm subsidies on the world
economy? Are the ethical issues raised by the two practices comparable? Why, or why not?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Three Little Words: The China Price

According to business journalists Pete Engardio and Dexter Roberts, the scariest three words that a U.S. manufacturer can hear
these days are the China price. To understand why, go to the Business Week Web site
(http://www.businessweek.com/magazine...9/b3911401.htm) and read its article "The China Price," which discusses the benefits
and costs of China's business expansion for U.S. companies, workers, and consumers. Once you've read the article, each member
of the team should be able to explain the paradoxical effect of U.S.-Chinese business relationships--namely, that they can hurt
American companies and workers while helping American companies and consumers.

Next, your team should get together and draw up two lists: a list of the top five positive outcomes and a list of the top five negative
outcomes of recent Chinese business expansion for U.S. businesses, workers, and consumers. Then, the team should debate the
pros and cons of China's emergence as a global business competitor and, finally, write a group report that answers the following
questions:

 1. Considered on balance, has China's business expansion helped or harmed U.S. companies, workers, and consumers? Justify
    your answers.

 2. What will happen to U.S. companies, workers, and consumers in the future if China continues to grow as a global business
    competitor?

 3. How should U.S. companies respond to the threats posed by Chinese competitors in their markets?
 4. What can you do as a student to prepare yourself to compete in an ever-changing global business environment?

When you hand in your report, be sure to attach all the following items:

Members' individually prepared lists of ways in which business relationships with China both hurt and help U.S. businesses,
workers, and consumers

Your group-prepared list of the top five positive and negative effects of Chinese business expansion
on U.S. businesses, workers, and consumers

The Global View (AACSB)

Go East, Young Job Seeker

How brave are you when it comes to employment? Are you bold enough to go halfway around the world to find work? Instead of

complaining about U.S. jobs going overseas, you could take the bull by the horns and grab one job back. It's not that tough to do,

and it could be a life-changing experience. U.S. college graduates with business or technical backgrounds are highly sought after by

companies that operate in India. If you qualify (and if you're willing to relocate), you could find yourself working in Bangalore or

New Delhi for some multinational company like Intel, Citibank, or GlaxoSmithKline (a pharmaceutical company). In addition,

learning how to live and work in a foreign country can build self-confidence and make you more attractive to future employers. To

get a glimpse of what it would be like to live and work in India, go to the Web sites of American Way magazine

(http://www.americanwaymag.com/jeffre...e-leela-palace)         and  CNN  and  Money

(http://money.cnn.com/2004/03/09/pf/workers_to_india), and check out the posted articles: "Passage to India," and "Needs Job,

Moves to India." Then, go to the Monster Work Abroad Web site (http://jobsearch.monsterindia.com/re...gin/index.html) and find a

job in India that you'd like to have, either right after graduation or about five years into your career. (When selecting the job, ignore

its actual location and proceed as if it's in Bangalore.) After you've pondered the possibility of living and working in India, answer

the following questions:

                                                         3.7.2            https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3993
 1. What would your job entail?
 2. What would living and working in Bangalore be like? What aspects would you enjoy? Which would you dislike?
 3. What challenges would you face as an expatriate (a person who lives outside his or her native country)? What opportunities

    would you have?
 4. How would the experience of working in India help your future career?
 5. Would you be willing to take a job in India for a year or two? Why, or why not?

This page titled 3.7: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

3.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3993
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

4: Selecting a Form of Business           Ownership

  4.1: Factors to Consider
  4.2: Sole Proprietorship
  4.3: Partnership
  4.4: Corporation
  4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
  4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
  4.7: Cases and Problems

This page titled 4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                          1
4.1: Factors to Consider

  Learning Objective

       Identify the questions to ask in choosing the appropriate form of ownership for a business.

If you're starting a new business, you have to decide which legal form of ownership is best for you and your business. Do you want
to own the business yourself and operate as a sole proprietorship? Or, do you want to share ownership, operating as a partnership or
a corporation? Before we discuss the pros and cons of these three types of ownership--sole proprietorship, partnership, and
corporation--let's address some of the questions that you'd probably ask yourself in choosing the appropriate legal form for your
business.

    What are you willing to do to set up and operate your business? Do you want to minimize the costs of getting started? Do you
    hope to avoid complex government regulations and reporting requirements?
    How much control would you like? Do you want to own the company yourself, or do you want to share ownership with other
    people? Are you willing to share responsibility for running the business?
    Do you want to be the sole benefactor of your efforts or are you willing to share profits with other people? Do you want to be in
    charge of deciding how much of the company's profits will be retained in the business?
    Do you want to avoid special taxes? Do you want to avoid paying "business" income taxes on your business and then paying
    "personal" income taxes on profits earned by the business?
    Do you have all the skills needed to run the business? Do you possess the talent and skills to run the business yourself, or would
    the business benefit from a diverse group of owners? Are you likely to get along with co-owners over an extended period of
    time?
    Should it be possible for the business to continue without you? Is it important to you that the business survive you? Do you
    want to know that other owners can take over if you die or become disabled? Do you want to make it easy for ownership to
    change hands?
    What are your financing needs? How do you plan to finance your company? Will you need a lot of money to start, operate, and
    grow your business? Can you furnish the money yourself, or will you need some investment from other people? Will you need
    bank loans? If so, will you have difficulty getting them yourself?
    How much liability exposure are you willing to accept? Are you willing to risk your personal assets--your bank account, your
    car, maybe even your home--for your business? Are you prepared to pay business debts out of your personal funds? Do you
    feel uneasy about accepting personal liability for the actions of fellow owners?

No single form of ownership will give you everything you desire. You'll have to make some trade-offs. Because each option has
both advantages and disadvantages, your job is to decide which one offers the features that are most important to you. In the
following sections we'll compare the three ownership options (sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation) on the eight
dimensions that we identified previously: setup costs and government regulations control, profit sharing, income taxes, skills,
continuity and transferability, ability to obtain financing, and liability exposure.

Key Takeaways

Some of the questions that you'd probably ask yourself in choosing the appropriate legal form for your business include the
following:

    What are you willing to do to set up and operate your business?
    How much control do you want?
    Do you want to share profits with others?
    Do you want to avoid special taxes on your business?
    Do you have all the skills needed to run the business?
    Should it be possible for the business to continue without you?
    What are your financing needs?
    How much liability exposure are you willing to accept?

4.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3994
    No single form of ownership--sole proprietorship, partnership, or corporation--will give you everything you want. Each has
    advantages and disadvantages.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Review the eight questions identified in this section that you'd probably ask yourself in choosing the appropriate legal form. Rate
each of the questions using this scale: [1] not at all important; [2] not very important; [3] somewhat important; [4] very important;
[5] extremely important. Select the two questions that are most important to you and the two questions that are least important to
you, and explain your responses to these four questions.

This page titled 4.1: Factors to Consider is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3994
4.2: Sole Proprietorship

  Learning Objective
    1. Describe the sole proprietorship form of organization, and specify its advantages and disadvantages.

A sole proprietorship is a business owned by only one person. The most common form of ownership, it accounts for about 72
percent of all U.S. businesses (The National Data Book, 2011). It's the easiest and cheapest type of business to form: if you're
using your own name as the name of your business, you just need a license to get started, and once you're in business, you're
subject to few government regulations.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Sole Proprietorships

As sole owner, you have complete control over your business. You make all important decisions, and you're generally responsible
for all day-to-day activities. In exchange for assuming all this responsibility, you get all the income earned by the business. Profits
earned are taxed as personal income, so you don't have to pay any special federal and state income taxes.

        Figure 4.1: Sole proprietors enjoy complete control but also face increased risks. (yooperann - Woman at work-sales associate -
        CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)

For many people, however, the sole proprietorship is not suitable. The flip side of enjoying complete control, for example, is
having to supply all the different talents that may be necessary to make the business a success. And if you die, the business
dissolves. You also have to rely on your own resources for financing: in effect, you are the business, and any money borrowed by
the business is loaned to you personally. Even more important, the sole proprietor bears unlimited liability for any losses incurred
by the business. As you can see from Figure 4.2, the principle of unlimited personal liability means that if the company incurs a
debt or suffers a catastrophe (say, getting sued for causing an injury to someone), the owner is personally liable. As a sole
proprietor, you put your personal assets (your bank account, your car, maybe even your home) at risk for the sake of your business.
You can lessen your risk with insurance, yet your liability exposure can still be substantial. Given that Ben and Jerry decided to
start their ice cream business together (and therefore the business was not owned by only one person), they could not set their
company up as a sole proprietorship.

4.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3995
                                                       Figure 4.2 Sole Proprietorship and Unlimited Liability

Key Takeaways

A sole proprietorship is a business owned by only one person.

    It's the most common form of ownership and accounts for about 72 percent of all U.S. businesses.
    Advantages of a sole proprietorship include the following:
     1. Easy and inexpensive to form; few government regulations
     2. Complete control over your business
     3. Get all the profits earned by the business
     4. Don't have to pay any special income taxes
    Disadvantages of a sole proprietorship include the following:
     1. Have to supply all the different talents needed to make the business a success
     2. If you die, the business dissolves
     3. Have to rely on your own resources for financing
     4. If the company incurs a debt or suffers a catastrophe, you are personally liable (you have unlimited liability)

Exercise

(AACSB) Communication
Talk with a sole proprietor about his or her selected form of business ownership. Ask him or her which of the following dimensions
(discussed in this section) were important in deciding to operate as a proprietor: setup costs and government regulations, control,
profit sharing, income taxes, skills, continuity and transferability, ability to obtain financing, and liability exposure. Write a report
detailing what you learned from the business owner.

This page titled 4.2: Sole Proprietorship is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3995
4.3: Partnership

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the different types of partnerships, and explain the importance of a partnership agreement.
    2. Describe the advantages and disadvantages of the partnership form of organization.

A partnership (or general partnership) is a business owned jointly by two or more people. About 10 percent of U.S. businesses are
partnerships (The National Data Book, 2011), and though the vast majority are small, some are quite large. For example, the big
four public accounting firms are partnerships. Setting up a partnership is more complex than setting up a sole proprietorship, but
it's still relatively easy and inexpensive. The cost varies according to size and complexity. It's possible to form a simple partnership
without the help of a lawyer or an accountant, though it's usually a good idea to get professional advice. Professionals can help you
identify and resolve issues that may later create disputes among partners.

The Partnership Agreement

The impact of disputes can be lessened if the partners have executed a well-planned partnership agreement that specifies
everyone's rights and responsibilities. The agreement might provide such details as the following:

    Amount of cash and other contributions to be made by each partner
    Division of partnership income (or loss)
    Partner responsibilities--who does what
    Conditions under which a partner can sell an interest in the company
    Conditions for dissolving the partnership
    Conditions for settling disputes

Unlimited Liability and the Partnership

Figure 4.3 shows that a major problem with partnerships, as with sole proprietorships, is unlimited liability: each partner is
personally liable not only for his or her own actions but also for the actions of all the partners. In a partnership, it may work
according to the following scenario. Say that you're a partner in a dry cleaning business. One day, you return from lunch to find
your establishment on fire. You're intercepted by your partner, who tells you that the fire started because he fell asleep while
smoking. As you watch your livelihood go up in flames, your partner tells you something else: because he forgot to pay the bill,
your fire insurance was canceled. When it's all over, you estimate the loss to the building and everything inside at $1.2 million. And
here's the really bad news: if the business doesn't have the cash or other assets to cover losses, you can be personally sued for the
amount owed. In other words, any party who suffered a loss because of the fire can go after your personal assets.

4.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3996
                                                       Figure 4.3 General Partnership and Unlimited Liability

Limited Partnerships

Many people are understandably reluctant to enter into partnerships because of unlimited liability. Individuals with substantial
assets, for example, have a lot to lose if they get sued for a partnership obligation (and when people sue, they tend to start with the
richest partner). To overcome this defect of partnerships, the law permits a limited partnership, which has two types of partners: a
single general partner who runs the business and is responsible for its liabilities, and any number of limited partners who have
limited involvement in the business and whose losses are limited to the amount of their investment.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Partnerships

The partnership has several advantages over the sole proprietorship. First, it brings together a diverse group of talented individuals
who share responsibility for running the business. Second, it makes financing easier: The business can draw on the financial
resources of a number of individuals. The partners not only contribute funds to the business but can also use personal resources to
secure bank loans. Finally, continuity needn't be an issue because partners can agree legally to allow the partnership to survive if
one or more partners die.

4.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3996
        Figure 4.4: Partnerships can have many advantages, but there are disadvantages to consider as well. (digital internet - Discussion at
        the table - Meeting over coffee - CC BY-ND 2.0.)

Still, there are some negatives. First, as discussed earlier, partners are subject to unlimited liability. Second, being a partner means
that you have to share decision making, and many people aren't comfortable with that situation. Not surprisingly, partners often
have differences of opinion on how to run a business, and disagreements can escalate to the point of actual conflict; in fact, they
can even jeopardize the continuance of the business. Third, in addition to sharing ideas, partners also share profits. This
arrangement can work as long as all partners feel that they're being rewarded according to their efforts and accomplishments, but
that isn't always the case.

While the partnership form of ownership is viewed negatively by some, it was particularly appealing to Ben Cohen and Jerry
Greenfield. Starting their ice cream business as a partnership was inexpensive and let them combine their limited financial
resources and use their diverse skills and talents. As friends they trusted each other and welcomed shared decision making and
profit sharing. They were also not reluctant to be held personally liable for each other's actions.

Key Takeaways

A general partnership is a business owned jointly by two or more people.

    About 10 percent of U.S. businesses are partnerships.
    The impact of disputes can be reduced if the partners have a partnership agreement that specifies everyone's rights and
    responsibilities.

A partnership has several advantages over a sole proprietorship:

    It's relatively inexpensive to set up and subject to few government regulations.
    Partners pay personal income taxes on their share of profits; the partnership doesn't pay any special taxes.
    It brings a diverse group of people together to share managerial responsibilities.
    Partners can agree legally to allow the partnership to survive if one or more partners die.
    It makes financing easier because the partnership can draw on resources from a number of partners.

A partnership has several disadvantages over a sole proprietorship:

    Shared decision making can result in disagreements.
    Profits must be shared.
    Each partner is personally liable not only for his or her own actions but also for those of all partners--a principle called
    unlimited liability.
    A limited partnership has a single general partner who runs the business and is responsible for its liabilities, plus any number
    of limited partners who have limited involvement in the business and whose losses are limited to the amount of their

4.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3996
    investment.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Grand Canyon Helicopter Adventures was started five years ago by Jayden Collins. The business has grown over the years, but is at
a standstill now. Jayden would like to expand his business, but needs additional funds to do this. Also, he could really use help
running the business. Though he is an excellent pilot with a perfect safety record, he's not very good at handling the day-to-day
details needed to keep the business running smoothly. A friend of his, Rob Tocci, approached him recently and asked to join him in
the business. Rob is fairly wealthy and has considerable business experience. Plus, he knows how to fly choppers--though he has
had a few (thankfully nonfatal) mishaps. Jayden is a little apprehensive about sharing responsibility for running the business, but he
doesn't mind sharing profits. On the other hand, he recognizes that he alone will not be able to grow the business.

Because Jayden doesn't want to incorporate, he has only two options: continue doing business as a sole proprietorship or find
someone to join him in a partnership. You should evaluate these two alternatives, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each
option, and recommend the one you consider most appropriate. If you recommend forming a partnership, distinguish between a
limited and a general partnership.

This page titled 4.3: Partnership is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3996
4.4: Corporation

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain how corporations are formed and how they operate.
    2. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the corporate form of ownership.

A corporation (sometimes called a regular or C-corporation) differs from a sole proprietorship and a partnership because it's a legal
entity that is entirely separate from the parties who own it. It can enter into binding contracts, buy and sell property, sue and be
sued, be held responsible for its actions, and be taxed. As Figure 4.5 shows, corporations account for 18 percent of all U.S.
businesses but generate almost 82 percent of the revenues (The National Data Book, 2011). Most large well-known businesses are
corporations, but so are many of the smaller firms with which you do business.

        Figure 4.5 Types of U.S. Businesses. Source: "Number of Tax Returns, Receipts, and Net Income by Type of Business," The 2011
        Statistical Abstract: The National Data Book, www.census.gov/compendia/stat...porations.html (accessed August 27, 2011);
        "Number of Tax Returns and Business Receipts by Size of Receipts," The 2011 Statistical Abstract: The National Data Book,
        www.census.gov/compendia/stat...porations.html (accessed August 27, 2011).

This page titled 4.4: Corporation is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3997
4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership

  Learning Objective

       Examine special types of business ownership, including S-corporations, limited-liability companies, cooperatives, and not-
       for-profit corporations.

In addition to the three commonly adopted forms of business organization--sole proprietorship, partnership, and regular
corporations--some business owners select other forms of organization to meet their particular needs. We'll look at several of these
options:

    S-corporations
    Limited-liability companies
    Cooperatives
    Not-for-profit corporations
    Hybrids: S-Corporations and Limited-Liability Companies

To understand the value of S-corporations and limited-liability companies, we'll begin by reviewing the major advantages and
disadvantages of the three types of business ownership we've explored so far: sole proprietorship, partnership, and corporation.
Identifying the attractive and unattractive features of these three types of business ownership will help us appreciate why S-
corporations and limited-liability companies were created.

Attractive and Unattractive Features of Corporations

What feature of corporations do business owners find most attractive? The most attractive feature of a corporation is limited
liability, which means that the shareholders (owners) cannot be held personally liable for the debts and obligations of the
corporation. For example, if a corporation cannot pay its debts and goes bankrupt, the shareholders will not be required to pay the
creditors with their own money. Shareholders cannot lose any more than the amount they have invested in the company.

What feature of corporations do business owners find least attractive? Most would agree that the least attractive feature of a
corporation is "double taxation." Double taxation occurs when the same earnings are taxed twice by the government. Let's use a
simple example to show how this happens. You're the only shareholder in a very small corporation. This past year it earned
$10,000. It had to pay the government $3,000 corporate tax on the $10,000 earned. The remaining $7,000 was paid to you by the
corporation in the form of a dividend. When you filed your personal income tax form, you had to pay personal taxes on the $7,000
dividend. So the $7,000 was taxed twice: the corporation paid the taxes the first time and you (the shareholder) paid the taxes the
second time.

Attractive and Unattractive Features of Sole Proprietorships and Partnerships

Now let's turn to the other two types of business ownership: sole proprietorship and partnership. What feature of these forms of
business organization do owners find most attractive? The most attractive feature is that there is no "double taxation" with
proprietorships and partnerships. Proprietorships and partnerships do not pay taxes on profits at the business level. The only taxes
paid are at the personal level--this occurs when proprietors and partners pay taxes on their share of their company's income. Here
are two examples (one for a sole proprietorship and one for a partnership). First, let's say you're a sole proprietor and your business
earns $20,000 this year. The sole proprietorship pays no taxes at the "business" level. You pay taxes on the $20,000 earnings on
your personal tax return. Second, let's say you're a partner in a three-partner firm (in which each partner receives one-third of the
partnership income). The firm earns $90,000 this year. It pays no taxes at the partnership level. Each partner, including you, pays
taxes on one-third of the earnings, or $30,000 each. Notice that in both cases, there is no "double taxation." Taxes were paid on the
company earnings only once--at the personal level. So the total tax burden is less with sole proprietorships and partnerships than it
is with corporations.

What feature of sole proprietorships and partnerships do business owners find least attractive? And the answer is...unlimited
liability. This feature holds a business owner personally liable for all debts of his or her company. If you're a sole proprietorship
and the debts of your business exceed its assets, creditors can seize your personal assets to cover the proprietorship's outstanding

4.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3998
business debt. For example, if your business is sued for $500,000 and it does not have enough money to cover its legal obligation,
the injured party can seize your personal assets (cash, property, etc.) to cover the outstanding debt. Unlimited liability is even
riskier in the case of a partnership. Each partner is personally liable not only for his or her own actions but also for the actions of all
the partners. If, through mismanagement by one of your partners, the partnership is forced into bankruptcy, the creditors can go
after you for all outstanding debts of the partnership.

The Hybrids

How would you like a legal form of organization that provides the attractive features of the three common forms of organization
(corporation, sole proprietorship and partnership) and avoids the unattractive features of these three organization forms? It sounds
very appealing. This is what was accomplished with the creation of two hybrid forms of organization: S-corporation and limited-
liability company. These hybrid organization forms provide business owners with limited liability (the attractive feature of
corporations) and no "double taxation" (the attractive feature of sole proprietorships and partnerships). They avoid double taxation
(the unattractive feature of corporations) and unlimited liability (the unattractive feature of sole proprietorships and partnerships).
We'll now look at these two hybrids in more detail.

This page titled 4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3998
4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions

  Learning Objective

    1. Define mergers and acquisitions, and explain why companies are motivated to merge or acquire other companies.

The headline read, "Wanted: More than 2,000 in Google Hiring Spree" (Oreskovic, 2011; The Official Google Blog, 2011). The
largest Web search engine in the world was disclosing its plans to grow internally and increase its workforce by more than 2,000
people, with half of the hires coming from the United States and the other half coming from other countries. The added employees
will help the company expand into new markets and battle for global talent in the competitive Internet information providers
industry. When properly executed, internal growth benefits the firm.

An alternative approach to growth is to merge with or acquire another company. The rationale behind growth through merger or
acquisition is that 1 + 1 = 3: the combined company is more valuable than the sum of the two separate companies. This rationale is
attractive to companies facing competitive pressures. To grab a bigger share of the market and improve profitability, companies
will want to become more cost efficient by combining with other companies.

Mergers and Acquisitions

Though they are often used as if they're synonymous, the terms merger and acquisition mean slightly different things. A merger
occurs when two companies combine to form a new company. An acquisition is the purchase of one company by another with no
new company being formed. An example of a merger is the merging in 2010 of United Airlines and Continental Airlines. The
combined company, the largest carrier in the world, flies under the name United Airlines, but its planes display the Continental
Airlines logo. The merger will combine the scale of United Airlines with the management culture of Continental. Another example
of a fairly recent acquisition is the purchase of Reebok by Adidas for $3.8 billion (Howard, 2005). The deal was expected to give
Adidas a stronger presence in North America and help the company compete with rival Nike. Though Adidas still sells shoes under
the Reebok brand, Reebok as a company no longer exists.

Motives behind Mergers and Acquisitions

Companies are motivated to merge or acquire other companies for a number of reasons, including the following.

Gain Complementary Products

Acquiring complementary products was the motivation behind Adidas's acquisition of Reebok. As Adidas CEO Herbert Hainer
stated in a conference call, "This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity. This is a perfect fit for both companies, because the companies
are so complementary....Adidas is grounded in sports performance with such products as a motorized running shoe and
endorsement deals with such superstars as British soccer player David Beckham. Meanwhile, Reebok plays heavily to the melding
of sports and entertainment with endorsement deals and products by Nelly, Jay-Z, and 50 Cent. The combination could be deadly to
Nike" (Howard, 2005).

Figure 4.6: Do you think by acquiring Reebok, Adidas has had an impact on Nike's command of the running shoe market? (Emily -
New shoes - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)

4.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3999
Attain New Markets or Distribution Channels

Gaining new markets was a significant factor in the 2005 merger of US Airways and America West. US Airways is a major player
on the East Coast, the Caribbean and Europe, while America West is strong in the West. The expectations were that combining the
two carriers would create an airline that could reach more markets than either carrier could do on its own (CNNMoney.com, 2005).

Realize More Efficient Economies of Scale

The purchase of Pharmacia Corporation (a Swedish pharmaceutical company) by Pfizer (a research-based pharmaceutical company
based in the United States) in 2003 created the world's largest drug maker and the leading pharmaceutical company, by revenue, in
every major market around the globe. The acquisition created an industry giant with more than $48 billion in revenue and a
research-and-development budget of more than $7 billion (Frank & Hensley, 2002). Each day, almost forty million people around
the glove are treated with Pfizer medicines (Pfizer.com, 2011). Its subsequent $68 billion purchase of rival drug maker Wyeth
further increased its presence in the pharaceutical market (New York Times, 2009).

This page titled 4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

4.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/3999
4.7: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Do you have an idea for a charitable organization you'd like to start? Think of some cause that's important to you. Then go online
and review this article by Joanne Fritz, "How to Incorporate as a Nonprofit: A Check List" located at
http://nonprofit.about.com/od/nonprofitbasics/ht/startingsteps.htm. Draft a mission statement for your not-for-profit organization,
and indicate the types of people you'd ask to serve on your board of directors. Then list the steps you'd take to set up your not-for-
profit organization.

Career Opportunities

Where Do You Find Happiness?

Have you given much thought to whether you'd be happier working for a small company or for a big one? Here's your chance to

compare and contrast the opportunities that small companies and big companies offer. First, read the article "Company Research--

Investigate Small Companies" (http://jobsearch.about.com/cs/employerresearch/a/compresearch.htm). Then read the article

"Benefits  of         Working          in  a  Small  Company                             vs.  a  Corporation"

(http://www.streetdirectory.com/travel_guide/190820/careers_and_job_hunting/benefits_of

_working_in_a_small_company_vs_a_corporation.html) (Doyle, 2011; Jacowsk, 2011). Identify five advantages of working for a

small company and five advantages of working for a big one. Indicate your choice of employer (small or big company), and

explain why you selected this option.

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Bermuda Is Beautiful, but Should You Incorporate There?

A company can incorporate in any state it chooses. Most small businesses incorporate in the state in which they do business, while
larger companies typically hunt around for the state or country that gives them the most favorable treatment (lower taxes, fewer
restrictions). A growing number of U.S. companies are incorporating in Bermuda to lower their corporate income taxes while still
enjoying the benefits of doing business in the United States. Does this seem right to you? Read these two articles and answer the
questions that follow:

    "U.S. Corporations Are Using Bermuda to Slash Tax Bills," by David Cay Johnston, New York Times on the Web, February 18,
    2002, http://query.nytimes.com/gst/fullpage.html?res=9901EEDB1E3FF93BA25751C0A9649C8B63
    "The Hidden Perils of Offshore Tax Havens," by Diane Brady, BusinessWeek, August 8, 2002,
    http://www.businessweek.com/bwdaily/...02088_9533.htm

Questions:

 1. What advantages do U.S. companies gain by incorporating in Bermuda?
 2. What disadvantages do U.S. companies incur by incorporating in Bermuda?
 3. Do you find the practice of incorporating in Bermuda unethical? Why, or why not?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Legally Speaking

Here's the scenario: You and your team serve as consultants to business owners who need help in deciding which legal form of
ownership is best for them. You're currently working with three clients. For each client, you'll evaluate possible legal forms of
organization, debate the alternatives, and make a recommendation. Then, you'll write a report to your client, presenting your
recommendation and explaining why you arrived at your conclusion.

In addition to learning the basic facts about each company, you've gathered additional information by asking each client the
following questions:

 1. How much control do you want?
 2. Do you want to share profits with others?
 3. How much liability exposure are you willing to accept?

                                              4.7.1                                           https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4000
 4. What are your financing needs?
 5. What are you willing to do to set up and operate your business?
 6. Should it be possible for the business to continue without you?

The following is the information that you've collected about each client, along with ownership options you should consider.

Client 1: Rainforest Adventures

Rainforest Adventures offers one-day and multiday tours of several locations in Australia. It works both with tourists and with
study groups, and its clientele varies from people who want a relaxing experience away from hectic urban life to those who are
keenly interested in the exotic environment. The business is dedicated to the preservation of Australia's tropical and wetland
preserves. Its guides have many years of experience leading tourists through the rainforests, particularly at night when they come
alive.

Rainforest Adventures was started three years ago by Courtney Kennedy, who has fifteen years of experience in the ecotourism
industry. She runs the business as a sole proprietorship but is considering a partnership. (She doesn't want the cost or hassle of
doing business as a corporation.) In questioning her, you found out the following: Kennedy is dedicated to preserving the
Australian wetlands and sees her business as a way of encouraging people to support conservation efforts. However, her guides
have displayed an "it's just-a-job" attitude, have become increasingly undependable, and are unwilling to share her commitment.
Still, Kennedy has several trusted friends who not only have years of experience as guides, but who also share her enthusiasm for
environmental preservation. She's optimistic that they'd be willing to join her in the business. She dreams of expanding her
business to offer classes on the ecology of the rainforest but doesn't have enough cash, and she's afraid that a loan application will
be turned down by the bank.

Options

Because Kennedy doesn't want to incorporate, she's left with two options: to continue doing business as a sole proprietorship or to
find one or more individuals to join her in a partnership. After evaluating these two alternatives, you should recommend the one
that you consider most appropriate. You should discuss the pros and cons of both options and explain how each applies to
Kennedy's situation. If you recommend forming a partnership, you need to distinguish between a general partnership and a limited
partnership, as well as explain what a partnership agreement is, what it covers, and why it's important.

Client 2: Scuffy the Tugboat

Scuffy the Tugboat is a family-run business that makes tugboats. It was formed as a partnership in 1996 by the three McLaughlin
brothers--Mick (a naval architect), Jack (an accountant), and Bob (a marine engineer). Their first tugboat is still towing ships in
Boston harbor, and over the years, success has allowed them to grow the company by plowing money back into it. Last year's sales
were more than $7 million. Now, however, they want to double production by expanding their factory by five thousand square feet.
They estimate a cost of about $1 million, yet a bigger facility would enable them to avoid late-delivery penalties that can run up to
$2,000 a day. They're not sure, however, about the best way to raise the needed funds. None of the brothers has $1 million on hand,
and because lenders are often hesitant to loan money to shipbuilders, even those with good performance records, local banks
haven't been encouraging.

Unlike many partners, the three brothers get along quite well. They're concerned, though, about the risks of taking on personal
debts for the business. In particular, they don't like being liable not only for their own actions, but also for the actions of all the
partners.

Options

You should recommend that Scuffy the Tugboat either remain a partnership or become a privately-held corporation. State the pros
and cons of both forms of organization, and explain how they apply to the brothers' situation.

Client 3: Dinner Rendezvous

For three years, owner Peggy Deardon has been operating Dinner Rendezvous, which gives individuals an opportunity to meet
others and expand their social networks, in Austin, Texas. Interested clients go to the company's Web site and fill out applications
and privacy statements. There's an annual membership fee of $125 and a $15 charge for each dinner attended (plus the cost of
dinner and drinks). Deardon sets up all dinners and is onsite at the restaurant to introduce guests and serve complimentary

4.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4000
champagne. While the company has a steady clientele, it's not a big moneymaker. If Deardon didn't have a regular full-time job,
she couldn't keep the business running. She stays with it because she enjoys it and believes that she provides a good service for
Austin residents. Because it's run out of her home, and because her biggest cost is the champagne, it's a low-risk business with no
debts. With a full-time job, she also appreciates the fact that it requires only a few hours of her time each week.

Options

Since your client wants advice on whether to incorporate, you should evaluate two options--remaining a sole proprietorship or
forming a corporation. In addition to your recommendation, you should state the pros and cons of both forms of organization and
explain how they apply to Deardon's situation.

The Global View (AACSB)

America for Sale

Our U.S. companies continue to expand by merging with or acquiring other companies. This is acceptable business practice. But
what happens when our U.S. companies and other assets are bought up by firms and individuals outside the United States? Is this
acceptable business practice or something we should be concerned about? Learn how this is happening by reading this article by
Geoff Colvin:

"America    for          Sale,"  Fortune,  CNNMoney.com,  February                                      6,  2008,

http://money.cnn.com/2008/01/30/news/economy/Colvin_recession.fortune/index.htm?postversion=2008020609

Questions:

1. Why are foreigners buying U.S. assets?
2. Is the current trend in foreign investments in U.S. assets positive or negative for the United States? Whom does it help? Whom

   does it hurt? Explain.
3. What, if anything, can the United States do to stop this trend?
4. If you were able, would you limit foreign investment in U.S. assets? Why, or why not?

References

Doyle, A., "Company Research--Investigate Small Companies," About.com: Job Searching,
http://jobsearch.about.com/cs/employerresearch/a/compresearch.htm (accessed August 28, 2011).

Jacowsk, T., "Benefits of Working in a Small Company vs. a Corporation," Business Resources,
http://www.streetdirectory.com/travel_guide/190820/careers_and_job_hunting/benefits_of_working_in_a_small_company_vs_a_c
orporation.html (accessed August 28, 2011).

This page titled 4.7: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                           4.7.3          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4000
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

5: The Challenges of Starting a Business

  5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
  5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S. Economy
  5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?
  5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business Ownership
  5.5: Starting a Business
  5.6: The Business Plan
  5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
  5.8: Cases and Problems
This page titled 5: The Challenges of Starting a Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define entrepreneur.
    2. Describe the three characteristics of entrepreneurial activity.
    3. Identify five potential advantages to starting your own business.
    4. Explain the differences among three types of start-up firms.

In developing BTIO and Realityworks Inc., the Jurmains were doing what entrepreneurs do (and doing it very well). In fact, Mary
was nominated three times for the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year Award and named 2001 Wisconsin Entrepreneurial
Woman of the Year by the National Association of Women Business Owners. So what, exactly, is an entrepreneur? What does an
entrepreneur do? According to one definition, an entrepreneur is an "individual who starts a new business," and that's true as far as
it goes. Another definition identifies an entrepreneur as someone who uses "resources to implement innovative ideas for new,
thoughtfully planned ventures," (Canadian Foundation for Economic Education, 2008) which is also true as far as it goes. But an
important component of a satisfactory definition is still missing. To appreciate fully what it is, let's go back to the story of the
Jurmains, for whom entrepreneurship seems to have worked out quite well. We hasten to point out that, in 1993, the Jurmains were
both unemployed--Rick had been laid off by General Dynamics Corp., and Mary by the San Diego Gas and Electric Company.
While they were watching the show about teenagers and flour sacks, they were living off a loan from her father and the returns
from a timely investment in coffee futures. Rick recalls that the idea for a method of creating BTIO came to him while "I was
awake in bed, worrying about being unemployed." He was struggling to find a way to feed his family. He had to make the first
forty simulators himself, and at the end of the first summer, BTIO had received about four hundred orders--a promising start,
perhaps, but, at $250 per baby (less expenses), not exactly a windfall. "We were always about one month away from bankruptcy,"
recalls Mary.

At the same time, it's not as if the Jurmains started up BTIO simply because they had no "conventional" options for improving
their financial prospects. Rick, as we've seen, was an aerospace engineer, and his rsum includes work on space-shuttle missions
at NASA. Mary, who has not only a head for business but also a degree in industrial engineering, has worked at the Johnson Space
Center. Therefore, the idea of replacing a sack of flour with a computer-controlled simulator wasn't necessarily rocket science for
the couple. But taking advantage of that idea--choosing to start a new business and to commit themselves to running it--was a
risk. Risk taking is the missing component that we're looking for in a definition of entrepreneurship, and so we'll define an
entrepreneur as someone who identifies a business opportunity and assumes the risk of creating and running a business to take
advantage of it.

The Nature of Entrepreneurship

If we look a little more closely at the definition of entrepreneurship, we can identify three characteristics of entrepreneurial activity
(Dollinger, 2003):

 1. Innovation. Entrepreneurship generally means offering a new product, applying a new technique or technology, opening a new
    market, or developing a new form of organization for the purpose of producing or enhancing a product.

 2. Running a business. A business, as we saw in Chapter 1 "The Foundations of Business", combines resources to produce goods
    or services. Entrepreneurship means setting up a business to make a profit.

 3. Risk taking. The term risk means that the outcome of the entrepreneurial venture can't be known. Entrepreneurs, therefore, are
    always working under a certain degree of uncertainty, and they can't know the outcomes of many of the decisions that they
    have to make. Consequently, many of the steps they take are motivated mainly by their confidence in the innovation and in their
    understanding of the business environment in which they're operating.

It isn't hard to recognize all three of these characteristics in the entrepreneurial experience of the Jurmains. They certainly had an
innovative idea. But was it a good business idea? In a practical sense, a "good" business idea has to become something more than
just an idea. If, like the Jurmains, you're interested in generating income from your idea, you'll probably need to turn it into a
product--something that you can market because it satisfies a need. If--again, like the Jurmains--you want to develop a product,
you'll need some kind of organization to coordinate the resources necessary to make it a reality (in other words, a business). Risk

5.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4001
enters the equation when, like the Jurmains, you make the decision to start up a business and when you commit yourself to
managing it.

A Few Things to Know about Going into Business for Yourself

So what about you? Do you ever wonder what it would be like to start your own business? Maybe you want to try your hand at
entrepreneurship. You could be the next Larry Page or Sergey Brin, cofounders of Google. Or the next David Marcks, a golf course
manager who came up with the idea of Geese Police--training dogs to chase geese from golf courses, corporate parks, and
municipal playgrounds (Isidro, 2008). Or even the next Pierre Omidyar, the French-born software developer who built an online
venue for person-to-person auctions, known as eBay (American Academy of Achievement, 2005).

        Figure 5.1: Mark Zuckerberg founded Facebook while a student at Harvard and, by age 27, has built up a personal wealth of $13.5
        billion. (Wikimedia Commons - CC BY 2.0.)

You might even turn into a "serial entrepreneur" like Marcia Kilgore (Encyclopedia of World Biography, 2011). After high school,
she moved from Canada to New York City to attend Columbia University. But when her financial aid was delayed, she abandoned
her plans to attend college and took a job as a personal trainer (a natural occupation for a former bodybuilder and middleweight
title holder). But things got boring in the summer when her wealthy clients left the city for the Hamptons. To keep busy, she took a
skin care course at a Manhattan cosmetology institute. As a teenager, she was self-conscious about her bad complexion and wanted
to know how to treat it herself. She learned how to give facials and work with natural remedies. Her complexion improved, and she
started giving facials to her fitness clients who were thrilled with the results. As demand for her services exploded, she started her
first business--Bliss Spa--and picked up celebrity clients, including Madonna, Oprah Winfrey, and Jennifer Lopez. The business
went international, and she sold it for more than $30 million (Bruder, 2010).

But the story doesn't end here; she didn't just sit back and enjoy her good fortune. Instead, she launched two more companies:
Soap and Glory, a supplier of affordable beauty products sold at Target, and FitFlops, which sells sandals that tone and tighten your
leg muscles as you walk. And by the way, remember how Oprah loved Kilgore's skin care products? She also loves Kilgore's
sandals and plugged them on her talk show. You can't get a better endorsement than that. Kilgore never did finish college, but when
asked if she would follow the same path again, she said, "If I had to decide what to do all over again, I would make the same
choices...I found by accident what I'm good at, and I'm glad I did."

For the sake of argument, let's say that you would like to know a little more about going into business for yourself--in which case,
you'll want some answers to questions like the following:

    Should I start a business?
    What are the advantages and disadvantages of starting a business?
    How do I come up with a business idea?
    Should I build a business from scratch, buy an existing business, or invest in a franchise?
    How do I go about planning a business?
    What steps are involved in developing a business plan?
    Where would I find help in getting my business started and operating it through the start-up phase?

5.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4001
    How can I increase the likelihood that I'll succeed?

In this chapter, we'll provide some answers to questions like these.

Why Start Your Own Business?

Let's say that you are interested in the idea of going into business for yourself. Not everyone, of course, has a desire to take the
risks and put in the work involved in starting up a business. What sort of characteristics distinguishes those who do from those who
don't want to start a business? Or, more to the point, why do some people actually follow through on the desire to start up their own
businesses? According to the Small Business Administration (SBA), a government agency that provides assistance to small
businesses, the most common reasons for starting a business are the following (U.S. Small Business Administration, 2006):

    To be your own boss
    To accommodate a desired lifestyle
    To achieve financial independence
    To enjoy creative freedom
    To use your skills and knowledge

The Small Business Administration points out, though, that these are likely to be advantages only "for the right person." And how
do you know if you're one of the "right people"? The SBA suggests that you assess your strengths and weaknesses by asking
yourself a few relevant questions (U.S. Small Business Administration, 2011):

    Am I a self-starter? You'll need to develop and follow through on your ideas. You'll need to be able to organize your time.
    How well do I get along with different personalities? You'll need to develop working relationships with a variety of people,
    including unreliable vendors and sometimes cranky customers.
    How good am I at making decisions? You'll be making decisions constantly--often under pressure.
    Do I have the physical and emotional stamina? Can you handle six or seven workdays of as long as twelve hours every week?
    How well do I plan and organize? If you can't stay organized, you'll get swamped by the details. In fact, poor planning is the
    culprit in most business failures.
    Is my drive strong enough? You'll need to be highly motivated to withstand bad periods in your business, and simply being
    responsible for your business's success can cause you to burn out.
    How will my business affect my family? Family members need to know what to expect before you begin a business venture,
    such as financial difficulties and a more modest standard of living.

Later in this chapter, we'll take up the question of why businesses fail, but since we're still talking about the pros and cons of
starting a business in the first place, we should consider one more issue: in addition to the number of businesses that start and then
fail, a huge number of business ideas never even make it to the grand opening. One business analyst cites four reservations (or
fears) that prevent people from starting businesses (Waters, 2008):

    Money. Granted, without the cash, you can't get very far. What to do: Conduct some research to find out where funding is
    available.
    Security. A lot of people don't want to sacrifice the steady income that comes with the nine-to-five job. What to do: Don't give
    up your day job. At least at first, think about hiring someone to run your business while you're gainfully employed elsewhere.
    Competition. A lot of people don't know how to distinguish their business ideas from similar ideas. What to do: Figure out how
    to do something cheaper, faster, or better.
    Lack of ideas. Some people simply don't know what sort of business they want to get into. What to do: Find out what trends are
    successful. Turn a hobby into a business. Think about a franchise.

If you're still interested in going into business for yourself, feel free to regard these potential drawbacks as mere obstacles to be
overcome by a combination of planning and creative thinking.

Distinguishing Entrepreneurs from Small Business Owners

Though most entrepreneurial ventures begin as small businesses, not all small business owners are entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are
innovators who start companies to create new or improved products. They strive to meet a need that's not being met, and their goal
is to grow the business and eventually expand into other markets.

5.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4001
In contrast, many people either start or buy small businesses for the sole purpose of providing an income for themselves and their
families. They do not intend to be particularly innovative, nor do they plan to expand significantly. This desire to operate is what's
sometimes called a "lifestyle business" (Allen, 2001). The neighborhood pizza parlor or beauty shop, the self-employed consultant
who works out of the home, and even a local printing company--all of these are typical lifestyle businesses. In Section 5.2 "The
Importance of Small Business to the U.S. Economy", we discuss the positive influences that both lifestyle and entrepreneurial
businesses have on the U.S. economy.

        Figure 5.2: These bakers are not entrepreneurs. They run their small bakery for the sole purpose of providing an income for
        themselves and their families (a salary-substitute firm) or to earn a living while pursuing their hobby of baking (a lifestyle firm).
        (Thomas Berg - Baker - CC BY-SA 2.0.)

Key Takeaways

An entrepreneur is someone who identifies a business opportunity and assumes the risk of creating and running a business to take
advantage of it.

    There are three characteristics of entrepreneurial activity:

     1. Innovating. An entrepreneur offers a new product, applies a new technique or technology, opens a new market, or develops a
        new form of organization for the purpose of producing or enhancing a product.

     2. Running a business. Entrepreneurship means setting up a business to make a profit from an innovative product or process.
     3. Risk taking. Risk means that an outcome is unknown. Entrepreneurs, therefore, are always working under a certain degree of

        uncertainty, and they can't know the outcomes of many of the decisions that they have to make.

    According to the SBA, a government agency that provides assistance to small businesses, there are five advantages to starting a
    business--"for the right person":

     1. Be your own boss.
     2. Accommodate a desired lifestyle.
     3. Achieve financial independence.
     4. Enjoy creative freedom.
     5. Use your skills and knowledge.

    To determine whether you're one of the "right people" to exploit the advantages of starting your own business, the SBA
    suggests that you assess your strengths and weaknesses by asking yourself the following questions:

     1. Am I a self-starter?
     2. How well do I get along with different personalities?
     3. How good am I at making decisions?
     4. Do I have the physical and emotional stamina?
     5. How well do I plan and organize?

5.1.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4001
     6. Is my drive strong enough?
     7. How will my business affect my family?
    Though most entrepreneurial ventures begin as small businesses, not all small business owners are entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs
    are innovators who start companies to create new or improved products. In contrast, many people start businesses for the
    purpose of providing an income for themselves and their families. This type of businesses is sometimes called a "lifestyle
    business."

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Do you have what it takes to be an entrepreneur? To find out, start by reviewing the following list of characteristics commonly
attributed to entrepreneurs:

They are creative people who sometimes accomplish extraordinary things because they're passionate about what they're doing.

    They are risk-taking optimists who commit themselves to working long hours to reach desired goals.
    They take pride in what they're doing and get satisfaction from doing something they enjoy.
    They have the flexibility to adjust to changing situations to achieve their goals.

We'll also add that entrepreneurs usually start small. They begin with limited resources and build their businesses through personal
effort. At the end of the day, their success depends on their ability to manage and grow the organization that they created to
implement their vision.

Now use the following three-point scale to indicate the extent to which each of these attributes characterizes you:

 1. It doesn't sound like me.
 2. It sounds like me to a certain extent.
 3. It sounds a lot like me.

Based on your responses, do you think that you have the attributes of an entrepreneur? Do you think you could be a successful
entrepreneur? Why, or why not?

This page titled 5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4001
5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S. Economy

  Learning Objectives

       Define a small business.
       Explain the importance of small businesses to the U.S. economy.
       Explain why small businesses tend to foster innovation more effectively than large ones.
       Describe some of the ways in which small companies work with big ones.

What Is a "Small Business"?

To assess the value of small businesses to the U.S. economy, we first need to know what constitutes a small business. Let's start by
looking at the criteria used by the Small Business Administration. According to the SBA, a small business is one that is
independently owned and operated, exerts little influence in its industry, and (with a few exceptions) has fewer than five hundred
employees (U.S. Small Business Administration, 2011).

Why Are Small Businesses Important?

Small business constitutes a major force in the U.S. economy. There are more than twenty-seven million small businesses in this
country, and they generate about 50 percent of our gross domestic product (GDP) (Office of Advocacy, 2010). The millions of
individuals who have started businesses in the United States have shaped the business world as we know it today. Some small
business founders like Henry Ford and Thomas Edison have even gained places in history. Others, including Bill Gates (Microsoft),
Sam Walton (Wal-Mart), Steve Jobs (Apple Computer), Michael Dell (Dell, Inc.), Steve Case (AOL), Pierre Omidyar (eBay), and
Larry Page and Sergey Brin (Google), have changed the way business is done today. Still millions of others have collectively
contributed to our standard of living.

Aside from contributions to our general economic well-being, founders of small businesses also contribute to growth and vitality in
specific areas of economic and socioeconomic development. In particular, small businesses do the following:

    Create jobs
    Spark innovation
    Provide opportunities for many people, including women and minorities, to achieve financial success and independence

In addition, they complement the economic activity of large organizations by providing them with components, services, and
distribution of their products.

Let's take a closer look at each of these contributions.

Job Creation

The majority of U.S. workers first entered the business world working for small businesses. Today, half of all U.S. adults either are
self-employed or work for businesses with fewer than five hundred employees (U.S. Small Business Administration, 2011).
Although the split between those working in small companies and those working in big companies is about even, small firms hire
more frequently and fire more frequently than do big companies (Headd, 2011). Why is this true? At any given point in time, lots of
small companies are started and some expand. These small companies need workers and so hiring takes place. But the survival and
expansion rates for small firms is poor, and so, again at any given point in time, many small businesses close or contract and
workers lose their jobs. Fortunately, over time more jobs are added by small firms than are taken away, which results in a net
increase in the number of workers. Table 5.1 "Small Firm Job Gains and Losses, 1993-2008 (in millions of jobs)" reports the net
increase in jobs generated by small firms for the fifteen-year period of 1993 to 2008 and breaks it down into job gains from
openings and expansions and job losses from closings and contractions.

                                          Table 5:1 Small Firm Job Gains and Losses, 1993-2008 (in millions of jobs)

5.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4002
Net Change  Job Gains From  Expansions  Job Losses From  Contractions
20.7        Openings        398.3       Closings         385.1
            105.2                       97.7

The size of the net increase in the number of workers for any given year depends on a number of factors, with the economy being at
the top of the list. A strong economy encourages individuals to start small businesses and expand existing small companies, which
adds to the workforce. A weak economy does just the opposite: discourages start-ups and expansions, which decreases the
workforce through layoffs. Table 5.1 "Small Firm Job Gains and Losses, 1993-2008 (in millions of jobs)" reports the job gains
from start-ups and expansions and job losses from business closings and contractions.

Innovation

Given the financial resources available to large businesses, you'd expect them to introduce virtually all the new products that hit
the market. According to the SBA, small companies develop more patents per employee than do larger companies. During a recent
four-year period, large firms generated 1.7 patents per hundred employees, whereas small firms generated an impressive 26.5
patents per employee (Breitzman & Hicks, 2011). Over the years, the list of important innovations by small firms has included the
airplane and air-conditioning, the defibrillator and DNA fingerprinting, oral contraceptives and overnight national delivery, the
safety razor, strobe lights, and the zipper (Baumol, 2005).

Small business owners are also particularly adept at finding new ways of doing old things. In 1994, for example, a young
computer-science graduate working on Wall Street came up with the novel idea of selling books over the Internet. During the first
year of operations, sales at Jeff Bezos's new company--Amazon.com--reached half a million dollars. In less than twenty years,
annual sales had topped $34 billion (Yahoo.com, 2011). Not only did his innovative approach to online retailing make Bezos
enormously rich, but it also established a viable model for the e-commerce industry.

Why are small businesses so innovative? For one thing, they tend to offer environments that appeal to individuals with the talent to
invent new products or improve the way things are done. Fast decision making is encouraged, their research programs tend to be
focused, and their compensation structures typically reward top performers. According to one SBA study, the supportive
environments of small firms are roughly thirteen times more innovative per employee than the less innovation-friendly
environments in which large firms traditionally operate (Baumol, 2005).

The success of small businesses in fostering creativity has not gone unnoticed by big businesses. In fact, many large companies
have responded by downsizing to act more like small companies. Some large organizations now have separate work units whose
purpose is to spark innovation. Individuals working in these units can focus their attention on creating new products that can then
be developed by the company.

Opportunities for Women and Minorities

Small business is the portal through which many people enter the economic mainstream. Business ownership allows individuals,
including women and minorities, to achieve financial success, as well as pride in their accomplishments. While the majority of
small businesses are still owned by white males, the past two decades have seen a substantial increase in the number of businesses
owned by women and minorities. Figure 5.3 gives you an idea of how many American businesses are owned by women and
minorities, and indicates how much the numbers grew between 1982 and 2007 (U.S. Census Bureau, 2011).

                            5.2.2                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4002
                 Figure 5.3 Businesses Owned by Women and Minorities. Source: Data obtained from www.census.gov/econ/sbo/#PR

What Small Businesses Do for Big Businesses

Small firms complement large firms in a number of ways. They supply many of the components needed by big companies. For
example, the U.S. automakers depend on more than 1,700 suppliers to provide them with the parts needed to make their cars. While
many of the suppliers are large, there are hundreds of smaller companies that provide a substantial portion of the 8,000 to 12,000
parts that go into each vehicle (Canis & Yacobucci, 2011). Small firms also provide large ones with such services as accounting,
legal, and insurance. Many small firms provide outsourcing services to large firms--that is, they hire themselves out to help with
special projects or handle certain business functions. A large firm, for example, might hire a small one to handle its billing or
collection services or to manage its health care benefits. A large company might contract with a small information technology firm
to manage its Web site or oversee software upgrades.

Small companies provide another valuable service to large companies by acting as sales agents for their products. For example,
automobile dealerships, which are generally small businesses, sell vehicles for the big car makers. Local sporting goods stores sell
athletic shoes made by industry giants, such as Adidas and Nike. Your corner deli sells products made by large companies, such as
Coca-Cola and Frito-Lay.

Key Takeaways

According to the SBA, a small business is independently owned and operated, exerts little influence in its industry, and (with
minimal exceptions) has fewer than five hundred employees.

The nearly twenty-seven million small businesses in the United States generate about 50 percent of our GDP. They also contribute
to growth and vitality in several important areas of economic and socioeconomic development. In particular, small businesses do
the following:

 1. Create jobs
 2. Spark innovation
 3. Provide opportunities for women and minorities to achieve financial success and independence
 4. Small businesses tend to foster environments that appeal to individuals with the talent to invent new products or improve the

    way things are done. They typically make faster decisions, their research programs often are focused, and their compensation
    structures frequently reward top performers.
 5. Small firms supply many of the components needed by big companies. They also provide large firms with such services as
    accounting, legal, and insurance, and many provide outsourcing services to large companies--that is, they hire themselves out
    to help with special projects or handle certain business functions. Small companies (such as automotive dealerships) often act as
    sales agents for the products of large businesses (for example, car makers).

Exercise

How "small" is a small business? If a substantial portion of small businesses in the United States suddenly closed, what would be
the impact on the U.S. economy? How would all these closings affect workers, consumers, and other businesses?

This page titled 5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S. Economy is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4002
5.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4002
5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the goods-producing and service-producing sectors of an economy.
    2. Identify the industries in which small businesses are concentrated.

If you want to start a new business, you probably should avoid certain types of businesses. You'd have a hard time, for example,
setting up a new company to make automobiles or aluminum, because you'd have to make tremendous investments in property,
plant, and equipment, and raise an enormous amount of capital to pay your workforce.

Fortunately, plenty of opportunities are still available if you're willing to set your sights a little lower. Many types of businesses
require reasonable initial investments, and not surprisingly, these are the ones that usually present attractive small business
opportunities.

Industries by Sector

We'll have more to say about industries and how to analyze them in later chapters. Here, we'll simply define an industry as a group
of companies that compete with one another to sell similar products, and we'll focus on the relationship between a small business
and the industry in which it operates. First, we'll discuss the industries in which small businesses tend to be concentrated. To do
this, we'll divide businesses into two broad types of industries, or sectors: the goods-producing sector and the service-producing
sector.

    The goods-producing sector includes all businesses that produce tangible goods. Generally speaking, companies in this sector
    are involved in manufacturing, construction, and agriculture.
    The service-producing sector includes all businesses that provide services but don't make tangible goods. They may be involved
    in retail and wholesale trade, transportation, finance, insurance, real estate, arts, entertainment, recreation, accommodations,
    food service, education, and such professional activities as technical services, health care, advertising, accounting, and personal
    services.

         Figure 5.4: A high percentage of small businesses are in the retail sector. (AuthenticEccentric - Gift Store Retailing - CC BY 2.0.)

About 20 percent of small businesses in the United States are concentrated in the goods-producing sector. The remaining 80% are
in the service sector (Small Business Administration, 2010). The high concentration of small businesses in the service-producing
sector reflects the makeup of the overall U.S. economy. Over the past fifty years, the service-producing sector has been growing at
an impressive rate. In 1960, for example, the goods-producing sector accounted for 38 percent of GDP, the service-producing sector
for 62 percent. By 2010, the balance had shifted dramatically, with the goods-producing sector accounting for only 22 percent of
GDP, while the service-producing sector had grown to 77 percent (The World Fact Book, 2011).

5.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4003
Goods-Producing Sector

The largest areas of the goods-producing sector are construction and manufacturing. Construction businesses are often started by
skilled workers, such as electricians, painters, plumbers, and home builders. They tend to be small and generally work on local
projects. Though manufacturing is primarily the domain of large businesses, there are exceptions. BTIO/Realityworks, for example,
is a manufacturing enterprise (components come from Ohio and China, and assembly is done in Wisconsin).

Another small manufacturer is Reveal Entertainment, which was founded in 1996 to make and distribute board games. Founder
Jeffrey Berndt started with a single award-winning game--a three-dimensional finance and real estate game called "Tripoly"--and
now boasts a product line of dozens of board games. There are strategy games, like "Squad Seven," which uses a CD soundtrack to
guide players through a jungle in search of treasure; children's games, like "Portfolio Junior," which teaches kids the rudiments of
personal finances; and party games, like "So Sue Me," in which players get to experience the fun side of suing their neighbors and
taking their possessions (Reveal Entertainment, 2011).

How about making something out of trash? Daniel Blake never followed his mother's advice at dinner when she told him to eat
everything on his plate. When he served as a missionary in Puerto Rico, Aruba, Bonaire, and Curacao after his first year in college,
he noticed that the families he stayed with didn't follow her advice either. But they didn't throw their uneaten food into the trash.
Instead they put it on a compost pile and used the mulch to nourish their vegetable gardens and fruit trees. While eating at an all-
you-can-eat breakfast buffet back home at Brigham Young University, Blake was amazed to see volumes of uneaten food in the
trash. This triggered an idea: why not turn the trash into money. Two years later, he was running his company--EcoScraps--that
collects 40 tons of food scraps a day from 75 grocers (including Costco) and turns it into high-quality potting soil that he sells
online and to nurseries and garden supply stores. What's his profit from this venture? Almost half a million dollars on sales of $1.5
million. Beats cleaning your plate. One person's trash is another person's treasure.

Service-Producing Sector

Many small businesses in this sector are retailers--they buy goods from other firms and sell them to consumers, in stores, by
phone, through direct mailings, or over the Internet. In fact, entrepreneurs are turning increasingly to the Internet as a venue for
start-up ventures. Take Tony Roeder, for example, who had a fascination with the red Radio Flyer wagons that many of today's
adults had owned as children. In 1998, he started an online store through Yahoo! to sell red wagons from his home. In three years,
he turned his online store into a million-dollar business (Isidro, 2011). When we talk about Internet entrepreneurs, we have to
mention Mark Zuckerberg, the king of Internet entrepreneurship. As is well known, he founded Facebook while a student at
Harvard and, by age 27, had built up a personal wealth of $13.5 billion (Forbes, 2011).

Other small business owners in this sector are wholesalers--they sell products to businesses that buy them for resale or for
company use. A local bakery, for example, is acting as a wholesaler when it sells desserts to a restaurant, which then resells them to
its customers. A small business that buys flowers from a local grower (the manufacturer) and resells them to a retail store is another
example of a wholesaler.

A high proportion of small businesses in this sector provide professional, business, or personal services. Doctors and dentists are
part of the service industry, as are insurance agents, accountants, and lawyers. So are businesses that provide personal services,
such as dry cleaning and hairdressing.

David Marcks, for example, entered the service industry about fourteen years ago when he learned that his border collie enjoyed
chasing geese at the golf course where he worked. Anyone who's been on a golf course recently knows exactly what the goose
problem is. While they are lovely to look at, they answer the call of nature on tees, fairways, and greens. That's where Marcks's
company, Geese Police, comes in: Marcks employs specially trained dogs to chase the geese away. He now has twenty-seven
trucks, thirty-two border collies, and five offices. Golf courses account for only about 5 percent of his business, as his dogs now
patrol corporate parks and playgrounds as well (Isidro, 2008)1.

Figure 5.5 provides a more detailed breakdown of small businesses by industry.

5.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4003
                                                                 Figure 5.5 Small Business by Industry

Key Takeaways

An industry is a group of companies that compete with one another to sell similar products. There are two broad types of industries,
or sectors:

 1. The goods-producing sector includes all businesses that produce tangible goods.
 2. The service-producing sector includes all businesses that provide services but don't make tangible goods.

    The largest areas of the goods-producing sector are construction and manufacturing. Construction businesses are often started
    by skilled workers, such as electricians, painters, plumbers, and home builders. These businesses tend to be small and generally
    focused on local projects. Though manufacturing is primarily the domain of large businesses, there are exceptions.
    Many small businesses in the service-producing sector are retailers--they buy goods from other firms and resell them to
    consumers, in stores, by phone, through direct mailings, or over the Internet. Other small business owners in this sector are
    wholesalers--they sell products to businesses that buy them for resale or for company use. A high proportion of small
    businesses in this sector provide professional, business, or personal services.

Exercise

Why are most small businesses found in the service-producing sector? Identify five small service-producing businesses that you
patronize frequently. What kinds of small businesses are found in the goods-producing sector? What small goods-producing firms
do you do business with regularly?

This page titled 5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4003
5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business Ownership

  Learning Objective

       Summarize the advantages and disadvantages of business ownership.

Do you want to be a business owner someday? Before deciding, you might want to consider the following advantages and
disadvantages of business ownership (Small Business Development Center, 2006).

Advantages of Small Business Ownership

Being a business owner can be extremely rewarding. Having the courage to take a risk and start a venture is part of the American
dream. Success brings with it many advantages:

    Independence. As a business owner, you're your own boss. You can't get fired. More importantly, you have the freedom to
    make the decisions that are crucial to your own business success.
    Lifestyle. Owning a small business gives you certain lifestyle advantages. Because you're in charge, you decide when and
    where you want to work. If you want to spend more time on nonwork activities or with your family, you don't have to ask for
    the time off. If it's important that you be with your family all day, you might decide to run your business from your home.
    Given today's technology, it's relatively easy to do. Moreover, it eliminates commuting time.
    Financial rewards. In spite of high financial risk, running your own business gives you a chance to make more money than if
    you were employed by someone else. You benefit from your own hard work.
    Learning opportunities. As a business owner, you'll be involved in all aspects of your business. This situation creates numerous
    opportunities to gain a thorough understanding of the various business functions.
    Creative freedom and personal satisfaction. As a business owner, you'll be able to work in a field that you really enjoy. You'll
    be able to put your skills and knowledge to use, and you'll gain personal satisfaction from implementing your ideas, working
    directly with customers, and watching your business succeed.

Disadvantages of Small Business Ownership

As the little boy said when he got off his first roller-coaster ride, "I like the ups but not the downs!" Here are some of the risks you
run if you want to start a small business:

    Financial risk. The financial resources needed to start and grow a business can be extensive. You may need to commit most of
    your savings or even go into debt to get started. If things don't go well, you may face substantial financial loss. In addition,
    there's no guaranteed income. There might be times, especially in the first few years, when the business isn't generating enough
    cash for you to live on.
    Stress. As a business owner, you are the business. There's a bewildering array of things to worry about--competition,
    employees, bills, equipment breakdowns, customer problems. As the owner, you're also responsible for the well-being of your
    employees.
    Time commitment. People often start businesses so that they'll have more time to spend with their families. Unfortunately,
    running a business is extremely time-consuming. In theory, you have the freedom to take time off, but in reality, you may not be
    able to get away. In fact, you'll probably have less free time than you'd have working for someone else. For many entrepreneurs
    and small business owners, a forty-hour workweek is a myth; see Figure 5.6 . Vacations will be difficult to take and will often
    be interrupted. In recent years, the difficulty of getting away from the job has been compounded by cell phones, iPhones,
    Internet-connected laptops and iPads, and many small business owners have come to regret that they're always reachable.
    Undesirable duties. When you start up, you'll undoubtedly be responsible for either doing or overseeing just about everything
    that needs to be done. You can get bogged down in detail work that you don't enjoy. As a business owner, you'll probably have
    to perform some unpleasant tasks, like firing people.

In spite of these and other disadvantages, most small business owners are pleased with their decision to start a business. A survey
conducted by the Wall Street Journal and Cicco and Associates indicates that small business owners and top-level corporate
executives agree overwhelmingly that small business owners have a more satisfying business experience. Interestingly, the
researchers had fully expected to find that small business owners were happy with their choices; they were, however, surprised at

5.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4004
the number of corporate executives who believed that the grass was greener in the world of small business ownership (Cicco and
Associates Inc., 2006).

                                                               Figure 5.6 The Entrepreneur's Workweek

Key Takeaways

There are several advantages that, generally speaking, come with success in business ownership:

    Independence. As a business owner, you're your own boss.
    Lifestyle. Because you're in charge, you decide when and where you want to work.
    Financial rewards. In spite of high financial risk, running your own business gives you a chance to make more money than if
    you were employed by someone else.
    Learning opportunities. As a business owner, you'll be involved in all aspects of your business.
    Creative freedom and personal satisfaction. As a business owner, you'll be able to work in a field that you really enjoy, and
    you'll gain personal satisfaction from watching your business succeed.

There are also a number of potential disadvantages to consider in deciding whether to start a small business:

    Financial risk. The financial resources needed to start and grow a business can be extensive, and if things don't go well, you
    may face substantial financial loss. In addition, you'll have no guaranteed income.
    Stress. You'll have a bewildering array of things to worry about--competition, employees, bills, equipment breakdowns,
    customer problems.
    Time commitment. Running a business is extremely time-consuming. In fact, you'll probably have less free time than you'd
    have working for someone else.
    Undesirable duties. You'll be responsible for either doing or overseeing just about everything that needs to be done, and you'll
    probably have to perform some unpleasant tasks, like firing people.

Exercises

(AACSB) Analysis

First, identify five advantages of small business ownership. Next, rank these advantages according to their importance to you. Why
did you rank them as you did? What factors discourage individuals from small business ownership? Indicate which of these factors
might discourage you from starting a business. Explain why.

(AACSB) Analysis

Because you're convinced that the best way to get rich is to work for yourself, you're thinking about starting your own business.
You have an idea and $100,000 that you just inherited from a great-aunt. You even have a location: Palo Alto, California, which
(according to a Forbes magazine article) is the best place in the United States to get rich. But there's a downside: to move to
California and start your own business, you'll have to drop out of college. What financial risks should you consider in making your
decision? What are your chances of succeeding with your plan? Are you willing to take the financial risk needed to start a business?
Why, or why not? Are you really likely to make more money running your own business than working for someone else?

5.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4004
This page titled 5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business Ownership is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4004
5.5: Starting a Business

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain what it takes to start a business.
    2. Evaluate the advantages and disadvantages of several small business ownership options--starting a business from scratch,

       buying an existing business, and obtaining a franchise.

Starting a business takes talent, determination, hard work, and persistence. It also requires a lot of research and planning. Before
starting your business, you should appraise your strengths and weaknesses and assess your personal goals to determine whether
business ownership is for you (Allen, 2001).

Questions to Ask Before You Start a Business

If you're interested in starting a business, you need to make decisions even before you bring your talent, determination, hard work,
and persistence to bear on your project. Here are the basic questions you'll need to address:

    What, exactly, is my business idea? Is it feasible?
    What type of business is right for me? What industry do I want to get into? Do I want to be a manufacturer, a retailer, or a
    wholesaler? Do I want to provide professional or personal services? Do I want to start a business that I can operate out of my
    home?
    Do I want to run a business that's similar to many existing businesses? Do I want to innovate--to create a new product or a new
    approach to doing business?
    Do I want to start a new business, buy an existing one, or buy a franchise?
    Do I want to start the business by myself or with others?
    What form of business organization do I want?

After making these decisions, you'll be ready to take the most important step in the entire process of starting a business: you must
describe your future business in the form of a business plan--a document that identifies the goals of your proposed business and
explains how these goals will be achieved. Think of a business plan as a blueprint for a proposed company: it shows how you
intend to build the company and how you intend to make sure that it's sturdy. You must also take a second crucial step before you
actually start up your business: You need to get financing--the money from individuals, banks, or both, that you'll need to get your
business off the ground. (Obviously, if you already have the necessary funds, you're one of the fortunate few who can skip this
step.)

The Business Idea

For some people, coming up with a great business idea is a gratifying adventure. For most, however, it's a daunting task. The key to
coming up with a business idea is identifying something that customers want--or, perhaps more importantly, filling an unmet need.
Your business will probably survive only if its purpose is to satisfy its customers--the ultimate users of its goods or services. In
coming up with a business idea, don't ask, "What do we want to sell?" but rather, "What does the customer want to buy?" (Thurm
& Lublin, 2005)

To come up with an innovative business idea, you need to be creative. The idea itself can come from various sources. Prior
experience accounts for the bulk of new business ideas. Many people generate ideas for industries they're already working in. Past
experience in an industry also increases your chances of success. Take Sam Walton, the late founder of Wal-Mart. He began his
retailing career at JCPenney and then became a successful franchiser of a Ben Franklin five-and-dime store. In 1962, he came up
with the idea of opening large stores in rural areas, with low costs and heavy discounts. He founded his first Wal-Mart store in
1962, and when he died thirty years later, his family's net worth was $25 billion (Krass, 2006).

Industry experience also gave Howard Schultz, a New York executive for a housewares company, his breakthrough idea. In 1981,
Schultz noticed that a small customer in Seattle--Starbucks Coffee, Tea and Spice--ordered more coffeemaker cone filters than
Macy's and many other large customers. So he flew across the country to find out why. His meeting with the owner-operators of
the original Starbucks Coffee Co. resulted in his becoming part-owner of the company, and changed his life and the life of coffee

5.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4005
lovers forever. Schultz's vision for the company far surpassed that of its other owners. While they wanted Starbucks to remain
small and local, Schultz saw potential for a national business that not only sold world-class-quality coffee beans but also offered
customers a European coffee-bar experience. After attempting unsuccessfully to convince his partners to try his experiment,
Schultz left Starbucks and started his own chain of coffee bars, which he called Il Giornale (after an Italian newspaper). Two years
later, he bought out the original owners and reclaimed the name Starbucks (Schultz & Yang, 1997).

Other people come up with business ideas because of hobbies or personal interests. This was the case with Nike founder Phil
Knight, who was an avid runner. He was convinced that it was possible to make high-quality track shoes that cost less than the
European shoes dominating the market at the time. His track experience, coupled with his knowledge of business (Knight holds an
MBA from Stanford and worked as an accountant), inspired him to start Nike. Michael Dell also turned a personal interest into a
business. From a young age, he was obsessed with taking computers apart and putting them back together again, and it was this
personal interest that led to his great business idea. At college, instead of attending classes, he spent his time assembling computers
and, eventually, founded Dell, Inc.

We will expand on this important topic of idea generation and creativity in other chapters.

Ownership Options

As we've already seen, you can become a small business owner in one of three ways--by starting a new business, buying an
existing one, or obtaining a franchise. Let's look more closely at the advantages and disadvantages of each option.

Starting from Scratch

The most common--and the riskiest--option is starting from scratch. This approach lets you start with a clean slate and allows you
to build the business the way you want. You select the goods or services that you're going to offer, secure your location, and hire
your employees, and then it's up to you to develop your customer base and build your reputation. This is the path taken by Andres
Masonwho figured out how to inject hysteria into the process of bargain hunting on the Web. The result is an overnight success
story called Groupon (Steiner, 2011). Here is how Groupon (a blend of the words "group" and "coupon") works: A daily email is
sent to 6.5 million people in 70 cities across the United States offering a deeply discounted deal to buy something or to do
something in their city. If theperson receiving the emaillikes the deal, he or she commits to buying it.But, here's the catch, if not
enough people sign up for the deal, it is cancelled.Groupon makes money by keeping half of the revenue from the deal. The
company offering the product or service gets exposure. But stay tuned: the "daily deals website isn't just unprofitable--it's
bleeding hundreds of millions of dollars" (The Week, 2011). As with all start-ups cash is always a problem.

Figure 5.7: SUBWAY, the largest franchise in the world, grew from a tiny sandwich shop started in 1965 by seventeen-year-old
Fred DeLuca hoping to put himself through college. (Wikimedia Commons - CC BY 3.0.)

5.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4005
Buying an Existing Business

If you decide to buy an existing business, some things will be easier. You'll already have a proven product, current customers,
active suppliers, a known location, and trained employees. You'll also find it much easier to predict the business's future success.
There are, of course, a few bumps in this road to business ownership. First, it's hard to determine how much you should pay for a
business. You can easily determine how much things like buildings and equipment are worth, but how much should you pay for the
fact that the business already has steady customers?

In addition, a business, like a used car, might have performance problems that you can't detect without a test drive (an option,
unfortunately, that you don't get when you're buying a business). Perhaps the current owners have disappointed customers; maybe
the location isn't as good as it used to be. You might inherit employees that you wouldn't have hired yourself. Finally, what if the
previous owners set up a competing business that draws away their former--and your current--customers?

Getting a Franchise

Lastly, you can buy a franchise. Under this setup, a franchiser (the company that sells the franchise) grants the franchisee (the
buyer--you) the right to use a brand name and to sell its goods or services. Franchises market products in a variety of industries,
including food, retail, hotels, travel, real estate, business services, cleaning services, and even weight-loss centers and wedding
services. There are thousands of franchises, many of which are quite familiar--SUBWAY, McDonald's, 7-Eleven, Holiday Inn,
Budget Car Rental, RadioShack, and Jiffy Lube.

As you can see from Figure 5.8, franchising has become an extremely popular way to do business. A new franchise outlet opens
once every eight minutes in the United States, where one in ten businesses is now a franchise. Franchises employ eight million
people (13 percent of the workforce) and account for 17 percent of all sales in this country ($1.3 trillion) (U.S. Census Bureau,
2010).

                                                          Figure 5.8 The Growth of Franchising, 1980-2007

In addition to the right to use a company's brand name and sell its products, the franchisee gets help in picking a location, starting
and operating the business, and advertising. In effect, you've bought a prepackaged, ready-to-go business that's proven successful
elsewhere. You also get ongoing support from the franchiser, which has a vested interest in your success.

Not surprisingly, these advantages don't come cheaply. Franchises can be very expensive, usually depending on the amount of
business that a franchisee is expected to do. KFC franchises, for example, require a total investment of $1.3 million to $2.5 million
each. This fee includes the cost of the property, equipment, training, start-up costs, and the franchise fee--a one-time charge for the
right to operate as a KFC outlet. McDonald's is in the same price range ($1.1 million to $1.9 million). SUBWAY sandwich shops
are more affordable, with expected total investment ranging from $84,000 to $258,000. If you'd prefer teaching dance and exercise
classes, you could get a Jazzercise franchise for anywhere from $3,000 to $76,000. If you don't want to deal in food or dance, you
might want to buy a dating service. The Right One franchises go for an initial investment of $98,000 to $254,000, depending on
location (Entrepreneur, 2011).

In addition to your initial investment, you'll have to pay two other fees on a monthly basis--a royalty fee (typically from 3 to 12
percent of sales) for continued support from the franchiser and the right to keep using the company's trade name, plus an

5.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4005
advertising fee to cover your share of national and regional advertising. You'll also be expected to buy your products from the
franchiser (Seid & Ainsley, 2006).

Why do would-be business owners like franchises? For one thing, buying a franchise lets you start up under fairly safe conditions,
with a proven model for running a company and a permanent support team. You can profit from name recognition without having
to develop your own image in the marketplace, and you can be your own boss (as long as you comply with the standards set by the
franchiser).

But there are disadvantages. The cost of obtaining and running a franchise can be high, and you have to play by the franchiser's
rules, even when you disagree with them. The franchiser maintains a great deal of control over its franchisees. For example, if you
own a fast-food franchise, the franchise agreement will likely dictate the food and beverages you can sell; the methods used to
store, prepare, and serve the food; and the prices you'll charge. In addition, the agreement will dictate what the premises will look
like and how they'll be maintained.

Finally, franchisers don't always keep their promises. What do you do if the promised advertising or employee training doesn't
materialize? What do you do if you're forced to make unnecessary and costly alterations to your premises, or the franchising
company sets up a competing establishment nearby? What if the franchising company gets bad press, which, in turn, hurts your
sales? You always have the option of suing the franchiser, but this is time-consuming and costly. As with any business venture, you
need to do your homework before investing in a franchise.

Key Takeaways

Before starting a business, you need to ask yourself a few basic questions:

 1. What, exactly, is my business idea? Is it feasible?
 2. What type of business is right for me? What industry do I want to get into?
 3. Do I want to run a business that's similar to many existing businesses, or do I want to innovate?
 4. Do I want to start a new business, take over an existing one, or buy a franchise?
 5. Do I want to start the business by myself, or do I want company?
 6. What form of business organization do I want?

    After you've addressed these basic questions, you'll be ready to describe your future business in the form of a business plan--a
    document that identifies the goals of your proposed business and explains how it will achieve them. Before you actually start up
    your business, you must also get financing.
    The key to coming up with a business idea is identifying something that customers want. Your business will probably survive
    only if its "purpose" is to satisfy its customers--the ultimate users of its goods or services.
    You can become a small business owner in one of three ways, each of which has advantages and disadvantages:

     1. Starting from scratch. This is the most common--and riskiest--option. Advantage: You start with a clean slate and build the
        business the way you want. Disadvantage: It's up to you to develop your customer base and build your reputation.

     2. Buying an existing business. This option is not as risky as starting a business from scratch, but it has some drawbacks.
        Advantages: You'll already have a proven product, current customers, active suppliers, a known location, and trained
        employees. Disadvantages: It's hard to determine how much to pay for a business; perhaps the current owners have
        disappointed customers; maybe the location isn't as good as it used to be.

     3. Buying a franchise. Under a franchise setup, a franchiser (the company that sells the franchise) grants the franchisee (the
        buyer) the right to use a brand name and to sell its goods or services. Advantages: You've bought a prepackaged, ready-to-go
        business that's proven successful elsewhere; you also get ongoing support from the franchiser. Disadvantages: The cost can
        be high; you have to play by the franchiser's rules; and franchisers don't always keep their promises.

Exercises

(AACSB) Analysis

If business ownership interests you, you can start a new business, buy an existing one, or obtain a franchise. Evaluate the
advantages and disadvantages of each option. Which option do you find most appealing, and why? Describe the business you
would probably start.

5.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4005
(AACSB) Analysis

How would you like to spend your summer collecting trash in a used pickup? Doesn't sound very appealing, does it? Would you
quit college to do it full time? Probably not. But that's exactly what Brian Scudamore did. And he got very rich doing it. His
summer job turned into the company known as 1-800-GOT-JUNK, one of the fastest-growing franchises in the United States and
Canada. Go to http://www.1800gotjunk.com to link to the Web site and learn more about the company. After looking at the Web
site, answer the following questions:

As a reward for working hard, take a break and click on the Junk Genie icon on the bottom of the company's home page
(http://www.1800gotjunk.com). Can you figure out the trick? Pass it along to your friends.

This page titled 5.5: Starting a Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.5.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4005
5.6: The Business Plan

  Learning Objective

       Discuss the importance of planning for your business, and identify the key sections of a business plan.

If you want to start a business, you must prepare a business plan. This essential document should tell the story of your business
concept, provide an overview of the industry in which you will operate, describe the goods or services you will provide, identify
your customers and proposed marketing activities, explain the qualifications of your management team, and state your projected
income and borrowing needs.

Purpose of a Business Plan

The business plan is a plan or blueprint for the company, and it's an indispensable tool in attracting investors, obtaining loans, or
both. Remember, too, that the value of your business plan isn't limited to the planning stages of your business and the process of
finding start-up money. Once you've acquired start-up capital, don't just stuff your plan in a drawer. Treat it as an ongoing guide to
your business and its operations, as well as a yardstick by which you can measure your performance. Keep it handy, update it
periodically, and use it to assess your progress.

In developing and writing your business plan, you must make strategic decisions in the areas of management, operations,
marketing, accounting, and finance--in short, in all the functional areas of business that we described in Chapter 1 "The
Foundations of Business". Granted, preparing a business plan takes a lot of time and work, but it's well worth the effort. A business
plan forces you to think critically about your proposed business and reduces your risk of failure. It forces you to analyze your
business concept and the industry in which you'll be operating, and it helps you determine how you can grab a percentage of sales
in that industry.

The most common use of a business plan is persuading investors, lenders, or both, to provide financing. These two groups look for
different things. Investors are particularly interested in the quality of your business concept and the ability of management to make
your venture successful. Bankers and other lenders are primarily concerned with your company's ability to generate cash to repay
loans. To persuade investors and lenders to support your business, you need a professional, well-written business plan that paints a
clear picture of your proposed business.

Sections of the Business Plan

Though formats can vary, a business plan generally includes the following sections: executive summary, description of proposed
business, industry analysis, mission statement and core values, management plan, goods or services and (if applicable) production
processes, marketing, global issues, and financial plan. Let's explore each of these sections in more detail. (Note: More detailed
documents and an Excel template are available for those classes in which the optional business plan project is assigned.)

Executive Summary

The executive summary is a one- to three-page overview of the business plan. It's actually the most important part of the business
plan: it's what the reader looks at first, and if it doesn't capture the reader's attention, it might be the only thing that he or she looks
at. It should therefore emphasize the key points of the plan and get the reader excited about the prospects of the business.

Even though the executive summary is the first thing read, it's written after the other sections of the plan are completed. An
effective approach in writing the executive summary is to paraphrase key sentences from each section of the business plan. This
process will ensure that the key information of each section is included in the executive summary.

Description of Proposed Business

Here, you present a brief description of the company and tell the reader why you're starting your business, what benefits it
provides, and why it will be successful. Some of the questions to answer in this section include the following:

    What will your proposed company do? Will it be a manufacturer, a retailer, or a service provider?
    What goods or services will it provide?

5.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4006
    Why are your goods or services unique?
    Who will be your main customers?
    How will your goods or services be sold?
    Where will your business be located?

Because later parts of the plan will provide more detailed discussions of many of these issues, this section should provide only an
overview of these topics.

Industry Analysis

This section provides a brief introduction to the industry in which you propose to operate. It describes both the current situation and
the future possibilities, and it addresses such questions as the following:

 1. How large is the industry? What are total sales for the industry, in volume and dollars?
 2. Is the industry mature or are new companies successfully entering it?
 3. What opportunities exist in the industry? What threats exist?
 4. What factors will influence future expansion or contraction of the industry?
 5. What is the overall outlook for the industry?
 6. Who are your major competitors in the industry?
 7. How does your product differ from those of your competitors?

Mission Statement and Core Values

This portion of the business plan states the company's mission statement and core values. The mission statement describes the
purpose or mission of your organization--its reason for existence. It tells the reader what the organization is committed to doing.
For example, one mission statement reads, "The mission of Southwest Airlines is dedication to the highest quality of customer
service delivered with a sense of warmth, friendliness, individual pride, and company spirit" (Southwest Airline's, 2011).

Core values are fundamental beliefs about what's important and what is (and isn't) appropriate in conducting company activities.
Core values are not about profits, but rather about ideals. They should help guide the behavior of individuals in the organization.
Coca-Cola, for example, intends that its core values--leadership, passion, integrity, collaboration, diversity, quality, and
accountability--will let employees know what behaviors are (and aren't) acceptable (The Coca-Cola Company, 2011).

Management Plan

Management makes the key decisions for the business, such as its legal form and organizational structure. This section of the
business plan should outline these decisions and provide information about the qualifications of the key management personnel.

A. Legal Form of Organization
This section dentifies the chosen legal form of business ownership: sole proprietorship (personal ownership), partnership
(ownership shared with one or more partners), or corporation (ownership through shares of stock).

B. Qualifications of Management Team and Compensation Package
It isn't enough merely to have a good business idea: you need a talented management team that can turn your concept into a
profitable venture. This part of the management plan section provides information about the qualifications of each member of the
management team. Its purpose is to convince the reader that the company will be run by experienced, well-qualified managers. It
describes each individual's education, experience, and expertise, as well as each person's responsibilities. It also indicates the
estimated annual salary to be paid to each member of the management team.

C. Organizational Structure
This section of the management plan describes the relationships among individuals within the company, listing the major
responsibilities of each member of the management team.

5.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4006
Goods, Services, and the Production Process

To succeed in attracting investors and lenders, you must be able to describe your goods or services clearly (and enthusiastically).
Here, you describe all the goods and services that you will provide the marketplace. This section explains why your proposed
offerings are better than those of competitors and indicates what market needs will be met by your goods or services. In other
words, it addresses a key question: What competitive advantage will the company's goods and services have over similar products
on the market?

This section also indicates how you plan to obtain or make your products. Naturally, the write-up will vary, depending on whether
you're proposing a service company, a retailer, or a manufacturer. If it's a service company, describe the process by which you'll
deliver your services. If it's a retail company, tell the reader where you'll purchase products for resale.

If you're going to be a manufacturer, you must furnish information on product design, development, and production processes. You
must address questions such as the following:

 1. How will products be designed?
 2. What technology will be needed to design and manufacture products?
 3. Will the company run its own production facilities, or will its products be manufactured by someone else?
 4. Where will production facilities be located?
 5. What type of equipment will be used?
 6. What are the design and layout of the facilities?
 7. How many workers will be employed in the production process?
 8. How many units will be produced?
 9. How will the company ensure that products are of high quality?

Marketing

This critical section focuses on four marketing-related areas--target market, pricing, distribution, and promotion:

    Target market. Describe future customers and profile them according to age, gender, income, interests, and so forth. If your
    company will sell to other companies, describe your typical business customer.
    Pricing. State the proposed price for each product. Compare your pricing strategy to that of competitors.
    Distribution. Explain how your goods or services will be distributed to customers. Indicate whether they'll be sold directly to
    customers or through retail outlets.
    Promotion. Explain your promotion strategy, indicating what types of advertising you'll be using.

In addition, if you intend to use the Internet to promote or sell your products, also provide answers to these questions:

    Will your company have a Web site? Who will visit the site?
    What will the site look like? What information will it supply?
    Will you sell products over the Internet?

How will you attract customers to your site and entice them to buy from your company?

Global Issues

In this section, indicate whether you'll be involved in international markets, by either buying or selling in other countries. If you're
going to operate across borders, identify the challenges that you'll face in your global environment, and explain how you'll meet
them. If you don't plan initially to be involved in international markets, state what strategies, if any, you'll use to move into
international markets when the time comes.

Financial Plan

In preparing the financial section of your business plan, specify the company's cash needs and explain how you'll be able to repay
debt. This information is vital in obtaining financing. It reports the amount of cash needed by the company for start-up and initial
operations and provides an overview of proposed funding sources. It presents financial projections, including expected sales, costs,
and profits (or losses). It refers to a set of financial statements included in an appendix to the business plan.

5.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4006
Appendices

Here, you furnish supplemental information that may be of interest to the reader. In addition to a set of financial statements, for
example, you might attach the rsums of your management team.

Key Takeaways

A business plan tells the story of your business concept, provides an overview of the industry in which you will operate, describes
the goods or services you will provide, identifies your customers and proposed marketing activities, explains the qualifications of
your management team, and states your projected income and borrowing needs.

In your business plan, you make strategic decisions in the areas of management, operations, marketing, accounting, and finance.
Developing your business plan forces you to analyze your business concept and the industry in which you'll be operating. Its most
common use is persuading investors and lenders to provide financing.

A business plan generally includes the following sections:

Executive summary. One- to three-page overview.

Description of proposed business. Brief description of the company that answers such questions as what your proposed company
will do, what goods or services it will provide, and who its main customers will be.

    Industry analysis. Short introduction to the industry in which you propose to operate.
    Mission statement and core values. Declaration of your mission statement, which are fundamental beliefs about what's
    important and what is (and isn't) appropriate in conducting company activities.
    Management plan. Information about management team qualifications and responsibilities, and designation of your proposed
    legal form of organization.
    Goods, services, and the production process. Description of the goods and services that you'll provide in the marketplace;
    explanation of how you plan to obtain or make your products or of the process by which you'll deliver your services.
    Marketing. Description of your plans in four marketing-related areas: target market, pricing, distribution, and promotion.
    Global issues. Description of your involvement, if any, in international markets.
    Financial plan. Report on the cash you'll need for start-up and initial operations, proposed funding sources, and means of
    repaying your debt.
    Appendices. Supplemental information that may be of interest to the reader.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Let's start with three givens: (1) college students love chocolate chip cookies, (2) you have a special talent for baking cookies, and
(3) you're always broke. Given these three conditions, you've come up with the idea of starting an on-campus business--selling
chocolate chip cookies to fellow students. As a business major, you want to do things right by preparing a business plan. First, you
identified a number of specifics about your proposed business. Now, you need to put these various pieces of information into the
relevant section of your business plan. Using the business plan format described in this chapter, indicate the section of the business
plan into which you'd put each of the following:

    You'll bake the cookies in the kitchen of a friend's apartment.
    You'll charge $1 each or $10 a dozen.
    Your purpose is to make the best cookies on campus and deliver them fresh. You value integrity, consideration of others, and
    quality.
    Each cookie will have ten chocolate chips and will be superior to those sold in nearby bakeries and other stores.
    You expect sales of $6,000 for the first year.

Chocolate chip cookies are irresistible to college students. There's a lot of competition from local bakeries, but your cookies will be
superior and popular with college students. You'll make them close to campus using only fresh ingredients and sell them for $1
each. Your management team is excellent. You expect first-year sales of $6,000 and net income of $1,500. You estimate start-up
costs at $600.

5.6.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4006
    You'll place ads for your product in the college newspaper.
    You'll hire a vice president at a salary of $100 a week.
    You can ship cookies anywhere in the United States and in Canada.
    You need $600 in cash to start the business.
    There are six bakeries within walking distance of the college.
    You'll bake nothing but cookies and sell them to college students. You'll make them in an apartment near campus and deliver
    them fresh.

This page titled 5.6: The Business Plan is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.6.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4006
5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business

  Learning Objectives

       Discuss ways to succeed in managing a business, and explain why some businesses fail.
       Identify sources of small business assistance from the Small Business Administration.

Why Do Businesses Succeed?

Being successful as a business owner requires more than coming up with a brilliant idea and working hard. You need to learn how
to manage and grow your business. In the process, you'll face numerous challenges, and your ability to meet them will be a major
factor in your success (or failure) (D&B, 2008). To give yourself a fighting chance in making a success of your business, you
should do the following:

    Know your business. It seems obvious, but it's worth mentioning: successful businesspeople know what they're doing. They're
    knowledgeable about the industry in which they operate (both as it stands today and where it's headed), and they know who
    their competitors are. They know how to attract customers and who the best suppliers and distributors are, and they understand
    the impact of technology on their business.
    Know the basics of business management. You might be able to start a business on the basis of a great idea, but to manage it
    you need to understand the functional areas of business--accounting, finance, management, marketing, and production. You
    need to be a salesperson, as well as a decision maker and a planner.
    Have the proper attitude. When you own a business, you are the business. If you're going to devote the time and energy needed
    to transform an idea into a successful venture, you need to have a passion for your work. You should believe in what you're
    doing and make a strong personal commitment to your business.
    Get adequate funding. It takes a lot of money to start a business and guide it through the start-up phase (which can last for over
    a year). You can have the most brilliant idea in the world, the best marketing approach, and a talented management team, yet if
    you run out of cash, your career as a business owner could be brief. Plan for the long term and work with lenders and investors
    to ensure that you'll have sufficient funds to get open, stay open during the start-up phase, and, ultimately, expand.
    Manage your money effectively. You'll be under constant pressure to come up with the money to meet payroll and pay your
    other bills. That's why you need to keep an eye on cash flow--money coming in and money going out. You need to control
    costs and collect money that's owed you, and, generally, you need to know how to gather the financial information that you
    require to run your business.
    Manage your time efficiently. A new business owner can expect to work sixty hours a week. If you want to grow a business and
    have some type of nonwork life at the same time, you'll have to give up some control--to let others take over some of the work.
    Thus, you must develop time-management skills and learn how to delegate responsibility.
    Know how to manage people. Hiring, keeping, and managing good people are crucial to business success. As your business
    grows, you'll depend more on your employees. You need to develop a positive working relationship with them, train them
    properly, and motivate them to provide quality goods or services.
    Satisfy your customers. You might attract customers through impressive advertising campaigns, but you'll keep them only by
    providing quality goods or services. Commit yourself to satisfying--or even exceeding--customer needs.
    Know how to compete. Find your niche in the marketplace, keep an eye on your competitors, and be prepared to react to
    changes in the marketplace. The history of business (and much of life) can be summed up in three words: "Adapt or perish."

Why Do Businesses Fail?

If you've paid attention to the occupancy of shopping malls over a few years, you've noticed that retailers come and go with
surprising frequency. The same thing happens with restaurants--indeed, with all kinds of businesses. By definition, starting a
business--small or large--is risky, and though many businesses succeed, a large proportion of them don't. One-third of small
businesses that have employees go out of business within the first two years. More than half of small businesses have closed by the
end of their fourth year, and 70 percent do not make it past their seventh year (Knaup & Piazza, 2011; Knaup & Piazza, 2007).

   Table 5:2 Survival Rate of New Companies. Note: Percentages based on a total of 212,182 businesses that started up in the second quarter of
   1998. Source: "Characteristics of Survival: Longevity of Business Establishments in the Business Employment Dynamics Data: Extension."

5.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4007
                                         www.bls.gov/osmr/pdf/st060040.pdf.  Rate of Survival
Number of Years after Start-up                                                     81.2%
                                                                                   65.8%
                 1                                                                 54.3%
                 2                                                                 44.4%
                 3                                                                 38.3%
                 4                                                                 34.4%
                 5                                                                 31.2%
                 6
                 7

As bad as these statistics on business survival are, some industries are worse than others. If you want to stay in business for a long
time, you might want to avoid some of these risky industries. Even though your friends think you make the best macaroni and
cheese pizza in the world, this doesn't mean you can succeed as a pizza parlor owner. Opening a restaurant or a bar is one of the
riskiest ventures (and, therefore, start-up funding is hard to get). You might also want to avoid the transportation industry. Owning a
taxi might appear lucrative until you find out what a taxi license costs. It obviously varies by city, but in New York City the price
tag is upward of $400,000. And setting up a shop to sell clothing can be challenging. Your view of "what's in" may be off, and one
bad season can kill your business. The same is true for stores selling communication devices: every mall has one or more cell
phone stores so the competition is steep, and business can be very slow (Farrell, 2011).

Businesses fail for any number of reasons, but many experts agree that the vast majority of failures result from some combination
of the following problems:

    Bad business idea. Like any idea, a business idea can be flawed, either in the conception or in the execution. If you tried selling
    snowblowers in Hawaii, you could count on little competition, but you'd still be doomed to failure.
    Cash problems. Too many new businesses are underfunded. The owner borrows enough money to set up the business but
    doesn't have enough extra cash to operate during the start-up phase, when very little money is coming in but a lot is going out.
    Managerial inexperience or incompetence. Many new business owners have no experience in running a business; many have
    limited management skills. Maybe an owner knows how to make or market a product but doesn't know how to manage people.
    Maybe an owner can't attract and keep talented employees. Maybe an owner has poor leadership skills and isn't willing to plan
    ahead.
    Lack of customer focus. A major advantage of a small business is the ability to provide special attention to customers. But some
    small businesses fail to seize this advantage. Perhaps the owner doesn't anticipate customers' needs or keep up with changing
    markets or the customer-focused practices of competitors.
    Inability to handle growth. You'd think that a sales increase would be a good thing. Often it is, of course, but sometimes it can
    be a major problem. When a company grows, the owner's role changes. He or she needs to delegate work to others and build a
    business structure that can handle the increase in volume. Some owners don't make the transition and find themselves
    overwhelmed. Things don't get done, customers become unhappy, and expansion actually damages the company.

Help from the SBA

If you had your choice, which cupcake would you pick--vanilla Oreo, tripple chocolate, or latte? In the last few years, cupcake
shops are popping up in almost every city. Perhaps the bad economy has put people in the mood for small, relatively inexpensive
treats. Whatever the reason, you're fascinated with the idea of starting a cupcake shop. You have a perfect location, have decided
what equipment you need, and have tested dozens of recipes (and eaten lots of cupcakes). You are set to go with one giant
exception: you don't have enough savings to cover your start-up costs. You have made the round of most local banks, but they are
all unwilling to give you a loan. So what do you do? Fortunately, there is help available. It is through your local Small Business
Administration (SBA), which offers an array of programs to help current and prospective small business owners. The SBA won't
actually loan you the money, but it will increase the liklihood that you will get funding from a local bank by guaranteeing the loan.

5.7.2                                                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4007
Here's how the SBA's loan guaranty program works: You apply to a bank for financing. A loan officer decides if the bank will loan
you the money without an SBA guarantee. If the answer is no (because of some weakness in your application), the bank then
decides if it will loan you the money if the SBA guarantees the loan. If the bank decides to do this, you get the money and make
payments on the loan. If you default on the loan, the government reimburses the bank for its loss, up to the amount of the SBA
guarantee.

In the process of talking with someone at the SBA, you will discover other programs it offers that will help you start your business
and manage your organization. For example, to apply for funding you will need a well-written business plan. Once you get the loan
and move to the business start-up phase, you will have lots of questions that need to be answered (including setting up a computer
system for your company). And you are sure you will need help in a number of areas as you operate your cupcake shop.
Fortunately, the SBA can help with all of these management and technical-service tasks.

This assistance is available through a number of channels, including the SBA's extensive Web site, online courses, and training
programs. A full array of individualized services is also available. The Small Business Development Center (SBDC) assists current
and prospective small business owners with business problems and provides free training and technical information on all aspects
of small business management. These services are available at approximately one thousand locations around the country, many
housed at colleges and universities (U.S. Small Business Administration, 2011).

If you need individualized advice from experienced executives, you can get it through the Service Corps of Retired Executives
(SCORE). Under the SCORE program, a businessperson needing advice is matched with someone on a team of retired executives
who work as volunteers. Together, the SBDC and SCORE help more than a million small businesspersons every year (U.S. Small
Business Administration, 2011; SBDC Economic Impact, 2011).

Key Takeaways

Business owners face numerous challenges, and the ability to meet them is a major factor in success (or failure). As a business
owner, you should do the following:

    Know your business. Successful businesspeople are knowledgeable about the industry in which they operate, and they know
    who their competitors are.
    Know the basics of business management. To manage a business, you need to understand the functional areas of business--
    accounting, finance, management, marketing, and production.
    Have the proper attitude. You should believe in what you're doing and make a strong personal commitment to it.
    Get adequate funding. Plan for the long term and work with lenders and investors to ensure that you'll have sufficient funds to
    get open, stay open during the start-up phase, and, ultimately, expand.
    Manage your money effectively. You need to pay attention to cash flow--money coming in and money going out--and you need
    to know how to gather the financial information that you require to run your business.
    Manage your time efficiently. You must develop time-management skills and learn how to delegate responsibility.
    Know how to manage people. You need to develop a positive working relationship with your employees, train them properly,
    and motivate them to provide quality goods or services.
    Satisfy your customers. Commit yourself to satisfying--or even exceeding--customer needs.Kno
    w how to compete. Find your niche in the marketplace, keep an eye on your competitors, and be prepared to react to changes in
    your business environment.

Businesses fail for any number of reasons, but many experts agree that the vast majority of failures result from some combination
of the following problems:

    Bad business idea. Like any idea, a business idea can be flawed, either in the conception or in the execution.
    Cash problems. Too many new businesses are underfunded.
    Managerial inexperience or incompetence. Many new business owners have no experience in running a business, and many
    have limited management skills.
    Lack of customer focus. Some owners fail to make the most of a small business's advantage in providing special attention to
    customers.

5.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4007
    Inability to handle growth. When a company grows, some owners fail to delegate work or to build an organizational structure
    that can handle increases in volume.
    Services available to current and prospective small business owners from the SBA include assistance in developing a business
    plan, starting a business, obtaining financing, and managing an organization.

The SBDC (Small Business Development Centers) matches businesspeople needing advice with teams of retired executives who
work as volunteers through the SCORE program.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
It's the same old story: you want to start a small business but don't have much money. Go to
http://entrepreneurs.about.com/cs/businessideas/a/10startupideas.htm and read the article titled "Business Ideas on a Budget."
Identify a few businesses that you can start for $20 or less (that's right--$20 or less). Select one of these business opportunities that
interests you. Why did you select this business? Why does the idea interest you? What would you do to ensure that the business
was a success? If you needed assistance starting up or operating your business, where could you find help, and what type of
assistance would be available?

Why do some businesses succeed while others fail? Identify three factors that you believe to be the most critical to business
success. Why did you select these factors? Identify three factors that you believe to be primarily responsible for business failures,
and indicate why you selected these factors.

This page titled 5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.7.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4007
5.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Would You Like to Own a Sub Shop?
How would you like to own your own sandwich shop? You could start one on your own or buy one that's already in business, but
an easier way might be buying a franchise from SUBWAY, the largest fast-food franchise in the world (even bigger than
McDonald's). SUBWAY began in 1965 when seventeen-year-old Fred DeLuca opened a tiny sandwich shop in Bridgeport,
Connecticut, hoping to put himself through college. As it turns out, his venture paid off in more ways than one. By 1974, DeLuca
was franchising his business concept, and today, there are more than fifteen thousand SUBWAY franchisees in some seventy-five
countries.

Go to www.subway.com to link to the SUBWAY Web site and learn more about franchise opportunities with the company. After
reviewing the information provided on the company's Web site, answer the following questions:

 1. What do you have to do to get a SUBWAY franchise?
 2. How much would it cost to open a SUBWAY shop?
 3. What training and support would you receive from SUBWAY?
 4. What advantages do you see in buying a SUBWAY franchise rather than starting a business from scratch? What disadvantages

    do you see?

Career Opportunities

Do You Want to Be an Entrepreneur?
Want to learn what it's like to be an entrepreneur? To help you decide whether life as an entrepreneur might be for you, go to
http://entrepreneurs.about.com/od/interviews/null.htm; then link to the "Interview with Entrepreneurs" section of the About.com
Web site and review the entrepreneur interviews. Select two entrepreneurs who interest you, and for each, do the following:

 1. Describe the company that he or she founded.
 2. Explain the reasons why he or she became an entrepreneur.
 3. Explain what qualities, background, or both, prepared the individual to start a business.

After reading the interviews with these two entrepreneurs, answer the following questions:

 1. What aspects of being an entrepreneur are particularly rewarding?
 2. What's the downside of being an entrepreneur?
 3. What challenges do entrepreneurs face?
 4. Is entrepreneurship for you? Why, or why not?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Term Papers for Sale
You and some fellow classmates are sitting around over pizza one night when someone comes up with an idea for a business. All of
you have old term papers and essays lying around, and a couple of you know how to set up a Web page. What if you combine these
two assets and start a business selling term papers over the Internet? Over time, you could collect or buy additional inventory from
other students, and since some of you are good at research and others are good writers, you could even offer "student clients" the
option of customized papers researched and written just for them. You figure that you can charge $15 for an "off-the-rack" paper,
and for customized jobs, $10 per double-spaced page seems reasonable.

You all agree that the idea is promising, and you and a partner volunteer to put together a business plan. You have no difficulty with
the section describing your proposed business: you know what your business will do, what products it will offer, who your
customers will be, how your products will be sold, and where you'll be located. So far, so good.

Let's pause at this point to consider the following questions:

 1. Does selling term papers over the Internet make business sense? Is it a good business idea?

5.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4008
 2. Could the venture be profitable?

Let's continue and find out how the business plan proceeds.

Now you're ready to write your section on industry analysis and the first question you need to answer is, who are the players in the
industry? To get some answers, you go online, log on to Google, and enter the search term "term papers for sale." Much to your
surprise, up pop dozens of links to companies that have beaten you to market. The first company you investigate claims to have a
quarter-million papers in stock, plus a team of graduate students on hand to write papers for anyone needing specialized work.

There's also a statement that says something like this: "Our term papers and essays are intended to help students write their own
papers. They should be used for research purposes only. Students using our term papers and essays should write their own papers
and cite our work."

You realize now that you're facing not only stiff competition but an issue that, so far, you and your partners have preferred to
ignore: Is the business that you have in mind even ethical? It occurs to you that you could probably find the answer to this question
in at least one of the 8,484 term papers on ethics available on your competitor's Web site, but you decide that it would be more
efficient to give the question some thought on your own.

At this point, then, let's pause again to identify a couple of questions that you need to ask yourself as you prepare a report of your
findings for your partners:

 1. Is the sole purpose of running a business to make a profit, or do you need to be concerned about what your products will be
    used for? Explain your reasoning.

 2. Do you need to consider the ethics of what other people do with your product? Explain your reasoning.

When you report on the problem that you've uncovered, your would-be partners are pretty discouraged, some by the prospect of
competition and some by the nagging ethical issue. Just as you're about to dissolve the partnership, one person speaks up: "How
about selling software that lets faculty search to see if students have plagiarized material on the Web?"

"Sorry," says someone else. "It's already out there. Two students at Berkeley have software that compares papers to a hundred
million Web pages."

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Knowing how to be an effective team member is a vital lifetime skill. It will help you in your academic career, in the business
world, and in nonwork activities as well. It takes time and effort to learn how to work in a team. Part of the challenge is learning
how to adjust your behavior to the needs of the group. Another part is learning how to motivate members of a group. A well-
functioning team allows members to combine knowledge and skills, and this reliance on diverse backgrounds and strengths often
results in team decisions that are superior to those made by individuals working alone.

Are You a Team Player?

As a first step, you should do a self-assessment to evaluate whether you possess characteristics that will help you be a successful
team member. You can do this by taking a "Team Player" quiz available at the Quintessential Careers Web site. Go to
www.quintcareers.com/team_player_quiz.html to link to this quiz. You'll get feedback that helps you identify the characteristics
you need to work on if you want to improve your teamwork skills.

Working Together as a Team

The best approach to specifying appropriate behavior for team members is for the team to come up with some ground rules. Get
together with three other students selected by your instructor, and establish working guidelines for your team. Prepare a team report
in which you identify the following:

 1. Five things that team members can do to increase the likelihood of group success
 2. Five things that team members can do to jeopardize group success

The Global View (AACSB)

5.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4008
Global Versions of MySpace

When Andrew Mason founded Groupon in November 2008, he had no idea that he was headed for an overnight success, but two
years after he set out on his entrepreneurial adventure (which, admittedly, isn't actually overnight), Groupon had more than fifty
million registered users and nine million customers who had purchased at least one "daily deal" (http://www.digital-dd.com/wp-
content/uploads/2011/06/groupon-ipo-s-1.pdf).

What's ahead for Groupon? Can its business model be exported to even more locations outside the United States? If you were in
charge of global expansion for Groupon, what country would you enter next? What country would you avoid? To identify
promising and not-so-promising foreign markets, go to the Groupon Wikipedia article (http://en.Wikipedia.org/wiki/Groupon) and
click on "Geographic Markets" to obtain a list of counties in which Groupon operates. Also go to
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/country_profiles/default.stm to link to the Country Profiles Web site maintained by BBC News. Study
the economic and political profiles of possible overseas locations, and answer the following questions:

 1. Why do you think Groupon has been so successful in the United States? Cite some of the challenges that it still faces in this
    country.

 2. If you were in charge of global expansion at Groupon, which country would you enter next? Why do you think the Groupon
    business concept will succeed in this country? What challenges will the company face there?

 3. What country would you avoid? Why is it incompatible with the Groupon business concept?

This page titled 5.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

5.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4008
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

6: Managing for Business     Success

  6.1: What Do Managers Do?
  6.2: Planning
  6.3: Organizing
  6.4: Directing
  6.5: Controlling
  6.6: Managerial Skills
  6.7: Cases and Problems

This page titled 6: Managing for Business Success is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                      1
6.1: What Do Managers Do?

  Learning Objective
       Identify the four interrelated functions of management: planning, organizing, directing, and controlling.

You'll accomplish this task through management: the process of planning, organizing, directing, and controlling resources to
achieve specific goals. A plan enables you to take your business concept beyond the idea stage. It does not, however, get the work
done. You have to organize things if you want your plan to become a reality. You have to put people and other resources in place to
make things happen. And because your note-taking venture is supposed to be better off with you in charge, you need to be a leader
who can motivate your people to do well. Finally, to know whether things are in fact going well, you'll have to control your
operations--that is, measure the results and compare them with the results that you laid out in your plan. Figure 6.1 gives you a
good idea of the interrelationship between planning and the other functions that managers perform.

                                                                     Figure 6.1 The Role of Planning

Functions of Management

If you visit any small or large company, not-for-profit organization, or government agency, you'll find managers doing the same
things you'd be doing to run your note-taking business--planning, organizing, directing, and controlling. In the rest of the chapter,
we'll look at these four interrelated functions in detail.

Key Takeaways

Managers plan, organize, direct, and control resources to achieve specific goals.
 1. In planning, they set goals and determine the best way to achieve them.
 2. Organizing means allocating resources (people, equipment, and money) to carry out the company's plans.
 3. Directing is the process of providing focus for employees and motivating them to achieve organizational goals.
 4. Controlling involves comparing actual to expected performance and taking corrective action when necessary.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Consider the things that the principal of your old high school had to do to ensure that the school met the needs of its students.
Identify these activities and group them by the four functions of management: planning, organizing, directing, and controlling.

This page titled 6.1: What Do Managers Do? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4009
6.2: Planning

  Learning Objective

    1. Understand the process by which a company develops and implements a strategic plan.

Without a plan, it's hard to succeed at anything. The reason is simple: if you don't know where you're going, you can't really move
forward. Successful managers decide where they want to be and then figure out how to get there. In planning, managers set goals
and determine the best way to achieve them. As a result of the planning process, everyone in the organization knows what should
be done, who should do it, and how it should be done.

Developing a Strategic Plan

Coming up with an idea--say, starting a note-taking business--is a good start, but it's only a start. Planning for it is a step forward.
Planning begins at the highest level and works its way down through the organization. Step one is usually called strategic planning,
which is the process of establishing an overall course of action. To begin this process, you should ask yourself a couple of very
basic questions: Why, for example, does the organization exist? What value does it create? Sam Walton posed these questions in the
process of founding Wal-Mart: his new chain of stores would exist to offer customers the lowest prices with the best possible
service (Scott, 2006).

After you've identified the purpose of your company, you're ready to take the remaining steps in the strategic-planning process:

    Write a mission statement that tells customers, employees, and others why your organization exists.
    Identify core values or beliefs that will guide the behavior of members of the organization.
    Assess the company's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
    Establish goals and objectives, or performance targets, to direct all the activities that you'll perform to achieve your mission.
    Develop and implement tactical and operational plans to achieve goals and objectives.

In the next few sections, we'll examine these components of the strategic-planning process.

Mission Statement

As we saw in an earlier chapter, the mission statement describes the purpose of your organization--the reason for its existence. It
tells the reader what the organization is committed to doing. It can be very concise, like the one from Mary Kay Inc. (the cosmetics
company): "To enrich the lives of women around the world." (Mary Kay Inc., 2011) Or it can be as detailed as the one from
Harley-Davidson: "We fulfill dreams inspired by the many roads of the world by providing extraordinary motorcycles and
customer experiences. We fuel the passion for freedom in our customers to express their own individuality." (Harley-Davidson,
2011)

        Figure 6.2: Harley-Davidson has a very focused mission statement--it's all about the motorcycles. (Neon Beer Signs For Sale -
        Harley Davidson Bar and Shield Neon Sign Light - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)

What about Notes-4-You? What should your mission statement say? A simple, concise mission statement for your enterprise could
be the following: "To provide high-quality class notes to college students." On the other hand, you could prepare a more detailed

6.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4010
statement that explains what the company is committed to doing, who its customers are, what its focus is, what goods or services it
provides, and how it serves its customers. In that case, your mission statement might be the following:

       Notes-4-You is committed to earning the loyalty of college students through its focus on customer service. It provides high-
       quality, dependable, competitively priced class notes that help college students master complex academic subjects.

This page titled 6.2: Planning is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4010
6.3: Organizing

  Learning Objective

       Discuss various options for organizing a business, and create an organization chart.

Now that you've developed a strategic plan for Notes-4-You, you need to organize your company so that it can implement your
plan. A manager engaged in organizing allocates resources (people, equipment, and money) to achieve a company's plans.
Successful managers make sure that all the activities identified in the planning process are assigned to some person, department, or
team and that everyone has the resources needed to perform assigned activities.

Levels of Management: How Managers Are Organized

A typical organization has several layers of management. Think of these layers as forming a pyramid like the one in Figure 6.3,
with top managers occupying the narrow space at the peak, first-line managers the broad base, and middle-managers the levels in
between. As you move up the pyramid, management positions get more demanding, but they carry more authority and
responsibility (along with more power, prestige, and pay). Top managers spend most of their time in planning and decision making,
while first-line managers focus on day-to-day operations. For obvious reasons, there are far more people with positions at the base
of the pyramid than there are with jobs at the other two levels (as you get to the top, there are only a few positions). Let's look at
each management level in more detail.

                                                                    Figure 6.3 Levels of Management

Top Managers

Top managers are responsible for the health and performance of the organization. They set the objectives, or performance targets,
designed to direct all the activities that must be performed if the company is going to fulfill its mission. Top-level executives
routinely scan the external environment for opportunities and threats, and they redirect company efforts when needed. They spend a
considerable portion of their time planning and making major decisions. They represent the company in important dealings with
other businesses and government agencies, and they promote it to the public. Job titles at this level typically include chief executive
officer (CEO), chief financial officer (CFO), chief operating officer (COO), president, and vice president.

6.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4011
Middle Managers

As the name implies, middle managers are in the "middle" of the management hierarchy: They report to top management and
oversee the activities of first-line managers. They're responsible for developing and implementing activities and allocating the
resources needed to achieve the objectives set by top management. Common job titles include operations manager, division
manager, plant manager, and branch manager.

First-Line Managers

First-line managers supervise employees and coordinate their activities to make sure that the work performed throughout the
company is consistent with the plans of both top and middle management. They're less involved in planning than higher-level
managers and more involved in day-to-day operations. It's at this level that most people acquire their first managerial experience.
The job titles vary considerably but include such designations as department head, group leader, office manager, foreman, and
supervisor.

Let's take a quick survey of the management hierarchy at Notes-4-You. As president, you are, of course, a member of top
management, and you're responsible for the overall performance of your company. You spend much of your time setting objectives,
or performance targets, to ensure that the company meets the goals you've set for it--increased sales, higher-quality notes, and
timely distribution.

Several middle managers report to you, including your operations manager. As a middle manager, this individual focuses on
implementing two of your objectives: producing high-quality notes and distributing them to customers in a timely manner. To
accomplish this task, the operations manager oversees the work of two first-line managers--the note-taking supervisor and the
copying supervisor. Each first-line manager supervises several non-managerial employees to make sure that their work is consistent
with the plans devised by top and middle management.

This page titled 6.3: Organizing is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4011
6.4: Directing

  Learning Objective

    1. Explain how managers direct others and motivate them to achieve company goals.

The third management function is directing--providing focus and direction to others and motivating them to achieve organizational
goals. As owner and president of Notes-4-You, you might think of yourself as an orchestra leader. You have given your musicians
(employees) their sheet music (plans). You've placed them in sections (departments) and arranged the sections (organizational
structure) so the music will sound as good as possible. Now your job is to tap your baton and lead the orchestra so that its members
make beautiful music together (Reh, 2011).

Leadership Styles

Actually, it's fairly easy to pick up a baton, cue each section, and strike up the band. But it doesn't follow that the music will sound
good. What if your cues are ignored or misinterpreted or ambiguous? Maybe your musicians don't like your approach to making
music and will just walk away. On top of everything else, you don't simply want to make music: you want to inspire your
musicians to make great music. How do you accomplish this goal? How do you become an effective leader? What style, or
approach, should you use to motivate others to achieve organizational goals?

Unfortunately, there are no definitive answers to questions like these. Over time, every manager refines his or her own leadership
style, or way of interacting with and influencing others. Despite a vast range of personal differences, leadership styles tend to
reflect one of the following approaches to directing and motivating people: the autocratic, the democratic, or the laissez-faire. Let's
see how managerial styles reflect each of them in a work situation.

    Autocratic style. Managers who have developed an autocratic leadership style tend to make decisions without soliciting input
    from subordinates. They exercise authority and expect subordinates to take responsibility for performing the required tasks
    without undue explanation.
    Democratic style. Managers who favor a democratic leadership style generally seek input from subordinates while retaining the
    authority to make the final decisions. They're also more likely to keep subordinates informed about things that affect their work.
    Laissez-faire style. In practicing a laissez-faire leadership style, managers adopt a "hands-off" approach and provide relatively
    little direction to subordinates. They may advise employees but usually give them considerable freedom to solve problems and
    make decisions on their own.

At first glance, you'd probably not want to work for an autocratic leader. After all, you certainly don't want to be told what to do
without having any input. You probably like the idea of working for a democratic leader; it's flattering to be asked for your input.
Though working in a laissez-faire environment might seem a little unsettling at first, the opportunity to make your own decisions is
appealing.

In general, your assessments of the three leadership styles would be accurate. Employees generally dislike working for autocratic
leaders; they like working for democratic leaders, and they find working for laissez-faire leaders rewarding (as long as they feel
they can handle the job). But there are situations when these generalities don't hold.

To learn what these situations are, let's turn things around and pretend you're the leader. To make it applicable to your current life,
we'll say that you're leading a group of fellow students in a team project for your class. Are there times when it would be best for
you to use an autocratic leadership style? What if your team was newly formed, unfamiliar with what needs to be done, under a
tight deadline, and looking to you for direction? In this situation, you might find it appropriate to follow an autocratic leadership
style (on a temporary basis) and assign tasks to each member of the group.

Now let's look at the leadership style you probably prefer--the democratic leadership style. Can you think of a situation where this
style would not work for your team? What if the members of your team are unmotivated, don't seem interested in providing input,
and aren't getting along? It might make sense to move away from a democratic style of leadership (temporarily) and delegate
specific tasks to each member of the group that they can do on their own.

6.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4012
How about laissez-faire leadership? Will this always work with your group? Not always. It will work if your team members are
willing and able to work independently and welcome the chance to make decisions. Otherwise, it could cause the team to miss
deadlines or do poorly on the project.

The point being made here is that no one leadership style is effective all the time for all people. While the democratic style is
viewed as the most appropriate (as is the laissez-faire style, to a lesser extent), there are times when following an autocratic style is
better. Good leaders learn how to adjust their styles to fit both the situation and the individuals being directed.

Transformational Leadership

Theories on what constitutes effective leadership evolve over time. One theory that has received a lot of attention in the last decade
contrasts two leadership styles: transactional and transformational. So-called transactional leaders exercise authority based on their
rank in the organization. They let subordinates know what's expected of them and what they will receive if they meet stated
objectives. They focus their attention on identifying mistakes and disciplining employees for poor performance. By contrast,
transformational leaders mentor and develop subordinates, providing them with challenging opportunities, working one-on-one to
help them meet their professional and personal needs, and encouraging people to approach problems from new perspectives. They
stimulate employees to look beyond personal interests to those of the group.

        Figure 6.9: Transformational leaders work one-on-one with subordinates to encourage and motivate them. (Maryland GovPics -
        Governor is Interviewed by Gus Prager - CC BY 2.0.)

So, which leadership style is more effective? You probably won't be surprised by the opinion of most experts. In today's
organizations, in which team building and information sharing are important and projects are often collaborative in nature,
transformational leadership has proven to be more effective. Modern organizations look for managers who can develop positive
relationships with subordinates and motivate employees to focus on the interests of the organization (Collins, 1997).

Key Takeaways

A manager's leadership style varies depending on the manager, the situation, and the people being directed. There are three
common styles.

    Using an autocratic style, a manager tends to make decisions without soliciting input and expects subordinates to follow
    instructions without undue explanation.
    Managers who prefer a democratic style seek input into decisions.
    Exercising a laissez-faire style, the manager provides no more guidance than necessary and lets subordinates make decisions
    and solve problems.
    One current leadership theory focuses on two contrasting leadership styles: transactional and transformational.
    Managers adopting a transactional style exercise authority according to their rank in the organization, let subordinates know
    what's expected of them, and step in when mistakes are made.
    Practicing a transformational style, managers mentor and develop subordinates and motivate them to achieve organizational
    rather than merely personal goals. Transformational leadership is effective in organizations that value team building and
    information sharing.

6.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4012
Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Compare and contrast three forms of leadership--democratic, autocratic, and laissez-faire. Which style would you prefer to use
yourself? Which would you prefer your boss to use? Explain your answers in both cases. Next, compare and contrast the
transactional-leadership style with the transformational-leadership style? Which style would you adopt as a manager, and why?

This page titled 6.4: Directing is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source
content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4012
6.5: Controlling

  Learning Objective

       Describe the process by which a manager monitors operations and assesses performance.

Let's pause for a minute and reflect on the management functions that we've discussed so far--planning, organizing, and directing.
As founder of Notes-4-You, you began by establishing plans for your new company. You defined its mission and set objectives, or
performance targets, which you needed to meet in order to achieve your mission. Then, you organized your company by allocating
the people and resources required to carry out your plans. Finally, you provided focus and direction to your employees and
motivated them to achieve organizational objectives. Is your job finished? Can you take a well-earned vacation? Unfortunately, the
answer is no: your work has just begun. Now that things are rolling along, you need to monitor your operations to see whether
everything is going according to plan. If it's not, you'll need to take corrective action. This process of comparing actual to planned
performance and taking necessary corrective action is called controlling.

A Five-Step Control Process

You can think of the control function as the five-step process outlined in Figure 6.10 .

                                                                 Figure 6.10 Five-Step Control Process

Let's see how this process might work at Notes-4-You. Let's assume that, after evaluating class enrollments, you estimate that you
can sell one hundred notes packages per month to students taking the sophomore-level geology course popularly known as "Rocks
for Jocks." So you set your standard at a hundred units. At the end of the month, however, you look over your records and find that
you sold only eighty. Comparing your actual performance with your planned performance, you realize that you came up twenty
packages short. In talking with your salespeople, you learn why: it turns out that the copy machine broke down so often that
packages frequently weren't ready on time. You immediately take corrective action by increasing maintenance on the copy
machine.

Now, let's try a slightly different scenario. Let's say that you still have the same standard (one hundred packages) and that actual
sales are still eighty packages. In investigating the reason for the shortfall, you find that you overestimated the number of students
taking "Rocks for Jocks." Calculating a more accurate number of students, you see that your original standard--estimated sales--
was too high by twenty packages. In this case, you should adjust your standards to reflect expected sales of eighty packages.

6.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4013
In both situations, your control process has been helpful. In the first instance, you were alerted to a problem that cut into your sales.
Correcting this problem would undoubtedly increase sales and, therefore, profits. In the second case, you encountered a defect in
your planning and learned a good managerial lesson: plan more carefully.

Key Takeaways

The process of comparing actual to planned performance and taking corrective action is called controlling. The control function
can be viewed as a five-step process: (1) establish standards, (2) measure performance, (3) compare actual performance with
standards and identify any deviations, (4) determine the reason for deviations, and (5) take corrective action if needed.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Have you ever gone to an ice cream stand and noticed that the "double dipper" ice cream cone the customer beside you bought has
a lot more ice cream than does your "double dipper?" If you were the supervisor of the ice cream stand, how would you ensure that
all cones received the same amount of ice cream? What if, instead of being the supervisor of the ice cream stand, you are the
manager of a professional baseball team? How would you apply the five-step control process to your job as manager?

This page titled 6.5: Controlling is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4013
6.6: Managerial Skills

  Learning Objective

    1. Describe the skills needed to be a successful manager.

To be a successful manager, you'll have to master a number of skills. To get an entry-level position, you'll have to be technically
competent at the tasks you're asked to perform. To advance, you'll need to develop strong interpersonal and conceptual skills. The
relative importance of different skills varies from job to job and organization to organization, but to some extent, you'll need them
all to forge a managerial career. Throughout your career, you'll also be expected to communicate ideas clearly, use your time
efficiently, and reach sound decisions.

Technical Skills

You'll probably be hired for your first job based on your technical skills--the ones you need to perform specific tasks--and you'll
use them extensively during your early career. If your college major is accounting, you'll use what you've learned to prepare
financial statements. If you have a marketing degree and you join an ad agency, you'll use what you know about promotion to
prepare ad campaigns. Technical skills will come in handy when you move up to a first-line managerial job and oversee the task
performance of subordinates. Technical skills, though developed through job training and work experience, are generally acquired
during the course of your formal education.

Interpersonal Skills

As you move up the corporate ladder, you'll find that you can't do everything yourself: you'll have to rely on other people to help
you achieve the goals for which you're responsible. That's why interpersonal skills--the ability to get along with and motivate
other people--are critical for managers in mid-level positions. These managers play a pivotal role because they report to top-level
managers while overseeing the activities of first-line managers. Thus, they need strong working relationships with individuals at all
levels and in all areas. More than most other managers, they must use "people skills" to foster teamwork, build trust, manage
conflict, and encourage improvement (Perkins, 2000).

Conceptual Skills

Managers at the top, who are responsible for deciding what's good for the organization from the broadest perspective, rely on
conceptual skills--the ability to reason abstractly and analyze complex situations. Senior executives are often called on to "think
outside the box"--to arrive at creative solutions to complex, sometimes ambiguous problems. They need both strong analytical
abilities and strong creative talents.

Communication Skills

Effective communication skills are crucial to just about everyone. At all levels of an organization, you'll often be judged on your
ability to communicate, both orally and in writing. Whether you're talking informally or making a formal presentation, you must
express yourself clearly and concisely. Talking too loudly, rambling, and using poor grammar reduce your ability to influence
others, as does poor written communication. Confusing and error-riddled documents (including e-mails) don't do your message any
good, and they will reflect poorly on you (Davis, et. al., 1992).

6.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4014
        Figure 6.11: Developing good time management skills is essential to being a successful manager. (Matt Biddulph - Papercamp
        schedule - CC BY-SA 2.0.)

Time-Management Skills

Managers face multiple demands on their time, and their days are usually filled with interruptions. Ironically, some technologies
that were supposed to save time, such as voicemail and e-mail, have actually increased workloads. Unless you develop certain
time-management skills, you risk reaching the end of the day feeling that you've worked a lot but accomplished little. What can
managers do to ease the burden? Here are a few common-sense suggestions:

    Prioritize tasks, focusing on the most important things first.
    Set aside a certain time each day to return phone calls and answer e-mail.
    Delegate routine tasks.
    Don't procrastinate.
    Insist that meetings start and end on time, and stick to an agenda.
    Eliminate unnecessary paperwork (Davis, et. al., 1992).

Decision-Making Skills

Every manager is expected to make decisions, whether alone or as part of a team. Drawing on your decision-making skills is often
a process in which you must define a problem, analyze possible solutions, and select the best outcome. As luck would have it,
because the same process is good for making personal decisions, we'll use a personal example to demonstrate the process approach
to decision making. Consider the following scenario: You're upset because your midterm grades are much lower than you'd hoped.
To make matters worse, not only are you in trouble academically, but also the other members of your business-project team are
annoyed because you're not pulling your weight. Your lacrosse coach is very upset because you've missed too many practices, and
members of the mountain-biking club of which you're supposed to be president are talking about impeaching you if you don't
show up at the next meeting. And your girlfriend says you're ignoring her. (You can substitute "boyfriend" here, of course; we're
just trying to keep our exposition as simple as possible.)

A Six-Step Approach to Problem Solving

Assuming that your top priority is salvaging your GPA, let's tackle your problem by using a six-step approach to solving problems
that don't have simple solutions. We've summarized this model in Figure 6.12 (Caudron, 1998).

6.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4014
                                                                  Figure 6.12 How to Solve a Problem

The six steps to solve a problem in Figure 6.12:

 1. Identify the problem you want to work on. Step one is getting to know your problem, which you can formulate by asking
    yourself a basic question: How can I improve my grades?

 2. Gather relevant data. Step two is gathering information that will shed light on the problem. Let's rehash some of the relevant
    information that you've already identified: (a) you did poorly on your finals because you didn't spend enough time studying; (b)
    you didn't study because you went to see your girlfriend (who lives about three hours from campus) over the weekend before
    your exams (and on most other weekends, as a matter of fact); (c) what little studying you got in came at the expense of your
    team project and lacrosse practice; and (d) while you were away for the weekend, you forgot to tell members of the mountain-
    biking club that you had to cancel the planned meeting.

 3. Clarify the problem. Once you review all the given facts, you should see that your problem is bigger than simply getting your
    grades up; your life is pretty much out of control. You can't handle everything to which you've committed yourself. Something
    has to give. You clarify the problem by summing it up with another basic question: What can I do to get my life back in order?

 4. Generate possible solutions. If you thought defining the problem was tough, wait until you've moved on to this stage. Let's say
    that you've come up with the following possible solutions to your problem: (a) quit the lacrosse team, (b) step down as
    president of the mountain-biking club, (c) let team members do your share of work on the business project, and (d) stop visiting
    your girlfriend so frequently. The solution to your main problem--how to get your life back in order--will probably require
    multiple actions.

 5. Select the best option. This is clearly the toughest part of the process. Working your way through your various options, you
    arrive at the following conclusions: (a) you can't quit the lacrosse team because you'd lose your scholarship; (b) you can resign
    your post in the mountain-biking club, but that won't free up much time; (c) you can't let your business-project team down (and
    besides, you'd just get a low grade); and (d) she wouldn't like the idea, but you could visit your girlfriend, say, once a month
    rather than once a week. So what's the most feasible (if not necessarily perfect) solution? Probably visiting your girlfriend once
    a month and giving up the presidency of the mountain-biking club.

6.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4014
6. Implement your decision and monitor your choice. When you call your girlfriend, you're pleasantly surprised to find that she
   understands. The vice president is happy to take over the mountain-biking club. After the first week, you're able to attend
   lacrosse practice, get caught up on your team business project, and catch up in all your other classes. The real test of your
   solution will be the results of the semester's finals.

Applying Your Skills at Notes-4-You

So, what types of skills will managers at Notes-4-You need? To oversee note-taking and copying operations, first-line managers
will require technical skills, probably in operations and perhaps in accounting. Middle managers will need strong interpersonal
skills to maintain positive working relationships with subordinates and to motivate them. As president, because you have to solve
problems and come up with creative ways to keep the business growing, you'll need conceptual skills. And everyone will have to
communicate effectively: after all, because you're in the business of selling written notes, it would look pretty bad if your
employees wrote poorly. Finally, everyone will have to use time efficiently and call on problem-solving skills to handle the day-to-
day crises that seem to plague every new company.

Key Takeaways

The skills needed by managers vary according to level.

    Top managers need strong conceptual skills, while those at midlevels need good interpersonal skills and those at lower levels
    need technical skills.
    All managers need strong communication, decision-making, and time-management skills.

Exercises

 1. Look for courses (or course components) designed to strengthen communication skills, such as writing (or composition) or
    speech classes.

 2. Find out whether your college has a writing program.
 3. Check into nonacademic programs designed to strengthen communication skills, such as courses on interview techniques

    offered by the career services office.
 4. Find out how you can do some writing for the school newspaper or, if you're a little more outgoing, how you can appear in

    theatrical productions.

(AACSB) Reflective Skills

Do you ever reach the end of the day and wonder what you've accomplished? To succeed in management, you need to learn how to
manage your time. The Internet is an interesting place to start. For many college students, surfing the Net takes up a lot of time that
could be put to better use. How much time do you spend online, instant-messaging, shopping, playing games, blogging, or
indulging in some other enjoyable but time-consuming activity? One approach to solving the problem of wasted online time is to
apply the six-step, problem-solving procedure that we outlined in the chapter. Write a brief report detailing each of the steps that
you take to solve the problem and implement a solution.

References

Caudron, S., "Six Steps in Creative Problem Solving," Controller Magazine, April 1998, 38. Caudron describes a systematic
approach developed by Roger L. Firestien, president of Innovation Systems Group, Williamsville, NY

Davis, B. L., et al., Successful Manager's Handbook: Development Suggestions for Today's Managers (Minneapolis: Personnel
Decisions Inc., 1992), 189.

Perkins, B., "Defining Crisis Management," Wharton Alumni                                Magazine,  Summer  2000,
http://whartonmagazine.com/issues/summer-2000/reunion-2000/ (accessed October 8, 2011).

This page titled 6.6: Managerial Skills is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.6.4                                                                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4014
6.7: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Mission "Improvisable"
A mission statement tells customers, employees, and stakeholders why the organization exists--its purpose. It can be concise, like
the one from Mary Kay Cosmetics--"To enrich the lives of women around the world"--or it can be more detailed, such as the
following from FedEx:

       FedEx Corporation will produce superior financial returns for its shareowners by providing high value-added logistics,
       transportation and related business services through focused operating companies. Customer requirements will be met in the
       highest quality manner appropriate to each market segment served. FedEx will strive to develop mutually rewarding
       relationships with its employees, partners and suppliers. Safety will be the first consideration in all operations. Corporate
       activities will be conducted to the highest ethical and professional standards.

Mission statements are typically constructed to communicate several pieces of information: what the company strives to
accomplish, what it's known for, and how it serves its customers. Here are a few examples:

The Hershey Company: Bringing sweet moments of Hershey happiness to the world every day.

 1. Microsoft: Our Mission At Microsoft, we work to help people and businesses throughout the world realize their full potential.
    This is our mission. Everything we do reflects this mission and the values that make it possible.

 2. Google: Google's mission is to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful.

Assignment

Create hypothetical mission statements for each of these four companies: Outback Steakhouse, Tesoro, Got Junk?, and Staples. To
find descriptions of all four, go to the Web site for each of the companies: www.outbacksteakhouse.com,
http://www.tesorocorp.com, http://www.1800gotjunk.com/us_en, www.staples.com.

In composing your four mission statements, follow the format suggested previously: each statement should be about two or three
sentences long and should provide several pieces of information--what the company strives to accomplish, what it's known for,
and how it serves its customers (and perhaps its employees and shareholders, too).

One last thing: your statements should be originals, not duplicates of the companies' official statements.

This page titled 6.7: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

6.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4015
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

7: Recruiting, Motivating, and            Keeping  Quality  Employees

  7.1: Human Resource Management
  7.2: Developing Employees
  7.3: Motivating Employees
  7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
  7.5: Performance Appraisal
  7.6: Labor Unions
  7.7: Cases and Problems

This page titled 7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality Employees is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored,
remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                   1
7.1: Human Resource Management

  Learning Objective

       Define human resource management and explain how managers develop and implement a human resource plan.

Employees at Starbucks are vital to the company's success. They are its public face, and every dollar of sales passes through their
hands (Schultz & Yang, 1997). According to Howard Schultz, they can make or break the company. If a customer has a positive
interaction with an employee, the customer will come back. If an encounter is negative, the customer is probably gone for good.
That's why it's crucial for Starbucks to recruit and hire the right people, train them properly, motivate them to do their best, and
encourage them to stay with the company. Thus, the company works to provide satisfying jobs, a positive work environment,
appropriate work schedules, and fair compensation and benefits. These activities are part of Starbucks's strategy to deploy human
resources in order to gain competitive advantage. The process is called human resource management (HRM), which consists of all
actions that an organization takes to attract, develop, and retain quality employees. Each of these activities is complex. Attracting
talented employees involves the recruitment of qualified candidates and the selection of those who best fit the organization's needs.
Development encompasses both new-employee orientation and the training and development of current workers. Retaining good
employees means motivating them to excel, appraising their performance, compensating them appropriately, and doing what's
possible to retain them.

Human Resource Planning

How does Starbucks make sure that its worldwide retail locations are staffed with just the right number of committed employees?
How does Walt Disney World ensure that it has enough qualified "cast members" to provide visitors with a "magical" experience?
How does Norwegian Cruise Lines make certain that when the Norwegian Dawn pulls out of New York harbor, it has a complete,
fully trained crew on board to feed, entertain, and care for its passengers? Managing these tasks is a matter of strategic human
resource planning--the process of developing a plan for satisfying an organization's human resources (HR) needs.

A strategic HR plan lays out the steps that an organization will take to ensure that it has the right number of employees with the
right skills in the right places at the right times. HR managers begin by analyzing the company's mission, objectives, and strategies.
Starbucks's objectives, for example, include the desire to "develop enthusiastically satisfied customers" (Starbucks, 2011) as well
as to foster an environment in which employees treat both customers and each other with respect. Thus, the firm's HR managers
look for people who are "adaptable, self-motivated, passionate, creative team members" (CNNMoney, 2011). Likewise, Disney's
overall objectives include not only making all visitors feel as if they're special in a special place but also ensuring that employees'
appearance reflects a special image (there's even a forty-seven-page book on the subject) (Vault, 2006). Disney looks for people
who best fulfill these job requirements. The main goal of Norwegian Cruise Lines--to lavish passengers with personal attention--
determines not only the type of employee desired (one with exceptionally good customer-relation skills and a strong work ethic)
but also the number needed (one for every two passengers on the Norwegian Dawn) (Career Prospects in Virginia, 2006).

Job Analysis

To develop an HR plan, HR managers must obviously be knowledgeable about the jobs that the organization needs performed.
They organize information about a given job by performing a job analysis to identify the tasks, responsibilities, and skills that it
entails, as well as the knowledge and abilities needed to perform it. Managers also use the information collected for the job analysis
to prepare two documents:

    A job description, which lists the duties and responsibilities of a position
    A job specification, which lists the qualifications--skills, knowledge, and abilities--needed to perform the job

HR Supply and Demand Forecasting

Once they've analyzed the jobs within the organization, HR managers must forecast future hiring (or firing) needs. This is the
three-step process summarized in Figure 7.1 .

Starbucks, for instance, might find that it needs three hundred new employees to work at stores scheduled to open in the next few
months. Disney might determine that it needs two thousand new cast members to handle an anticipated surge in visitors. The

7.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4016
Norwegian Dawn might be short two dozen restaurant workers because of an unexpected increase in reservations.

                                                        Figure 7.1 How to Forecast Hiring (and Firing) Needs
After calculating the disparity between supply and future demand, HR managers must draw up plans for bringing the two numbers
into balance. If the demand for labor is going to outstrip the supply, they may hire more workers, encourage current workers to put
in extra hours, subcontract work to other suppliers, or introduce labor-saving initiatives. If the supply is greater than the demand,
they may deal with overstaffing by not replacing workers who leave, encouraging early retirements, laying off workers, or (as a last
resort) firing workers.
This page titled 7.1: Human Resource Management is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4016
7.2: Developing Employees

  Learning Objective

       Explain how companies train and develop employees, and discuss the importance of a diverse workforce.

Because companies can't survive unless employees do their jobs well, it makes economic sense to train them and develop their
skills. This type of support begins when an individual enters the organization and continues as long as he or she stays there.

New-Employee Orientation

Have you ever started your first day at a new job feeling upbeat and optimistic only to walk out at the end of the day thinking that
maybe you've taken the wrong job? If this happens too often, your employer may need to revise its approach to orientation--the
way it introduces new employees to the organization and their jobs. Starting a new job is a little like beginning college; at the
outset, you may be experiencing any of the following feelings:

    Somewhat nervous but enthusiastic
    Eager to impress but not wanting to attract too much attention
    Interested in learning but fearful of being overwhelmed with information
    Hoping to fit in and worried about looking new or inexperienced (HRM Guide Network, 2011)

The employer who understands how common such feelings are is more likely not only to help newcomers get over them but also to
avoid the pitfalls often associated with new-employee orientation:

    Failing to have a workspace set up for you
    Ignoring you or failing to supervise you
    Neglecting to introduce you to coworkers (or introducing you to so many people that you have no chance of remembering
    anybody's name)
    Assigning you no work or giving you busywork unrelated to your actual job
    Swamping you with facts about the company (Heathfield, 2011)

A good employer will take things slowly, providing you with information about the company and your job on a need-to-know basis
while making you feel as comfortable as possible. You'll get to know the company's history, traditions, policies, and culture over
time. You'll learn more about salary and benefits and how your performance will be evaluated. Most importantly, you'll find out
how your job fits into overall operations and what's expected of you.

Training and Development

It would be nice if employees came preprogrammed with all the skills they need to do their jobs. It would also be nice if job
requirements stayed the same: once you've learned how to do a job (or been preprogrammed), you'd know how to do it forever. In
reality, new employees must be trained; moreover, as they grow in their jobs or as their jobs change, they'll need additional
training. Unfortunately, training is costly and time-consuming.

How costly? On average, for every $1 in payroll, large companies spend close to $0.03 in employee training and development
(Training Magazine, 2010). The consulting firm Booz Allen Hamilton invests almost $0.08 in employee training and development.
At Pfizer, the world's largest pharmaceutical company, the total is $0.14 out of every payroll dollar (Training Magazine, 2004).
What's the payoff? Why are such companies willing to spend so much money on their employees? Pfizer, whose motto is "Succeed
through People," regards employee growth and development as its top priority. At Booz Allen Hamilton, consultants specialize in
finding innovative solutions to client problems, and their employer makes sure that they're up-to-date on all the new technologies
by maintaining a "technology petting zoo" at its training headquarters. It's called a "petting zoo" because employees get to see,
touch, and interact with new and emerging technologies. For example, those attending the "petting zoo" several years ago got to try
out the Segway Human Transporter even before it hit the market (Galvin, 2003).

At Booz Allen Hamilton's technology "petting zoo," employees are receiving off-the-job training. This approach allows them to
focus on learning without the distractions that would occur in the office. More common, however, is informal on-the-job training,

7.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4017
which may be supplemented with formal training programs. This is the method, for example, by which you'd move up from mere
coffee maker to a full-fledged "barista" if you worked at Starbucks (Locascio, 2004). You'd begin by reading a large spiral book
(titled Starbucks University) on the responsibilities of the barista. After you've passed a series of tests on the reading material,
you'll move behind the coffee bar, where a manager or assistant manager will give you hands-on experience in making drinks.
According to the rules, you can't advance to a new drink until you've mastered the one you're working on; the process, therefore,
may take a few days (or even weeks). Next, you have to learn enough about different types of coffee to be able to describe them to
customers. (Because this course involves drinking a lot of coffee, you don't have to worry about staying awake.) Eventually, you'll
be declared a coffee connoisseur, but there's still one more set of skills to master: you must complete a customer-service course,
which trains you in making eye contact with customers, anticipating their needs, and making them feel welcome (Schultz & Yang,
1997).

Diversity in the Workplace

The makeup of the U.S. workforce has changed dramatically over the past 50 years. In the 1950s, more than 60 percent was
composed of white males (Lindenberger & Stoltz-Loike, 2011). Today's workforce, however, reflects the broad range of
differences in the population--differences in gender, race, ethnicity, age, physical ability, religion, education, and lifestyle. As you
can see in Table 7.1 "Employment by Gender and Ethnic Group", more women and minorities have entered the workforce, and
white males now make up only 36 percent of the workforce (U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2006). Their
percentage representation diminished as more women and minorities entered the workforce.

Most companies today strive for diverse workforces. HR managers work hard to recruit, hire, develop, and retain a workforce that's
representative of the general population. In part, these efforts are motivated by legal concerns: discrimination in recruiting, hiring,
advancement, and firing is illegal under federal law and is prosecuted by the EEOC (U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission, 2011). Companies that violate antidiscrimination laws not only are subject to severe financial penalties but also risk
damage to their reputations. In November 2004, for example, the EEOC charged that recruiting policies at Abercrombie & Fitch, a
national chain of retail clothing stores, had discriminated against minority and female job applicants between 1999 and 2004. The
employer, charged the EEOC, had hired a disproportionate number of white salespeople, placed minorities and women in less
visible positions, and promoted a virtually all-white image in its marketing efforts. Six days after the EEOC filed a lawsuit, the
company settled the case at a cost of $50 million, but the negative publicity will hamper both recruitment and sales for some time
to come (U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, 2011).

                                Table 7:1 Employment by Gender and Ethnic Group

Group                           Total (%)         Males (%)                          Females (%)

All employees       100                    52                                    48

White               68                     36                                    32

African American    14                     6                                     8

Hispanic or Latino  13                     7                                     5

Asian/Pacific Islander/Other 5             3                                     3

There's good reason for building a diverse workforce that goes well beyond mere compliance with legal standards. It even goes
beyond commitment to ethical standards. It's good business. People with diverse backgrounds bring fresh points of view that can
be invaluable in generating ideas and solving problems. In addition, they can be the key to connecting with an ethnically diverse
customer base. If a large percentage of your customers are Hispanic, it might make sense to have a Hispanic marketing manager. In
short, capitalizing on the benefits of a diverse workforce means that employers should view differences as assets rather than
liabilities.

Key Takeaways

The process of introducing new employees to their jobs and to the company is called orientation.

                                           7.2.2                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4017
    An effective approach is to take things slowly, providing new employees with information on a need-to-know basis while
    making them feel as comfortable as possible.
    New employees will need initial training to start their jobs, and they'll need additional training as they grow in or change their
    jobs.
    Off-the-job training allows them to focus on learning without the distractions that would occur in the office, but on-the-job
    training is more common.
    In addition to having well-trained employees, it's important that a workforce reflects the broad range of differences in the
    population.
    The efforts of HR managers to build a workforce that's representative of the general population are driven in part by legal
    concerns: discrimination is illegal, and companies that violate antidiscrimination laws are subject to prosecution.
    But ensuring a diverse workforce goes well beyond both legal compliance and ethical commitment. It's good business, because
    a diverse group of employees can bring fresh points of view that may be valuable in generating ideas and solving problems.
    Additionally, people from varied backgrounds can help an organization connect with an ethnically diverse customer base.

Exercises

(AACSB) Reflective Skills

Think about a full-time or part-time job that you've held. Was your orientation to the job satisfactory? If not, how would you have
improved the process? Did you receive any training? Was it useful? What additional training would have helped you do a better
job? How would it have benefited the company?

(AACSB) Diversity

While visiting a mall in Los Angeles, you noticed two stores located side by side selling electronic-entertainment products--CDs,
DVDs, and so on. All the employees in one store were white males. The mix of workers in the other store--which happened to be
more profitable--was more diverse. Why do you think the store with the diverse workforce did more business? In terms of
diversity, what would be your ideal workforce in a store similar to these in Los Angeles?

This page titled 7.2: Developing Employees is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4017
7.3: Motivating Employees

  Learning Objective

    1. Define motivation and describe several theories of motivation.

Motivation refers to an internally generated drive to achieve a goal or follow a particular course of action. Highly motivated
employees focus their efforts on achieving specific goals; those who are unmotivated don't. It's the manager's job, therefore, to
motivate employees--to get them to try to do the best job they can. But what motivates employees to do well? How does a
manager encourage employees to show up for work each day and do a good job? Paying them helps, but many other factors
influence a person's desire (or lack of it) to excel in the workplace. What are these factors? Are they the same for everybody? Do
they change over time? To address these questions, we'll examine four of the most influential theories of motivation: hierarchy-of-
needs theory, two-factor theory, expectancy theory, and equity theory.

Hierarchy-of-Needs Theory

Psychologist Abraham Maslow's hierarchy-of-needs theory proposed that we are motivated by the five unmet needs, arranged in
the hierarchical order shown in Figure 7.3, which also lists examples of each type of need in both the personal and work spheres of
life. Look, for instance, at the list of personal needs in the left-hand column. At the bottom are physiological needs (such life-
sustaining needs as food and shelter). Working up the hierarchy we experience safety needs (financial stability, freedom from
physical harm), social needs (the need to belong and have friends), esteem needs (the need for self-respect and status), and self-
actualization needs (the need to reach one's full potential or achieve some creative success).

                                                           Figure 7.3 Maslow's Hierarchy-of-Needs Theory

There are two things to remember about Maslow's model:

 1. We must satisfy lower-level needs before we seek to satisfy higher-level needs.
 2. Once we've satisfied a need, it no longer motivates us; the next higher need takes its place.

Let's say, for example, that you've just returned to college and that for a variety of reasons that aren't your fault, you're broke,
hungry, and homeless. Because you'll probably take almost any job that will pay for food and housing (physiological needs), you
go to work repossessing cars. Fortunately, your student loan finally comes through, and with enough money to feed yourself, you
can look for a job that's not so risky (a safety need). You find a job as a night janitor in the library, and though you feel secure, you

7.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4018
start to feel cut off from your friends, who are active during daylight hours. You want to work among people, not books (a social
need). So now you join several of your friends selling pizza in the student center. This job improves your social life, but even
though you're very good at making pizzas, it's not terribly satisfying. You'd like something that will let you display your
intellectual talents (an esteem need). So you study hard and land a job as an intern in the governor's office. On graduation, you
move up through a series of government appointments and eventually run for state senator. As you're sworn into office, you realize
that you've reached your full potential (a self-actualization need) and you comment to yourself, "It doesn't get any better than
this."

Needs Theory and the Workplace

What implications does Maslow's theory have for business managers? There are two key points: (1) Not all employees are driven
by the same needs, and (2) the needs that motivate individuals can change over time. Managers should consider which needs
different employees are trying to satisfy and should structure rewards and other forms of recognition accordingly. For example,
when you got your first job repossessing cars, you were motivated by the need for money to buy food. If you'd been given a choice
between a raise or a plaque recognizing your accomplishments, you'd undoubtedly have opted for the money. As a state senator, by
contrast, you may prefer public recognition of work well done (say, election to higher office) to a pay raise.

        Figure 7.4: Employees are motivated by different factors. For some, the ability to have fun at work is a priority. (ICMA Photos =
        Employee Meeting 5 - CC BY-SA 2.0.)
This page titled 7.3: Motivating Employees is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4018
7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?

  Learning Objective

       Identify factors that make an organization a good place to work, including competitive compensation and benefits
       packages.

Every year, the Great Places to Work Institute analyzes comments from thousands of employees and compiles a list of "The 100
Best Companies to Work for in America," which is published in Fortune magazine. Having compiled its list for more than twenty
years, the institute concludes that the defining characteristic of a great company to work for is trust between managers and
employees. Employees overwhelmingly say that they want to work at a place where employees "trust the people they work for,
have pride in what they do, and enjoy the people they work with" (Great Place to Work Institute, 2011). They report that they're
motivated to perform well because they're challenged, respected, treated fairly, and appreciated. They take pride in what they do,
are made to feel that they make a difference, and are given opportunities for advancement (Great Place to Work Institute, 2006).
The most effective motivators, it would seem, are closely aligned with Maslow's higher-level needs and Herzberg's motivating
factors.

Job Redesign

The average employee spends more than two thousand hours a year at work. If the job is tedious, unpleasant, or otherwise
unfulfilling, the employee probably won't be motivated to perform at a very high level. Many companies practice a policy of job
redesign to make jobs more interesting and challenging. Common strategies include job rotation, job enlargement, and job
enrichment.

Job Rotation

Specialization promotes efficiency because workers get very good at doing particular tasks. The drawback is the tedium of
repeating the same task day in and day out. The practice of job rotation allows employees to rotate from one job to another on a
systematic basis, eventually cycling back to their original tasks. A computer maker, for example, might rotate a technician into the
sales department to increase the employee's awareness of customer needs and to give the employee a broader understanding of the
company's goals and operations. A hotel might rotate an accounting clerk to the check-in desk for a few hours each day to add
variety to the daily workload. Rotated employees develop new skills and gain experience that increases their value to the company,
which benefits management because cross-trained employees can fill in for absentees, thus providing greater flexibility in
scheduling.

Job Enlargement

Instead of a job in which you performed just one or two tasks, wouldn't you prefer a job that gave you many different tasks? In
theory, you'd be less bored and more highly motivated if you had a chance at job enlargement--the policy of enhancing a job by
adding tasks at similar skill levels (see Figure 7.7 ). The job of sales clerk, for example, might be expanded to include gift-
wrapping and packaging items for shipment. The additional duties would add variety without entailing higher skill levels.

Figure 7.7 Job Enlargement versus Job Enrichment  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4019
                             7.4.1
Job Enrichment

As you can see from Figure 7.7, merely expanding a job by adding similar tasks won't necessarily "enrich" it by making it more
challenging and rewarding. Job enrichment is the practice of adding tasks that increase both responsibility and opportunity for
growth. It provides the kinds of benefits that, according to Maslow and Herzberg, contribute to job satisfaction: stimulating work,
sense of personal achievement, self-esteem, recognition, and a chance to reach your potential.

Consider, for example, the evolving role of support staff in the contemporary office. Today, employees who used to be called
"secretaries" assume many duties previously in the domain of management, such as project coordination and public relations.
Information technology has enriched their jobs because they can now apply such skills as word processing, desktop publishing,
creating spreadsheets, and managing databases. That's why we now hear such a term as administrative assistant instead of
secretary (Kerka, 2011).

This page titled 7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4019
7.5: Performance Appraisal

  Learning Objective

       Explain how managers evaluate employee performance and retain qualified employees.

Employees generally want their managers to tell them three things: what they should be doing, how well they're doing it, and how
they can improve their performance. Good managers address these issues on an ongoing basis. On a semiannual or annual basis,
they also conduct formal performance appraisals to discuss and evaluate employees' work performance.

The Basic Three-Step Process

Appraisal systems vary both by organization and by the level of the employee being evaluated, but as you can see in Figure 7.8, it's
generally a three-step process:

 1. Before managers can measure performance, they must set goals and performance expectations and specify the criteria (such as
    quality of work, quantity of work, dependability, initiative) that they'll use to measure performance.

 2. At the end of a specified time period, managers complete written evaluations that rate employee performance according to the
    predetermined criteria.

 3. Managers then meet with each employee to discuss the evaluation. Jointly, they suggest ways in which the employee can
    improve performance, which might include further training and development.

                                                            Figure 7.8 How to Do a Performance Appraisal

It sounds fairly simple, but why do so many managers report that, except for firing people, giving performance appraisals is their
least favorite task? (Heathfield, 2011) To get some perspective on this question, we'll look at performance appraisals from both
sides, explaining the benefits and identifying potential problems with some of the most common practices.

Among other benefits, formal appraisals provide the following:

    An opportunity for managers and employees to discuss an employee's performance and to set future goals and performance
    expectations
    A chance to identify and discuss appropriate training and career-development opportunities for an employee
    Formal documentation of the evaluation that can be used for salary, promotion, demotion, or dismissal purposes (Nelson &
    Economy, 2003)

As for disadvantages, most stem from the fact that appraisals are often used to determine salaries for the upcoming year.
Consequently, meetings to discuss performance tend to take on an entirely different dimension: the manager appears judgmental
(rather than supportive), and the employee gets defensive. It's the adversarial atmosphere that makes many managers not only
uncomfortable with the task but also unlikely to give honest feedback. (They tend to give higher marks in order to avoid delving

7.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4020
into critical evaluations.) HR professionals disagree about whether performance appraisals should be linked to pay increases. Some
experts argue that the connection eliminates the manager's opportunity to use the appraisal to improve an employee's performance.
Others maintain that it increases employee satisfaction with the process and distributes raises on the basis of effort and results
(Archer North & Associates, 2011).

360-Degree and Upward Feedback

Instead of being evaluated by one person, how would you like to be evaluated by several people--not only those above you in the
organization but those below and beside you? The approach is called 360-degree feedback, and the purpose is to ensure that
employees (mostly managers) get feedback from all directions--from supervisors, reporting subordinates, coworkers, and even
customers. If it's conducted correctly, this technique furnishes managers with a range of insights into their performance in a number
of roles.

Some experts, however, regard the 360-degree approach as too cumbersome. An alternative technique, called upward feedback,
requires only the manager's subordinates to provide feedback. Computer maker Dell uses this approach as part of its manager-
development plan. Every six months, forty thousand Dell employees complete a survey in which they rate their supervisors on a
number of dimensions, such as practicing ethical business principles and providing support in balancing work and personal life.
Like most companies using this technique, Dell uses survey results for development purposes only, not as direct input into
decisions on pay increases or promotions (Dell, Inc., 2011).

Retaining Valuable Employees

When a valued employee quits, the loss to the employer can be serious. Not only will the firm incur substantial costs to recruit and
train a replacement, but it also may suffer temporary declines in productivity and lower morale among remaining employees who
have to take on heavier workloads. Given the negative impact of turnover--the permanent separation of an employee from a
company--most organizations do whatever they can to retain qualified employees. Compensation plays a key role in this effort:
companies that don't offer competitive compensation packages (including benefits) tend to lose employees. But other factors come
into play, some of which we discussed earlier, such as training and development, as well as helping employees achieve a satisfying
work/nonwork balance. In the following sections, we'll look at a few other strategies for reducing turnover and increasing
productivity (Smith, 2011).

Creating a Positive Work Environment

Employees who are happy at work are more productive, provide better customer service, and are more likely to stay with the
company. A study conducted by Sears, for instance, found a positive relationship between customer satisfaction and employee
attitudes on ten different issues: a 5 percent improvement in employee attitudes results in a 1.3 percent increase in customer
satisfaction and a 0.5 percent increase in revenue (Wall Street Journal, 1998).

The Employee-Friendly Workplace

What sort of things improve employee attitudes? The twelve thousand employees of software maker SAS Institute fall into the
category of "happy workers." They choose the furniture and equipment in their own (private) offices; eat subsidized meals at one of
three on-site restaurants; enjoy free soft drinks, fresh fruit on Mondays, M&M's on Wednesdays, and a healthy breakfast snack on
Fridays in convenient break rooms; and swim and work out at a seventy-seven-thousand-square-foot fitness center. They set their
own work hours, and they're encouraged to stay home with sick children. They also have job security: no one's ever been laid off
because of an economic downturn. The employee-friendly work environment helps SAS employees focus on their jobs and
contribute to the attainment of company goals (Safer, 2003; Fortune, 2011). Not surprisingly, it also results in very low 3 percent
turnover.

Recognizing Employee Contributions

Thanking people for work done well is a powerful motivator. People who feel appreciated are more likely to stay with a company
than those who don't (McGarvey, 2004). While personal thank-yous are always helpful, many companies also have formal
programs for identifying and rewarding good performers. The Container Store, a national storage and container retailer, rewards
employee accomplishments in a variety of ways. Recently, for example, twelve employees chosen by coworkers were rewarded

7.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4020
with a Colorado vacation with the company's owners, and the seven winners of a sales contest got a trip to visit an important
supplier--in Sweden (The Container Store, 2011). The company is known for its supportive environment and has frequently been
selected as one of the top U.S. companies to work for.

Involving Employees in Decision Making

Companies have found that involving employees in decisions saves money, makes workers feel better about their jobs, and reduces
turnover. Some have found that it pays to take their advice. When General Motors asked workers for ideas on improving
manufacturing operations, management was deluged with more than forty-four thousand suggestions during one quarter.
Implementing a few of them cut production time on certain vehicles by 15 percent and resulted in sizable savings (Turner, 2003).

Similarly, in 2001, Edward Jones, a personal investment company, faced a difficult situation during the stock-market downturn.
Costs had to be cut, and laying off employees was one option. Instead, however, the company turned to its workforce for solutions.
As a group, employees identified cost savings of more than $38 million. At the same time, the company convinced experienced
employees to stay with it by assuring them that they'd have a role in managing it (Daft & Marcic, 2006).

This page titled 7.5: Performance Appraisal is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4020
7.6: Labor Unions

  Learning Objective

       Explain why workers unionize and how unions are structured, and describe the collective-bargaining process.

As we saw earlier, Maslow believed that individuals are motivated to satisfy five levels of unmet needs (physiological, safety,
social, esteem, and self-actualization). From this perspective, employees should expect that full-time work will satisfy at least the
two lowest-level needs: they should be paid wages that are sufficient for them to feed, house, and clothe themselves and their
families, and they should have safe working conditions and some degree of job security. Organizations also have needs: they need
to earn profits that will satisfy their owners. Sometimes, the needs of employees and employers are consistent: the organization can
pay decent wages and provide workers with safe working conditions and job security while still making a satisfactory profit. At
other times, there is a conflict--real, perceived, or a little bit of both--between the needs of employees and those of employers. In
such cases, workers may be motivated to join a labor union--an organized group of workers that bargains with employers to
improve its members' pay, job security, and working conditions.

Figure 7.10 charts labor-union density--union membership as a percentage of payrolls--in the United States from 1930 to 2010.
As you can see, there's been a steady decline since the mid-1950s, and, today, only about 12 percent of U.S. workers belong to
unions (U.S. Department of Labor, 2011). Only membership among public workers (those employed by federal, state, and local
governments, such as teachers, police, and firefighters) has grown. In the 1940s, 10 percent of public workers and 34 percent of
those in the private sector belonged to unions. Today, this has reversed: 36 percent of public workers and 7 percent of those in the
private sector are union members (Wikipedia, 2011).

                                                             Figure 7.10 Labor Union Density, 1930-2010

Why the decline in private sector unionization? Many factors come into play. The poor economy has reduced the number of
workers who can become union members. In addition, we've shifted from a manufacturing-based economy characterized by large,
historically unionized companies to a service-based economy made up of many small firms that are hard to unionize. Finally, there
are more women in the workforce, and they're more likely to work part-time or intermittently (Maher, 2010; Greenhouse, 2011).

Union Structure

Unions have a pyramidal structure much like that of large corporations. At the bottom are locals that serve workers in a particular
geographical area. Certain members are designated as shop stewards to serve as go-betweens in disputes between workers and
supervisors. Locals are usually organized into national unions that assist with local contract negotiations, organize new locals,
negotiate contracts for entire industries, and lobby government bodies on issues of importance to organized labor. In turn, national
unions may be linked by a labor federation, such as the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations
(AFL-CIO), which provides assistance to member unions and serves as the principal political organ for organized labor.

7.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4021
Collective Bargaining

In a nonunion environment, the employer makes largely unilateral decisions on issues affecting its labor force, such as salary and
benefits. Management, for example, may simply set an average salary increase of 3 percent and require employees to pay an
additional $50 a month for medical insurance. Typically, employees are in no position to bargain for better deals. (At the same time,
however, for reasons that we've discussed earlier in this chapter, employers have a vested interest in treating workers fairly. A
reputation for treating employees well, for example, is a key factor in attracting talented people.)

The process is a lot different in a union environment. Basically, union representatives determine with members what they want in
terms of salary increases, benefits, working conditions, and job security. Union officials then tell the employer what its workers
want and ask what they're willing to offer. When there's a discrepancy between what workers want and what management is
willing to give--as there usually is--union officials serve as negotiators to bring the two sides together. The process of settling
differences and establishing mutually agreeable conditions under which employees will work is called collective bargaining.

The Negotiation Process

Negotiations start when each side states its position and presents its demands. As in most negotiations, these opening demands
simply stake out starting positions. Both parties expect some give-and-take and realize that the final agreement will fall somewhere
between the two positions. If everything goes smoothly, a tentative agreement is reached and then voted on by union members. If
they accept the agreement, the process is complete and a contract is put into place to govern labor-management relations for a
stated period. If workers reject the agreement, negotiators go back to the bargaining table.

Mediation and Arbitration

If negotiations stall, the sides may call in outsiders. One option is mediation, under which an impartial third party assesses the
situation and makes recommendations for reaching an agreement. A mediator's advice can be accepted or rejected. If the two sides
are willing to accept the decision of a third party, they may opt instead for arbitration, under which the third party studies the
situation and arrives at a binding agreement.

Grievance Procedures

Another difference between union and nonunion environments is the handling of grievances--worker complaints on contract-
related matters. When nonunion workers feel that they've been treated unfairly, they can take up the matter with supervisors, who
may or may not satisfy their complaints. When unionized workers have complaints (such as being asked to work more hours than
stipulated under their contract), they can call on union representatives to resolve the problem, in conjunction with supervisory
personnel. If the outcome isn't satisfactory, the union can take the problem to higher-level management. If there's still no
resolution, the union may submit the grievance to an arbitrator.

This page titled 7.6: Labor Unions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4021
7.7: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

What's Your (Emotional) IQ?

If you were an HR manager, on what criteria would you base a hiring decision--intelligence (IQ), education, technical skills,
experience, references, or performance on the interview? All these can be important determinants of a person's success, but some
experts believe that there's an even better predictor of success. It's called emotional intelligence (or EI), and it gained some
currency in the mid-1990s thanks to Daniel Goleman's book Emotional Intelligence: Why It Can Matter More Than IQ. EI is the
ability to understand both our own emotions and those of others, as well as the ability to use that understanding in managing our
behavior, motivating ourselves, and encouraging others to achieve goals.

An attractive aspect of EI is that, unlike IQ, it's not fixed at an early age. Rather, its vital components--self-awareness, self-
management, social awareness, and relationship management--can be strengthened over time. To assess your level of EI, go to the
Web site maintained by the Hay Group, a management-consulting firm, and take the ten-item test that's posted there
(http://psychology.about.com/library/...num=6&cor=2399). After completing the test, you'll get your EI score, some instructions
for interpreting it, and an answer key.

When you've finished with the test, rank the following items according to the importance that you'd give them in making a hiring
decision: intelligence, education, technical skills, experience, references, interview skills, and emotional intelligence. Explain your
ranking.

Career Opportunities

Are You a People Person?

You might not like the idea of sitting across the desk from a corporate college recruiter and asking for a job, but what if you were
on the other side of the desk? As a recruiter, you'd get to return to campus each year to encourage students to join your company.
Or, maybe you'd like to help your company develop a new compensation and benefits program, implement a performance-
evaluation system, or create a new training program. All these activities fall under the umbrella of HR.

To learn more about the field of HR, go to the WetFeet Web site (wetfeet.com/Careers-and-Indus...obdescriptions) and read the
page "Human Resources Overview." Then answer these questions:

 1. What is the human resources field like?
 2. What do HR professionals like about their jobs? What do they dislike?
 3. Are job prospects in the HR field positive or negative? Which HR areas will experience the fastest growth?
 4. Based on the job descriptions posted, which specific HR job would you want?

Finally, write a paragraph responding to this question: Do you find the HR field interesting? Why, or why not?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Misstating the Facts

Life couldn't get much better for George O'Leary when he was named the head football coach at Notre Dame. Unfortunately, he
barely had time to celebrate his new job before he was ruled ineligible: after just a week on the job, he was forced to resign,
embarrassing himself, his family, his friends, and Notre Dame itself. Why? Because of a few lies that he'd put on his rsum
twenty years earlier. To get the facts behind this story, go to the Sports Illustrated Web site
(sportsillustrated.cnn.com/foo...ary_notredame/) and read the article "Short Tenure: O'Leary Out at Notre Dame After One Week."
Then, answer the following questions:

 1. Was O'Leary's punishment appropriate? If you were the athletic director at Notre Dame, would you have meted out the same
    punishment? Why, or why not?

 2. False information on his rsum came back to haunt O'Leary after twenty years. Once he'd falsified his rsum, was there any
    corrective action that he could have taken? If so, what?

7.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4022
 3. If O'Leary had told Notre Dame about the falsifications before they came to light, would they have hired him?
 4. Would his previous employer take him back?
 5. O'Leary was later hired as a head coach by the University of Central Florida. Will the episode involving his rsum undermine

    his ability to encourage players to act with integrity? Will it affect his ability to recruit players?
 6. What's the lesson to be learned from O'Leary's experience? In what ways might a few (theoretical) misstatements on your

    rsum come back to haunt you?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Dorm Room Rescue

Any night of the week (at least as of this writing), you can relax in front of the TV and watch a steady stream of shows about how
to improve your living space--such as New Spaces. You like the concept of these programs well enough, but you're tired of
watching them in a tiny, cluttered dorm room that's decorated in early barracks style. Out of these cramped conditions, however,
you and a team of friends come up with an idea. On graduation, you'll start a business called Dorm Room Rescue to provide
decorating services to the dorm dwellers who come after you. You'll help college students pick colors and themes for their rooms
and select space-saving furniture, storage materials, area rugs, and wall decorations. Your goal will be to create attractive dorm
rooms that provide comfort, functionality, and privacy, as well as pleasant spaces in which students can relax and even entertain.

The team decides to develop a plan for the HR needs of your future company. You'll need to address the following issues:

 1. Number of employees
 2. Job descriptions: duties and responsibilities for each type of employee
 3. Job specifications: needed skills, knowledge, and abilities

2. Recruitment of qualified employees

Recruitment plan: how and where to find candidates

    Selection process: steps taken to select employees

3. Developing employees

New-employee orientation

    Training and development

4. Compensation and benefits

Wages, salaries, and incentive programs

    Benefits

5. Work/Life quality

Work schedules and alternative work arrangements

    Family-friendly programs

6. Performance appraisal

Appraisal process

    Retaining valuable employees

You might want to divide up the initial work, but you'll need to regroup as a team to make your final decisions on these issues and
to create a team-prepared report.

The Global View (AACSB)

Sending Ed to China

You're the HR manager for a large environmental consulting firm that just started doing business in China. You've asked your top
engineer, Ed Deardon, to relocate to Shanghai for a year. Though China will be new to Deardon, working overseas won't be; he's

7.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4022
already completed assignments in the Philippines and Thailand; as before, his wife and three children will be going with him.
You've promised Deardon some advice on adapting to living and working conditions in Shanghai, and you intend to focus on the
kinds of cultural differences that tend to create problems in international business dealings. Unfortunately, you personally know
absolutely nothing about living in China and so must do some online research. Here are some promising sites:
Executive Planet (www.executiveplanet.com/index.php?title=China)

    China Window (china-window.com)
    Los Angeles Chinese Learning Center (http://chinese-school.netfirms.com)

Instructions

Prepare a written report to Deardon in which you identify and explain five or six cultural differences between business behavior in
the United States and China, and offer some advice on how to deal with them.

This page titled 7.7: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

7.7.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4022
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

8: Teamwork and Communications

  8.1: The Team and the Organization
  8.2: Why Teamwork Works
  8.3: The Team and Its Members
  8.4: The Business of Communication
  8.5: Communication Channels
  8.6: Forms of Communication
  8.7: Cases and Problems
This page titled 8: Teamwork and Communications is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
8.1: The Team and the Organization

  Learning Objectives

       Define a team and describe its key characteristics.
       Explain why organizations use teams, and describe different types of teams.

What Is a Team? How Does Teamwork Work?

A team (or a work team) is a group of people with complementary skills who work together to achieve a specific goal (Thompson,
2008). In the case of Motorola's RAZR team, the specific goal was to develop (and ultimately bring to market) an ultrathin cell
phone that would help restore the company's reputation as a designer of stylistically appealing, high-function phones. The team
achieved its goal by integrating specialized but complementary skills in engineering and design and by making the most of its
authority to make its own decisions and manage its own operations.

Teams versus Groups

"A group," suggests Bonnie Edelstein, a consultant in organizational development, "is a bunch of people in an elevator. A team is
also a bunch of people in an elevator, but the elevator is broken." This distinction may be a little oversimplified, but as our tale of
teamwork at Motorola reminds us, a team is clearly something more than a mere group of individuals. In particular, members of a
group--or, more accurately, a working group--go about their jobs independently and meet primarily to share information. A group
of department-store managers, for example, might meet monthly to discuss their progress in cutting plant costs, but each manager is
focused on the goals of his or her department because each is held accountable for meeting only those goals. Teams, by contrast,
are responsible for achieving specific common goals, and they're generally empowered to make the decisions needed to complete
their authorized tasks.

Some Key Characteristics of Teams

To keep matters in perspective, let's identify five key characteristics of work teams (Thompson, 2008; Alderfer, et. al., 1977):

    Teams are accountable for achieving specific common goals. Members are collectively responsible for achieving team goals,
    and if they succeed, they're rewarded collectively.
    Teams function interdependently. Members cannot achieve goals independently and must rely on each other for information,
    input, and expertise.
    Teams are stable. Teams remain intact long enough to finish their assigned tasks, and each member remains on board long
    enough to get to know every other member.
    Teams have authority. Teams possess the decision-making power to pursue their goals and to manage the activities through
    which they complete their assignments.
    Teams operate in a social context. Teams are assembled to do specific work for larger organizations and have the advantage of
    access to resources available from other areas of their organizations.

This page titled 8.1: The Team and the Organization is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4023
8.2: Why Teamwork Works

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain why teams may be effective or ineffective.
    2. Identify factors that contribute to team cohesiveness.

Now that we know a little bit about how teams work, we need to ask ourselves why they work. Not surprisingly, this is a fairly
complex issue. In this section, we'll answer these closely related questions: Why are teams often effective? Why are they
sometimes ineffective?

Factors in Effective Teamwork

First, let's begin by identifying several factors that, in practice, tend to contribute to effective teamwork. Generally speaking, teams
are effective when the following factors are met (Whetten & Cameron, 2007):

    Members depend on each other. When team members rely on each other to get the job done, team productivity and efficiency
    are high.
    Members trust one another. Teamwork is more effective when members trust each other.
    Members work better together than individually. When team members perform better as a group than alone, collective
    performance exceeds individual performance.
    Members become boosters. When each member is encouraged by other team members to do his or her best, collective results
    improve.
    Team members enjoy being on the team. The more that team members derive satisfaction from being on the team, the more
    committed they become.
    Leadership rotates. Teams function effectively when leadership responsibility is shared over time.

Most of these explanations probably make pretty clear intuitive sense. Unfortunately, because such issues are rarely as clear-cut as
they may seem at first glance, we need to examine the issue of group effectiveness from another perspective--one that considers
the effects of factors that aren't quite so straightforward.

Group Cohesiveness

The idea of group cohesiveness refers to the attractiveness of a team to its members. If a group is high in cohesiveness,
membership is quite satisfying to its members; if it's low in cohesiveness, members are unhappy with it and may even try to leave
it. The principle of group cohesiveness, in other words, is based on the simple idea that groups are most effective when their
members like being members of the group (George & Jones, 2008; Festinger, 1950).

What Makes a Team Cohesive?

Numerous factors may contribute to team cohesiveness, but in this section, we'll focus on five of the most important:

 1. Size. The bigger the team, the less satisfied members tend to be. When teams get too large, members find it harder to interact
    closely with other members; a few members tend to dominate team activities, and conflict becomes more likely.

 2. Similarity. People usually get along better with people like themselves, and teams are generally more cohesive when members
    perceive fellow members as people who share their own attitudes and experience.

 3. Success. When teams are successful, members are satisfied, and other people are more likely to be attracted to their teams.
 4. Exclusiveness. The harder it is to get into a group, the happier the people who are already in it. Status (the extent to which

    outsiders look up to a team, as well as the perks that come with membership) also increases members' satisfaction.
 5. Competition. Members value membership more highly when they're motivated to achieve common goals--especially when

    those goals mean outperforming other teams.

8.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4024
        Figure 8.2: A cohesive team with goals that are aligned with the goals of the organization is most likely to succeed. (Teamwork and
        team spirit - CC BY-ND 2.0.)

There's such a thing as too much cohesiveness. When, for instance, members are highly motivated to collaborate in performing the
team's activities, the team is more likely to be effective in achieving its goals. Clearly, when those goals are aligned with the goals
of the larger organization, the organization, too, will be happy. If, however, its members get too wrapped up in more immediate
team goals, the whole team may lose sight of the larger organizational goals toward which it's supposed to be working.

Groupthink

Likewise, it's easier for leaders to direct members toward team goals when members are all on the same page--when there's a
basic willingness to conform to the team's rules and guidelines. When there's too much conformity, however, the group can become
ineffective: It may resist change and fresh ideas and, what's worse, may end up adopting its own dysfunctional tendencies as its
way of doing things. Such tendencies may also encourage a phenomenon known as groupthink--the tendency to conform to group
pressure in making decisions, while failing to think critically or to consider outside influences.

Groupthink is often cited as a factor in the explosion of the space shuttle Challenger in January 1986: Engineers from a supplier of
components for the rocket booster warned that the launch might be risky because of the weather but were persuaded to reverse their
recommendation by NASA officials who wanted the launch to proceed as scheduled (Griffin, 2011).

This page titled 8.2: Why Teamwork Works is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4024
8.3: The Team and Its Members

  Learning Objectives

       Understand the importance of learning to participate in team-based activities.
       Identify the skills needed by team members and the roles that members of a team might play.
       Learn how to survive team projects in college (and actually enjoy yourself).
       Explain the skills and behaviors that foster effective team leadership.

"Life Is All about Group Work"

"I'll work extra hard and do it myself, but please don't make me have to work in a group."

Like it or not, you'll probably be given some teamwork assignments while you're in college. More than two-thirds of all students
report having participated in the work of an organized team, and if you're in business school, you will almost certainly find
yourself engaged in team-based activities (Whetten & Cameron, 2007; Wellins et. al., 1991).

Why do we put so much emphasis on something that, reportedly, makes many students feel anxious and academically drained?
Here's one college student's practical-minded answer to this question:

       In the real world, you have to work with people. You don't always know the people you work with, and you don't always get
       along with them. Your boss won't particularly care, and if you can't get the job done, your job may end up on the line. Life is
       all about group work, whether we like it or not. And school, in many ways, prepares us for life, including working with
       others" (Nichols, 2003).

She's right. In placing so much emphasis on teamwork skills and experience, college business departments are doing the
responsible thing--preparing students for the business world that awaits them. A survey of Fortune 1000 companies reveals that 79
percent already rely on self-managing teams and 91 percent on various forms of employee work groups. Another survey found that
the skill that most employers value in new employees is the ability to work in teams (Whetten & Cameron, 2007; Lawler, 2003). If
you're already trying to work your way up an organizational ladder, consider the advice of former Chrysler Chairman Lee Iacocca:
"A major reason that capable people fail to advance is that they don't work well with their colleagues" (Paulson, 1990). The
importance of the ability to work in teams was confirmed in a survey of leadership practices of more than sixty of the world's top
organizations (Fortune Magazine, 1999). When top executives in these organizations were asked, "What causes high-potential
leadership candidates to derail? (stop moving up in the organization)," 60 percent of the organizations cited "inability to work in
teams." Interestingly, only 9 percent attributed the failure of these executives to advance to "lack of technical ability." While
technical skills will be essential in your getting hired into an organization, your team skills will play a significant role in your
ability to advance.

To be team-ready or not to be team-ready--that is the question. Or, to put it in plainer terms, the question is not whether you'll find
yourself working as part of a team. You will. The question is whether you'll know how to participate successfully in team-based
activities.

Will You Make a Good Team Member?

What if your instructor in this course decides to divide the class into several three-, four-, or five-member teams and assigns each
team to develop a new product plus a business plan to get it into production and out on the market? What teamwork skills could
you bring to the table? What teamwork skills do you need to work on? What qualities do you possess that might make you a good
team leader?

What Skills Does the Team Need?

Sometimes we hear about a sports team made up of mostly average players who win a championship because of coaching genius,
flawless teamwork, and superhuman determination (Robbins & Judge, 2009). But not terribly often. In fact, we usually hear about
such teams simply because they're newsworthy--exceptions to the rule. Typically a team performs well because its members
possess some level of talent. This doesn't mean, however, that we should reduce team performance to the mere sum of its

8.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4025
individual contributions: Members' talents aren't very useful if they're not managed in a collective effort to achieve a common
goal.

In the final analysis, of course, a team can succeed only if its members provide the skills that need managing. In particular, every
team requires some mixture of three sets of skills:

    Technical skills. Because teams must perform certain tasks, they need people with the skills to perform them. For example, if
    your project calls for a lot of math work, it's good to have someone with the necessary quantitative skills.
    Decision-making and problem-solving skills. Because every task is subject to problems, and because handling every problem
    means deciding on the best solution, it's good to have members who are skilled in identifying problems, evaluating alternative
    solutions, and deciding on the best options.
    Interpersonal skills. Because teams are composed of people, and because people need direction and motivation and depend on
    communication, every group benefits from members who know how to listen, provide feedback, and smooth ruffled feathers.
    The same people are usually good at communicating the team's goals and needs to outsiders.

The key to success is ultimately the right mix of these skills. Remember, too, that no team needs to possess all these skills--never
mind the right balance of them--from day one. In many cases, a team gains certain skills only when members volunteer for certain
tasks and perfect their skills in the process of performing them. For the same reason, effective teamwork develops over time as
team members learn how to handle various team-based tasks. In a sense, teamwork is always work in progress.

What Roles Do Team Members Play?

Like your teamwork skills, expect your role on a team to develop over time. Also remember that, both as a student and as a member
of the workforce, you'll be a member of a team more often than a leader (a subject that we'll take up in the next section). Team
members, however, can have as much impact on a team's success as its leaders. The key is the quality of the contributions they
make in performing nonleadership roles (Whetten & Cameron, 2007).

What, exactly, are those roles? At this point, you've probably concluded that every team faces two basic challenges:

Accomplishing its assigned task

Maintaining or improving group cohesiveness

Whether you affect the team's work positively or negatively depends on the extent to which you help it or hinder it in meeting these
two challenges (Whetten & Cameron, 2007). We can thus divide teamwork roles into two categories, depending on which of these
two challenges each role addresses. These two categories (task-facilitating roles and relationship-building roles) are summarized in
Table 8.2 "Roles that Team Members Play".

Table 8:2 Roles that Team Members Play. Source: Adapted from David A. Whetten and Kim S. Cameron, Developing Management Skills, 7th ed.
                                                   (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2007), 517, 519.

8.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4025
Task-facilitating Roles  Example                            Relationship-building Roles     Example
Direction giving                                            Supporting
Information seeking      "Jot down a few ideas and we'll                                    "Now, that's what I mean by a
Information giving       see what everyone has come up                                      practical application."
Elaborating              with."
Urging                                                                                      "Actually, I think you're both
Monitoring               "Does anyone know if this is       Harmonizing                     saying pretty much the same
Process analyzing        the latest data we have?"                                          thing."
Reality testing
Enforcing                "Here are latest numbers           Tension relieving               "Before we go on to the next
Summarizing              from...."                                                          section, how many people
                                                                                            would like a pillow?"
                         "I think a good example of         Confronting
                         what you're talking about                                          "How does that suggestion
                         is...."                                                            relate to the topic that we're
                                                                                            discussing?"
                         "Let's try to finish this proposal before we adjourn." Energizing
                                                                                            "It's been a long time since I've
                         "If you'll take care of the first  Developing                      had this many laughs at a
                         section, I'll make sure that we                                    meeting in this department."
                         have the second by next week."
                                                                                            "If you need some help pulling
                         "What happened to the energy       Consensus building              the data together, let me know."
                         level in this room?"
                                                                                            "Do we agree on the first four
                         "Can we make this work and         Empathizing                     points even if number five
                         stay within budget?"                                               needs a little more work?"

                         "We're getting off track. Let's                                    "It's not you. The numbers are
                         try to stay on topic."                                             confusing."

                         "Before we jump ahead, here's
                         what we've decided so far."

Task-Facilitating Roles

Task-facilitating roles address challenge number one--accomplishing the team goals. As you can see from Table 8.2 "Roles that
Team Members Play", such roles include not only providing information when someone else needs it but also asking for it when
you need it. In addition, it includes monitoring (checking on progress) and enforcing (making sure that team decisions are carried
out). Task facilitators are especially valuable when assignments aren't clear or when progress is too slow. Moreover, every team
needs people who recognize when a little task facilitation is called for.

Relationship-Building Roles

When you challenge unmotivated behavior or help other team members understand their roles, you're performing a relationship-
building role and addressing challenge number two--maintaining or improving group cohesiveness. This type of role includes just
about every activity that improves team "chemistry," from confronting to empathizing.

Bear in mind three points about this model of team-membership roles: (1) Teams are most effective when there's a good balance
between task facilitation and relationship building; (2) it's hard for any given member to perform both types of roles, as some
people are better at focusing on tasks and others on relationships; and (3) overplaying any facet of any role can easily become
counterproductive. For example, elaborating on something may not be the best strategy when the team needs to make a quick
decision; and consensus building may cause the team to overlook an important difference of opinion.

                                                       8.3.3                                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4025
Blocking Roles

Finally, review Table 8.3 "How to Block Teamwork", which summarizes a few characteristics of another kind of team-membership
role. So-called blocking roles consist of behavior that inhibits either team performance or that of individual members. Every
member of the team should know how to recognize blocking behavior. If teams don't confront dysfunctional members, they can
destroy morale, hamper consensus building, create conflict, and hinder progress.

Table 8:3 How to Block Teamwork. Source: Adapted from David A. Whetten and Kim S. Cameron, Developing Management Skills, 7th ed.
                                               (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2007), 519-20.

Blocking Strategy          Tactics

Dominate                   Talk as much as possible; interrupt and interject

Overanalyze                Split hairs and belabor every detail

Stall                      Frustrate efforts to come to conclusions: decline to agree, sidetrack
Remain passive             the discussion, rehash old ideas

                           Stay on the fringe; keep interaction to a minimum; wait for others
                           to take on work

Overgeneralize             Blow things out of proportion; float unfounded conclusions

Find fault                 Criticize and withhold credit whenever possible

Make premature decisions   Rush to conclusions before goals are set, information is shared, or
                           problems are clarified

Present opinions as facts  Refuse to seek factual support for ideas that you personally favor

Reject                     Object to ideas offered by people who tend to disagree with you

Pull rank                  Use status or title to push through ideas, rather than seek
                           consensus on their value

Resist                     Throw up roadblocks to progress; look on the negative side

Deflect                    Refuse to stay on topic; focus on minor points rather than main
                           points

This page titled 8.3: The Team and Its Members is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                           8.3.4                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4025
8.4: The Business of Communication

  Learning Objectives

    1. Discuss the role of communication in the design of the RAZR cell phone.
    2. Define communication and discuss the ways in which organizations benefit from effective communication.

Communication by Design

As the chief designer assigned to the "thin-clam" team at Motorola, Chris Arnholt was responsible for some of the phone's
distinctive physical features, including its sleek aluminum finish and backlit keyboard. In fact, it was he who pushed the company's
engineers and marketers to buck an industry trend toward phones that were getting fatter because of many add-ons such as cameras
and stereo speakers. For Arnholt had a vision. He called it "rich minimalism," and his goal was to help the Motorola cell phone
team realize a product that embodied that profile.

But what exactly did Arnholt mean by rich minimalism? "Sometimes," he admits, "my ideas are tough to communicate," but as a
veteran in his field, he also understands that "design is really about communication" (Lashinsky, 2006; Anthony, 2011). His chief
(and ongoing) task, then, was communicating to the cell phone team what he meant by rich minimalism. Ultimately, of course, he
had to show them what rich minimalism looked like when it appeared in tangible form in a fashionable new cell phone. In the
process, he also had to be sure that the cell phone included certain key benefits that prospective consumers would want. As always,
the physical design of the finished product had to be right for its intended market.

We'll have much more to say about the process of developing new products in Chapter 10 "Product Design and Development".
Here, however, let's simply highlight two points about the way successful companies approach the challenges of new-product
design and development (which you will likely recognize from reading the first part of this chapter):

 1. In contributing to the new-product design and development process, industrial designers like Chris Arnholt must effectively
    communicate both ideas and practical specifications.

 2. The design and development process usually succeeds only when the assigned team integrates input from every relevant area of
    the organization (Urban & Hauser, 1993).

The common denominator in both facets of the process is effective communication. The designer, for example, must communicate
not only his vision of the product but also certain specifications for turning it into something concrete. Chris Arnholt sculpted
models out of cornstarch and then took them home at night to refashion them according to suggestions made by the product team.
Then he'd put his newest ideas on paper and hand the drawings over to another member of his design team, who'd turn them into
3D computer graphics from which other specialists would build plastic models. Without effective communication at every step in
this process, it isn't likely that a group of people with different skills would produce plastic models bearing a practical resemblance
to Arnholt's original drawings. On top of everything else, Arnholt's responsibility as chief designer required him to communicate
his ideas not only about the product's visual and physical features but also about the production processes and manufacturing
requirements for building it (ISDA, 2008).

Thus Arnholt's job--which is to say, his responsibility on the cell phone team--meant that he had to do a lot more than merely
design the product. Strictly speaking, the designer's function is to understand a product from the consumer's point of view; develop
this understanding into a set of ideas and specifications that will satisfy not only consumer needs but producer requirements; and
make recommendations through drawings, models, and verbal communications (IDSA, 2008). Even our condensed version of the
RAZR story, however, indicates that Arnholt's job was far broader. Why? Because new-product design is an integrative process:
contributions must come from all functions within an organization, including operations (which includes research and
development, engineering and manufacturing), marketing, management, finance, and accounting (Urban & Hauser, 1993).

Our version of the RAZR story has emphasized operations (which includes research and development, engineering, and
manufacturing) and touched on the role of marketing (which collects data about consumer needs). Remember, though, that
members from several areas of management were recruited for the team. Because the project required considerable investment of
Motorola's capital, finance was certainly involved, and the decision to increase production in late 2004 was based on numbers

8.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4026
crunched by the accounting department. At every step, Arnholt's drawings, specs, and recommendations reflected his collaboration
with people from all these functional areas.

        Figure 8.5: The explosion of text messaging has changed the way people use their cell phones and created new design needs for
        manufacturers like Motorola. (Adrian Black - Motorola V3i Open - CC BY-NC 2.0.)

As we'll see in Section 8.4.2 "What Is Communication?", what all this interactivity amounts to is communication (Urban & Hauser,
1993). As for what Arnholt meant by rich minimalism, you'll need to take a look at the picture of the RAZR at the beginning of the
chapter. Among other things, it means a blue electroluminescent panel and a 22 kHz polyphonic speaker.

What Is Communication?

Let's start with a basic (and quite practical) definition of communication as the process of transferring information from a sender to
a receiver. When you call up a classmate to inform him that your Introduction to Financial Accounting class has been canceled,
you're sending information and your classmate is receiving it. When you go to your professor's Web site to find out the assignment
for the next class, your professor is sending information and you're receiving it. When your boss e-mails you the data you need to
complete a sales report and tells you to e-mail the report back to her by 4 o'clock, your boss is sending information and, once
again, you're receiving it; later in the day, the situation will be reversed.

Your Ticket In (or Out)

Obviously, you participate in dozens of "informational transfers" every day. (In fact, they take up about 70 percent of your waking
hours--80 percent if you have some sort of managerial position (Robbins & Judge, 2009; Whetten & Cameron, 2007). In any case,
it wouldn't make much sense for us to pursue the topic much further without assuming that you've gained some experience and
mastered some skills in the task of communicating. At the same time, though, we'll also venture to guess that you're much more
comfortable having casual conversations with friends than writing class assignments or giving speeches in front of classmates.
That's why we're going to resort to the same plain terms that we used when we discussed the likelihood of your needing teamwork
skills in an organizational setting: The question is not whether you'll need communication skills (both written and verbal). You
will. The question is whether you'll develop the skills to communicate effectively in a variety of organizational situations.

Once again, the numbers back us up. In a recent survey by the Association of Colleges and Employers, the ability to communicate
well topped the list of skills that business recruiters want in potential hires (National Association of Colleges and Employers,
2007). A College Board survey of 120 major U.S. companies concludes that writing is a "threshold skill" for both employment and
promotion. "In most cases," volunteered one human resources director, "writing ability could be your ticket in--or your ticket out."
Applicants and employees who can't write and communicate clearly, says the final report, "will not be hired and are unlikely to last
long enough to be considered for promotion" (College Board, 2004).

8.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4026
Why Are Communication Skills Important?

They're important to you because they're important to prospective employers. And why do employers consider communication
skills so important? Because they're good for business. Research shows that businesses benefit in several ways when they're able
to foster effective communication among employees (Thill & Bove, 2008; Carr, 2006):

    Decisions are more convincing and certain, and problem solving is faster.
    Warning signs of potential problems appear earlier.
    Workflow moves more smoothly and productivity increases.
    Business relationships are stronger.
    Marketing messages are more persuasive.
    The company's professional image is enhanced.
    Employee satisfaction goes up and turnover goes down.
    The firm and its investors enjoy better financial results.

What Skills Are Important?

Figure 8.6 reveals some further findings of the College Board survey that we mentioned previously--namely, the percentage of
companies that identified certain communication skills as being "frequently" or "almost always" necessary in their workplaces. As
you can see, ability in using e-mail is a nearly universal requirement (and in many cases this includes the ability to adapt messages
to different receivers or compose persuasive messages when necessary). The ability to make presentations (with visuals) also ranks
highly.

                                                                        Figure 8.6 Required Skills

Key Takeaways

Effective communication is needed in several facets of the new-product design and development process:

 1. Designers must effectively communicate both ideas and practical specifications.
 2. The process usually succeeds only when the assigned team integrates input from every relevant area of the organization.

    Communication is the process of transferring information from a sender to a receiver.
    Businesses benefit in several ways when they're able to foster effective communication among employees:
     1. Decisions are more assured and cogent, and problem solving is faster.
     2. Warning signs of potential problems appear earlier.
     3. Workflow moves more smoothly and productivity increases.

8.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4026
     4. Business relationships are stronger.
     5. Marketing messages are more persuasive.
     6. The company's professional image is enhanced.
     7. Employee satisfaction goes up and turnover goes down.
     8. The firm and its investors enjoy better financial results.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Pick a company you're interested in working for when you graduate from college. For this company, identify the following:

 1. A starting position you'd like to obtain on graduation
 2. A higher-level position you'd like to be promoted to in five years.

For each of these positions, describe the skills needed to get the job and those needed to be successful in the position.

This page titled 8.4: The Business of Communication is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4026
8.5: Communication Channels

  Learning Objectives

    1. Discuss the nature of communications in an organizational setting, including communication flows, channels, and
       networks.

    2. Explain barriers to communication, and discuss the most common types of barriers to group communication.

What Is Organizational Communication?

Clearly, the task of preparing and submitting a finished sales report doesn't require the same kinds of communication skills as
talking on the phone with a classmate. No matter what your "workstation" happens to be--whether your workplace office or your
kitchen table--you're performing the task of preparing that sales report in an organizational setting. You're still a sender
transferring information to a receiver, but the organizational context of the task requires you to consider different factors for
success in communicating effectively (including barriers to success). A report, for example, must be targeted for someone in a
specific position and must contain the information necessary to make a specific set of decisions (Netzley & Snow, 2002).

Communication Flows

Here's another way of thinking about communication in an organizational setting. Let's assume that you and the classmate you
called on the phone are on roughly equal footing--you're both juniors, your grades in the class are about the same, and so forth.
Your phone conversation, therefore, is "lateral": You belong to the same group (your accounting class), and your group activities
take place on the same level.

Communication may also flow laterally in organizational settings (as it does between you and your classmate), but more often it
flows up or down. Take a look at Figure 8.7 . If it looks familiar, that's because we've borrowed it from Chapter 6 "Managing for
Business Success", where it appeared as the organization chart for the fictional company Notes-4-You. As you can see, we've
added a few lines to show the three directions in which communications can flow in a typical organization (Greenberg & Baron,
2008):

    As the term suggests, downward communication flows from higher organizational levels (supervisors) to lower organizational
    levels (subordinates).
    Upward communication flows from lower to higher organizational levels.
    Lateral (or horizontal) communication flows across the organization, among personnel on the same level.

Your boss's request for a sales report is an instance of downward communication, and when you've finished and submitted it, you
will have completed a task of upward communication.

8.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4027
                                                               Figure 8.7 Formal Communication Flows

Advantages of Communication Flows

Naturally, each of these different directional flows has its functions and advantages. Downward communication, for example, is
appropriate for giving instructions or directions--telling people what to do. (As a goal of communication, by the way, giving orders
isn't as one-sided as it may seem. One of the things that employees--the receivers--most want to know is: What, exactly, does my
job entail?) (Greenberg & Baron, 2002) Like a sales report, upward communication usually provides managers with information
that they need for making decisions, but it's also the vehicle for new ideas, suggestions, and complaints. Horizontal communication
supports efforts to coordinate tasks and otherwise help people work together.

Disadvantages of Communication Flows

And, of course, each type of flow has its disadvantages. As information seeps downward, for instance, it tends to lose some of its
original clarity and often becomes distorted or downright wrong. (This is especially true when it's delivered orally.) In addition,
unlike Donald Trump, most people who are responsible for using downward communication don't like delivering bad news (such
as "You're fired" or, more commonly, "Your job is being phased out"); as a result, bad news--including bad news that happens to
be important news--is often ignored or disguised. The same thing may happen when bad news--say, a negative status report--
must be sent upward.

Finally, while horizontal flows are valuable for promoting cooperation, they can also be used to engage in conflict--for instance,
between two departments competing for the same organizational resources. The problem is especially bad when such horizontal
communications breach official upward or downward lines of communication, thus bypassing managers who might be able to
resolve the conflict.

This page titled 8.5: Communication Channels is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4027
8.6: Forms of Communication

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain the do's and don'ts of business e-mails.
    2. Describe the process followed to create and deliver successful presentations.
    3. Learn how to write clear, concise memos.

As mentioned previously, the College Board identified these communication skills as "frequently" or "almost always" necessary in
the workplace (College Board, 2004): e-mail, presentation with visuals, technical reports, formal reports, memos, and presentations
without visuals. The skill ranked highest in importance was the use of e-mails, including the ability to adapt messages to different
receivers or compose persuasive messages when necessary. The ability to make presentations (with visuals) ranked second in
importance. Report writing came next. Given the complexity of report writing, we will not cover this topic here. Instead, we will
look at the remaining three forms of communication: e-mail, presentations with visuals, and memos.

Tips for Writing Business E-Mails

Dennis Jerz and Jessica Bauer created the following list of the top 10 tips for writing effective e-mail messages (Jerz & Bauer,
2011):

 1. Write a meaningful subject line. Recipients use the subject line to decide whether to open or delete a message and sometimes
    where to store it. Write a subject line that describes the content.

 2. Keep the message focused. Avoid including multiple messages or requests in one e-mail. Try to focus on only one topic. Use
    standard capitalization and spelling; none of this "thx 4 ur help 2day ur gr8."

 3. Avoid attachments. Extract the relevant text from a large file and ask the recipient if he or she wants to see the full document.
 4. Identify yourself clearly. Identify yourself in the first few lines--otherwise your message might be deleted quickly.
 5. Be kind. Don't flame. Avoid writing e-mails when you are upset. Always think before you hit the "send" button. Once it's gone,

    you can't get it back. If you're mad, write the e-mail, but don't send it. Keep it in your "save" or "draft" folder and reread it the
    next day.
 6. Proofread. Use spell check and read the memo carefully before sending it.
 7. Don't assume privacy. Don't send anything you wouldn't want posted on the office bulletin board (with your name on it).
    Remember, employers can read your e-mails!
 8. Distinguish between formal and informal situations. When writing to a coworker with whom you are friends, you can be less
    formal than when you are writing to your manager or a client.
 9. Respond promptly. Get back quickly to the person who sent you the e-mail. If you're too busy to answer, let the person know
    you got the message and will respond as soon as you can.
10. Show respect and restraint. Watch out: Don't use the "reply to all" button in error. Don't forward an e-mail before getting
    permission from the sender.

Planning, Preparing, Practicing, and Presenting

For some, the thought of making a presentation is traumatic. If you're one of those people, the best way to get over your fear is to
get up and make a presentation. With time, it will get easier, and you might even start enjoying it. As you progress through college,
you will have a number of opportunities to make presentations. This is good news--it gives you practice, lets you make your
mistakes in a protected environment (before you hit the business world), and allows you to get fairly good at it. Your opportunities
to talk in front of a group will multiply once you enter the business world. Throughout your business career, you'll likely be called
on to present reports, address groups at all levels in the organization, represent your company at various events, run committee
meetings, lead teams, or make a sales pitch (Barada, 2011). In preparing and delivering your presentation, you can follow a four-
step process (plan, prepare, practice, and present) designed by Dale Carnegie, a global training company named after its famed
founder (Carnegie, 2011).

8.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4028
Plan

Plan your presentation based on your purpose and the knowledge level and interest of your audience. Use words and concepts your
audience can understand, and stay focused. If your audience is knowledgeable about your topic, you can skim over the generalities
and delve into the details. On the other hand, if the topic is new to them, you need to move through it slowly. As you plan your
presentation, ask yourself these questions: What am I trying to accomplish? Am I trying to educate, inform, motivate, or persuade
my audience? What does my audience know about the topic? What do I want them to know? How can I best convey this
information to them?

Prepare

Once you have planned your presentation, you're ready to prepare. It might be easier to write your presentation if you divide it into
three sections: opening, body, close. Your opening should grab your audience's attention. You can do this by asking a question,
telling a relevant story, or even announcing a surprising piece of information. About 5 to 10 percent of your time can be spent on
the opening. The body covers the bulk of the material and consumes about 80 to 85 percent of your time. Cover your key points,
stay focused, but do not overload your audience. It has been found that an audience can absorb only about four to six points. Your
close, which uses about 5 to 10 percent of your time, should leave the audience with a positive impression of you and your
presentation. You have lots of choices for your close: You can either summarize your message or relate your closing remarks to
your opening remarks or do both.

Practice

This section should really be called "Practice, Practice, Practice" (and maybe another Practice for emphasis). The saying "practice
makes perfect" is definitely true with presentations, especially for beginners. You might want to start off practicing your
presentation by yourself, perhaps in front of a mirror. You could even videotape yourself and play it back (that should be fun). As
you get the hang of it, ask a friend or a group of friends to listen to and critique your talk. When you rehearse, check your time to
see whether it's what you want. Avoid memorizing your talk, but know it well.

Present

Now you're ready for the big day--it's time to present. Dress for the part--if it's a professional talk, dress like a professional. Go
early to the location where you'll present, check out the room, and be sure any equipment you'll need is there and works. Try to
connect with your audience as soon as you start your presentation. Take your time delivering your opening. Act as natural as you
can, and try to relax. Slow your speech down, as you'll likely have a tendency to speed up if you get nervous. Pause before and
after your main point for emphasis. If you put brief notes on index cards, avoid reading from the cards. Glance down at them when
needed, but then look up at your audience as you speak. Involve your audience in your presentation by asking them questions. Not
only will they feel included, but it will help you relax. When you're close to finishing, let your audience know this (but don't
announce it too early in the talk or your audience might start packing up prematurely). Remember to leave some time for questions
and answers.

Figure 8.11: Preparation is key to a successful presentation. (NASA Goddard Space Flight Center - Earth Day Presentation - CC
BY 2.0.)

8.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4028
Visual Aids

It's very common to use visual aids (generally PowerPoint slides) in business presentations. The use of visual aids helps your
audience remember your main points and keeps you focused. If you do use PowerPoint slides, follow some simple (but important)
rules (Iasted, 2011):

    Avoid wordiness: use key words and phrases only.
    Don't crowd your slide: include at most four to five points per slide.
    Use at least an eighteen-point font (so that it can be seen from the back of the room).
    Use a color font that contrasts with the background (for example, blue font on white background).
    Use graphs rather than just words.
    Proof your slides and use spell check.

And most important: The PowerPoint slides are background, but you are the show. Avoid turning around and reading the slides.
The audience wants to see you talk; they are not interested in seeing the back of your head.

This page titled 8.6: Forms of Communication is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

8.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4028
8.7: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Factors Contributing to Nike's Success
This writing assignment solicits your opinion on factors contributing to Nike's success. To complete it, you should go to
www.nikebiz.com/company_overview/timeline to learn about Nike's history by reviewing the company's time line.

Memo Format
Use the memo format described in the chapter for this assignment. Your memo should not exceed two pages. It should be single
spaced (with an extra space between paragraphs and bulleted items).

Scenario
You're one of the fortunate college students selected to participate in Nike's summer internship program. The program is quite
competitive, and you still can't believe that you were chosen. You arrived in Beaverton, Oregon, yesterday morning and have been
busy ever since. Last night, you attended a dinner for new interns where you were welcomed to Nike by CEO Mark Parker.

You were lucky to be sitting next to a personable, well-informed Nike veteran named Simon Pestridge. Pestridge joined Nike about
twelve years ago. He was telling you about a past assignment he had as director of marketing for Australia. (You were impressed
with his status at Nike, not just because he doesn't look much older than you, but also because you've always wanted to travel to
Australia.) The dinner conversation turned to a discussion of the reasons for Nike's success. Others at the table were giving their
opinions on the subject when Pestridge turned to you and said, "As a new intern, give us an outsider's point of view. Why do you
think Nike's been so successful?" You were about to venture an opinion when Pestridge was called away for a phone call. As he got
up, however, he quickly said, "Send me a memo telling me what factors you think have contributed to Nike's success. Keep it
simple. Three factors are plenty." Though you were relieved to have a little time to think about your answer, you were also a bit
nervous about the prospect of writing your first official memo.

As everyone else headed for the Bo Jackson gym, you went back to your room to think about Pestridge's question and to figure out
how to go about writing your memo. You want to be sure to start by telling him that you enjoyed talking with him. You also need to
remind him that you're responding to his question about three factors in Nike's success, and must be sure to explain why you
believe they're important. You'll end by saying that you hope the information is helpful and that he can contact you if he has any
further questions.

So far, so good, but you're still faced with the toughest part of your task--identifying the three factors that you deem important to
Nike's success. Fortunately, even at Nike there's always tomorrow to get something done, so you decide to sleep on it and write
your memo in the morning.

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

The Goof-Off
You and three other students have been working on a group project all semester in your Introduction to Business class. One of the
members of the team did very little work; he failed to attend almost all the meetings, took no responsibility for any of the tasks,
didn't attend the practice session before your presentation, and in general was a real goof-off. But he happens to be friends with
two of the team members. You and your other team members have been asked to complete the attached team member evaluation.
You want to give the student what he deserves--almost no credit. But your other two team members don't agree. They argue that it
is "unsocial and mean" to tell the truth about this student's lack of contribution. Instead, they want to report that everyone shared
the work equally. The evaluation will be used in determining grades for each team member. Those who contributed more will get a
higher grade than those who did not. Prepare an argument that you can advance to the other team members on the ethics of
covering for this student. Assuming that your two teammates won't change their minds, what would you do?

Attachment to Ethics Angle Problem

8.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4029
Introduction to Business

Team Member Evaluation
(To be given to your faculty member during the last week of class)

TEAM ___________________

You have a total of $100,000. You can use this to reward your team members (including yourself) for their contributions to the team
project.

Fill in each team member's name below (including your own), and show beside each name how much of the $100,000 you would
give that member for his or her contributions to the preparation and presentation of the team project. Do not share your
recommendations with your team members.

Your recommendations will be confidential.

Team Members (including yourself)     Amount to be given for efforts on team project
____________________________________  $_________________________
____________________________________  $_________________________

____________________________________  $_________________________
____________________________________  $_________________________
____________________________________  $_________________________

____________________________________  $_________________________
TOTAL (MUST EQUAL $100,000)           $_________________________

YOUR NAME ______________________________________________________

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Team Skills and Talents

Team projects involve a number of tasks that are handled by individual team members. These tasks should be assigned to team
members based on their particular skills and talents. The next time you work on a team project, you should use the following table
to help your team organize its tasks and hold its members responsible for their completion.

Here is how you should use this document:

    Identify all tasks to be completed.
    Assign each task to a member (or members) of your team based on their skills, talents, and time available.
    Determine a due date for each task.
    As a task is completed, indicate its completion date and the team member (or members) who completed the task. If more than
    one team member works on the assignment, indicate the percentage of time each devoted to the task. You can add tasks that
    surface as your team works its way through the project.
    If the assigned person fails to complete the task, or submits poor quality work, add a note to the report explaining what
    happened and how the situation was corrected (for example, another team member had to redo the task).
    Submit the completed form (with all columns completed) to your faculty member at the class after your team project is due.
    Include a cover sheet with your team's name (or number) and the name of each team member.

                                      8.7.2                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4029
Tasks to Be Completed  Initials of Team    Date to Be Completed Date Completed  Initials of Team
                       Member(s) Who Will                                       Member(s) Who
                       Complete Task                                            Completed Task (Add a
                                                                                Note Below the Table
________               ________            ________  ________                   Explaining Any
________               ________            ________  ________                   Problems with
________               ________            ________  ________                   Completion or Quality of
________               ________            ________  ________                   Work)
________               ________            ________  ________
                                                                                ________

                                                                                ________

                                                                                ________

                                                                                ________

                                                                                ________

This page titled 8.7: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                           8.7.3                                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4029
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers

  9.1: 0 Cases and Problems
  9.2: What Is Marketing?
  9.3: The Marketing Mix
  9.4: Pricing a Product
  9.5: Placing a Product
  9.6: Promoting a Product
  9.7: Interacting with Your Customers
  9.8: The Product Life Cycle
  9.9: The Marketing Environment
  9.10: Careers in Marketing
This page titled 9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
9.1: 0 Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

The Economics of Online Annoyance

You've just accessed a Web page and begun searching for the information you want to retrieve. Suddenly the page is plastered from
top to bottom with banner ads. Some pop up, some float across the screen, and in some, animated figures dance and prance to
inane music. As a user of the Internet, feel free to be annoyed. As a student of business, however, you should stop and ask yourself
a few questions: Where do banner ads come from? Who stands to profit from them?

To get a handle on these questions, go to the How Stuff Works Web site (http://computer.howstuffworks.com/web-advertising.htm)
and read the article "How Web Advertising Works," by Marshall Brain. When you've finished, answer the following questions from
the viewpoint of a company advertising on the Web:

 1. What are the advantages and disadvantages of banner ads? Why are they less popular with advertisers today than they were
    about ten years ago?

 2. What alternative forms of Web advertising are more common today? (For each of these alternative forms, describe the type of
    ad, explain how it's more effective than banner advertising, and list any disadvantages.)

 3. Why are there so many ads on the Web? Is it easy to make money selling ads on the Web? Why, or why not?
 4. Assume that you're in charge of Web advertising for a company that sells cell-phone ring tones. On which sites would you

    place your ads and what type of ads would you use? Why?

Career Opportunities

So Many Choices

How would you like to work for an advertising agency? How about promoting a new or top-selling brand? Want to try your hand at
sales? Or does marketing research or logistics management sound more appealing? With a marketing degree, you can pursue any of
these career options--and more. To learn more about these options, go to the WetFeet Web site (wetfeet.com/Careers--
Industries.aspx). Scroll down to the "Careers" section and select two of the following career options that interest you: advertising,
brand management, marketing, sales, or supply chain management. For each of the two selected, answer the following questions:

    What would you do if you worked in this field?
    Who does well?
    What requirements are needed to be hired into this field?
    Are job prospects in the field positive or negative?
    What career track would you follow?

Finally, write a paragraph responding to these questions: Does a career in marketing appeal to you? Why, or why not? Which career
option do you find most interesting? Why?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Pushing Cigarettes Overseas

A senior official of the United Nation's World Health Organization (WHO) claims that the marketing campaigns of international
tobacco companies are targeting half a billion young people in the Asia Pacific region by linking cigarette smoking to glamorous
and attractive lifestyles. WHO accuses tobacco companies of "falsely associating use of their products with desirable qualities such
as glamour, energy and sex appeal, as well as exciting outdoor activities and adventure" (Agence France Presse, 2008). WHO
officials have expressed concern that young females are a major focus of these campaigns.

The organization called on policymakers to support a total ban on tobacco advertising saying that "the bombardment of messages
through billboards, newspapers, magazines, radio and television ads, as well as sports and fashion sponsorships and other ploys, are
meant to deceive young people into trying their first stick" (Associated Press, 2008). WHO stresses the need for a total ban on
advertising as partial bans let tobacco companies switch from one marketing scheme to another.

9.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4030
WHO officials believe that extensive tobacco advertising gives young people the false impression that smoking is normal and
diminishes their ability to comprehend that it can kill. Representatives of the organization assert that the tobacco industry is taking
advantage of young people's vulnerability to advertising.

Instructions: Read the following articles and provide your opinion on the questions that follow:

Agence France Presse (AFP), "WHO: Half a Billion Young Asians at Risk from Tobacco Addiction," May 31, 2008,
afp.google.com/article/ALeqM5...asEdZ20BsmiDfQ.

    Associated Press, "WHO Criticizes Tobacco Industry Focus on Asian Young People," May 30, 2008,
    www.chinapost.com.tw/news/200...criticizes.htm
    Were Blockbuster's actions unethical?

Provide your opinion on the following :

U.S. laws prohibit advertising by the tobacco companies. Should developing countries in which cigarette smoking is promoted by
the international tobacco companies follow suit--should they also ban tobacco advertising?

 1. Are U.S. companies that engage in these advertising practices acting unethically? Why or why not?
 2. Should international policymakers support a total ban on tobacco advertising? Why or why not?
 3. If tobacco advertising was banned globally, what would be the response of the international tobacco companies?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Build a Better iPod and They Will Listen

Right now, Apple is leading the pack of consumer-electronics manufacturers with its extremely successful iPod. But that doesn't
mean that Apple's lead in the market can't be surmounted. Perhaps some enterprising college students will come up with an idea
for a better iPod and put together a plan for bringing it to market. After all, Apple founders (the late Steve Jobs and Stephen
Wozniak) were college students (actually, college dropouts) who found entrepreneurship more rewarding than scholarship. Here's
your team assignment for this exercise:

 1. Select a target market for your product.
 2. Develop your product so that it offers features that meet the needs of your target market.
 3. Describe the industry in which you'll compete.
 4. Set a price for your product and explain your pricing strategy.
 5. Decide what distribution channels you'll use to get your product to market.
 6. Develop a promotion mix to create demand for your product.

The Global View (AACSB)

Made in China--Why Not Sell in China?

One of Wow Wee's recent robots, Roboscooper, is manufactured in China. Why shouldn't it sell the product in China? In fact, the
company has introduced its popular robot to the Chinese market through a Toys "R" Us store in Hong Kong. Expanding into other
parts of China, however, will require a well-crafted, well-executed marketing plan. You're director of marketing for Wow Wee, and
you've been asked to put together a plan to expand sales of Roboscooper in China. You can be introduced to Roboscooper by going
to the product section of Wow Wee's site: http://www.wowwee.com/en/products/to...cs/roboscooper. To get some background on
selling toys in China, go to the Epoch Times Web site (en.epochtimes.com/news/4-12-23/25184.html) and read the article "China
Could Soon Become Booming Toy Market." Then, draw up a brief marketing plan for increasing sales in China, being sure to
include all the following components:

Profile of your target market (gender, age, income level, geographic location, interests, and so forth)

 1. Proposed changes to the company's current marketing mix: modifications to product design, pricing, distribution, and
    promotional strategies

 2. Estimated sales in units for each of the next five years, including a list of the factors that you considered in arriving at your
    projections

 3. Discussion of threats and opportunities posed by expansion in the Chinese market

9.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4030
References                                                                                          2008,
                                                                                                    2008,
Agence France Presse, "WHO: Half a Billion Young Asians at Risk from Tobacco Addiction," May 31,
afp.google.com/article/ALeqM5...asEdZ20BsmiDfQ (accessed January 22, 2012).

Associated Press, "WHO Criticizes Tobacco Industry Focus on Asian Young People," May 30,
http://www.iht.com/articles/ap/2008/05/30/news/Asia-Young-Smokers.php (accessed January 22, 2012).

This page titled 9.1: 0 Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4030
9.2: What Is Marketing?

  Learning Objectives

       Define the terms marketing, marketing concept, and marketing strategy.
       Outline the tasks involved in selecting a target market.

When you consider the functional areas of business--accounting, finance, management, marketing, and operations--marketing is
the one you probably know the most about. After all, as a consumer and target of all sorts of advertising messages, you've been on
the receiving end of marketing initiatives for most of your life. What you probably don't appreciate, however, is the extent to which
marketing focuses on providing value to the customer. According to the American Marketing Association, "Marketing is the
activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for
customers, clients, partners, and society at large" (American Marketing Association, 2011).

In other words, marketing isn't just advertising and selling. It includes everything that organizations do to satisfy customer needs:

    Coming up with a product and defining its features and benefits
    Setting its price
    Identifying its target market
    Making potential customers aware of it
    Getting people to buy it
    Delivering it to people who buy it
    Managing relationships with customers after it has been delivered

Not surprisingly, marketing is a team effort involving everyone in the organization. Think about a typical business--a local movie
theater, for example. It's easy to see how the person who decides what movies to show is involved in marketing: he or she selects
the product to be sold. It's even easier to see how the person who puts ads in the newspaper works in marketing: he or she is in
charge of advertising--making people aware of the product and getting them to buy it. But what about the ticket seller and the
person behind the counter who gets the popcorn and soda? What about the projectionist? Are they marketing the business?
Absolutely: the purpose of every job in the theater is satisfying customer needs, and as we've seen, identifying and satisfying
customer needs is what marketing is all about.

If everyone is responsible for marketing, can the average organization do without an official marketing department? Not
necessarily: most organizations have marketing departments in which individuals are actively involved in some marketing-related
activity--product design and development, pricing, promotion, sales, and distribution. As specialists in identifying and satisfying
customer needs, members of the marketing department manage--plan, organize, direct, and control--the organization's overall
marketing efforts.

The Marketing Concept

Figure 9.1 is designed to remind you that to achieve business success you need to do three things:

    Find out what customers or potential customers need.
    Develop products to meet those needs.
    Engage the entire organization in efforts to satisfy customers.

Figure 9.1 The Marketing Concept  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4031
                  9.2.1
At the same time, you need to achieve organizational goals, such as profitability and growth. This basic philosophy--satisfying
customer needs while meeting organizational goals--is called the marketing concept, and when it's effectively applied, it guides all
of an organization's marketing activities.

The marketing concept puts the customer first: as your most important goal, satisfying the customer must be the goal of everyone in
the organization. But this doesn't mean that you ignore the bottom line; if you want to survive and grow, you need to make some
profit. What you're looking for is the proper balance between the commitments to customer satisfaction and company survival.
Consider the case of Medtronic, a manufacturer of medical devices, such as pacemakers and defibrillators. The company boasts
more than 50 percent of the market in cardiac devices and is considered the industry standard setter (Medtronics, 2011). Everyone
in the organization understands that defects are intolerable in products that are designed to keep people alive. Thus, committing
employees to the goal of zero defects is vital to both Medtronic's customer base and its bottom line. "A single quality issue,"
explains CEO Arthur D. Collins Jr., "can deep-six a business" (Arndt, 2004).

Marketing Strategy

Declaring that you intend to develop products that satisfy customers and that everyone in your organization will focus on customers
is easy. The challenge is doing it. As you can see in Figure 9.2, to put the marketing concept into practice, you need a marketing
strategy--a plan for performing two tasks:

    Selecting a target market
    Developing your marketing mix--implementing strategies for creating, pricing, promoting, and distributing products that
    satisfy customers

We'll use Figure 9.2 as a blueprint for our discussion of target-market selection, and we'll analyze the concept of the marketing mix
in more detail in Section 9.2 "The Marketing Mix".

Figure 9.2 Marketing Strategy  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4031
               9.2.2
This page titled 9.2: What Is Marketing? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4031
9.3: The Marketing Mix

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the four Ps of the marketing mix.
    2. Explain how to conduct marketing research.
    3. Discuss various branding strategies and explain the benefits of packaging and labeling.

After identifying a target market, your next step is developing and implementing a marketing program designed to reach it. As
Figure 9.4 shows, this program involves a combination of tools called the marketing mix, often referred to as the "four Ps" of
marketing:

 1. Developing a product that meets the needs of the target market
 2. Setting a price for the product
 3. Distributing the product--getting it to a place where customers can buy it
 4. Promoting the product--informing potential buyers about it

                                                                      Figure 9.4 The Marketing Mix

The goal is to develop and implement a marketing strategy that combines these four elements. To see how this process works, let's
look at Wow Wee Toys' marketing program for Robosapien (Wow Wee Toys Ltd., 2004).

Developing a Product

The development of Robosapien was a bit unusual for a company that was already active in its market. Generally, product ideas
come from people within the company who understand its customers' needs. Internal engineers are then challenged to design the
product. In the case of Robosapien, however, the creator, Mark Tilden, had conceived and designed the product before joining Wow
Wee Toys. The company gave him the opportunity to develop the product for commercial purposes, and Tilden was brought on
board to oversee the development of Robosapien into a product that satisfied Wow Wee's commercial needs.

Robosapien is not a "kid's toy," though kids certainly love its playful personality. It's a home-entertainment product that appeals to
a broad audience--children, young adults, older adults, and even the elderly. It's a big gift item, and it has developed a following of
techies and hackers who take it apart, tinker with it, and even retrofit it with such features as cameras and ice skates. In fact, Tilden
wanted the robot to be customizable; that's why he insisted that its internal parts be screwed together rather than soldered.

Conducting Marketing Research

Before settling on a strategy for Robosapien, the marketers at Wow Wee did some homework. First, to zero in on their target
market, they had to find out what various people thought of the product. More precisely, they needed answers to questions like the
following:

    Who are our potential customers? What are they like?
    Do people like Robosapien? What gets them excited about it? What don't they like? What would they change?

9.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4032
    How much are they willing to pay for Robosapien?
    Where will they probably go to buy the product?
    How should it be promoted? How can we distinguish it from competing products?
    Will enough people buy Robosapien to return a reasonable profit?
    Should we go ahead and launch the product?

The last question would be left up to Wow Wee management, but, given the size of the investment needed to bring Robosapien to
market, Wow Wee couldn't afford to make the wrong decision. Ultimately, the company was able to make an informed decision
because its marketing team provided answers to all the other questions. They got these answers through marketing research--the
process of collecting and analyzing the data that are relevant to a specific marketing situation.

This data had to be collected in a systematic way. Market research seeks two types of data:

 1. Marketers generally begin by looking at secondary data--information already collected, whether by the company or by others,
    that pertains to the target market.

 2. Then, with secondary data in hand, they're prepared to collect primary data--newly collected information that addresses
    specific questions.

You can get secondary data from inside or outside the organization. Internally available data includes sales reports and other
information on customers. External data can come from a number of sources. The U.S. Census Bureau, for example, posts
demographic information on American households (such as age, income, education, and number of members), both for the country
as a whole and for specific geographic areas. You can also find out whether an area is growing or declining.

Population data helped Wow Wee estimate the size of its potential U.S. target market. Other secondary data helped the firm assess
the size of foreign markets in regions around the world, such as Europe, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia, and the Pacific Rim.
This data positioned the company to sell Robosapien in eighty-five countries, including Canada, England, France, Germany, South
Africa, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong, and Japan.

Using secondary data that are already available (and free) is a lot easier than collecting your own information. Unfortunately,
however, secondary data didn't answer all the questions that Wow Wee was asking in this particular situation. To get these answers,
the marketing team had to conduct primary research: they had to work directly with members of their target market. It's a
challenging process. First, they had to decide exactly what they wanted to know. Then they had to determine whom to ask. Finally,
they had to pick the best methods for gathering information.

We know what they wanted to know--we've already listed the questions they asked themselves. As for whom to talk to, they
randomly selected representatives from their target market. Now, they could have used a variety of tools for collecting information
from these people, each of which has its advantages and disadvantages. To understand the marketing-research process fully, we
need to describe the most common of these tools:

    Surveys. Sometimes marketers mail questionnaires to members of the target market. In Wow Wee's case, the questionnaire
    could have included photos of Robosapien. It's an effective way to reach people, but the process is time consuming and the
    response rate is generally low. Phoning people also takes a lot of time, but a good percentage of people tend to respond.
    Unfortunately, you can't show them the product. Online surveys are easier to answer and get better response rates, and the site
    can link to pictures or even videos of Robosapien.
    Personal interviews. Though time consuming, personal interviews not only let you talk with real people but also let you
    demonstrate Robosapien. You can also clarify answers and ask open-ended questions.
    Focus groups. With a focus group, you can bring together a group of individuals (perhaps six to ten) and ask them questions. A
    trained moderator can explain the purpose of the group and lead the discussion. If sessions are run effectively, you can come
    away with valuable information about customer responses to both your product and your marketing strategy.

Wow Wee used focus groups and personal interviews because both approaches had the advantage of allowing people to interact
with Robosapien. In particular, focus-group sessions provided valuable opinions about the product, proposed pricing, distribution
methods, and promotion strategies. Management was pleased with the feedback and confident that the product would succeed.

Researching your target market is necessary before you launch a new product. But the benefits of marketing research don't extend
merely to brand-new products. Companies also use it when they're deciding whether or not to refine an existing product or develop

9.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4032
a new marketing strategy for an existing product. Kellogg's, for example, conducted online surveys to get responses to a variation
on its Pop-Tarts brand--namely, Pop-Tarts filled with a mixture of traditional fruit filling and yogurt. Marketers had picked out
four possible names for the product and wanted to know which one kids and mothers liked best. They also wanted to know what
they thought of the product and its packaging. Both mothers and kids liked the new Pop-Tarts (though for different reasons) and its
packaging, and the winning name for the product launched in the spring of 2011 was "Pop-Tarts Yogurt Blasts." The online survey
of 175 mothers and their children was conducted in one weekend by an outside marketing research group (Light, 2004).

Branding

Armed with positive feedback from their research efforts, the Wow Wee team was ready for the next step: informing buyers--both
consumers and retailers--about their product. They needed a brand--some word, letter, sound, or symbol that would differentiate
their product from similar products on the market. They chose the brand name Robosapien, hoping that people would get the
connection between homo sapiens (the human species) and Robosapien (the company's coinage for its new robot "species"). To
prevent other companies from coming out with their own "Robosapiens," they took out a trademark by registering the name with
the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

Though this approach--giving a unique brand name to a particular product--is a bit unusual, it isn't unprecedented. Mattel, for
example, established a separate brand for Barbie, and Anheuser-Busch sells beer under the brand name Budweiser. Note, however,
that the more common approach, which is taken by such companies as Microsoft, Dell, and Apple, calls for marketing all the
products made by a company under the company's brand name.

Branding Strategies

Companies can adopt one of three major strategies for branding a product:

 1. With private branding (or private labeling), a company makes a product and sells it to a retailer who in turn resells it under its
    own name. A soft-drink maker, for example, might make cola for Wal-Mart to sell as its Sam's Choice Cola house brand.

 2. With generic branding, the maker attaches no branding information to a product except a description of its contents. Customers
    are often given a choice between a brand-name prescription drug or a cheaper generic drug with a similar chemical makeup.

        Figure 9.5: Though the generic brand Fluoxetine has the same chemical makeup as Prozac, it has a much lower price tag. (eviied -
        fluoxetine 40 mg - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)
 1. With manufacturer branding, a company sells one or more products under its own brand names. Adopting a multiproduct-
    branding approach, it sells all its products under one brand name (generally the company name). Using a multibranding
    approach, it will assign different brand names to different products. Campbell's Soup, which markets all its soups under the
    company's name, uses the multiproduct-branding approach. Automakers generally use multibranding. Toyota, for example,
    markets to a wide range of potential customers by offering cars under various brand names (Toyota, Lexus, and Scion).

Building Brand Equity

Wow Wee went with the multibranding approach, deciding to market Robosapien under the robot's own brand name. Was this a
good choice? The answer depends, at least in part, on how the product sells. If customers don't like Robosapien, its failure won't
reflect badly on Wow Wee's other products. On the other hand, people might like Robosapien but have no reason to associate it
with other Wow Wee products. In this case, Wow Wee wouldn't gain much from its brand equity--any added value generated by

9.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4032
favorable consumer experiences with Robosapien. To get a better idea of how valuable brand equity is, think for a moment about
the effect of the name Dell on a product. When you have a positive experience with a Dell product--say, a laptop or a printer--you
come away with a positive opinion of the entire Dell product line and will probably buy more Dell products. Over time, you may
even develop brand loyalty: you may prefer--or even insist on--Dell products. Not surprisingly, brand loyalty can be extremely
valuable to a company. Because of customer loyalty, the value of the Coca-Cola brand is estimated at more than $70 billion,
followed by IBM at $65 billion, Microsoft at $61 billion, and Google at $43 billion (Interbrand, 2010).

This page titled 9.3: The Marketing Mix is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4032
9.4: Pricing a Product

  Learning Objective

       Identify pricing strategies that are appropriate for new and existing products.

The second of the four Ps in the marketing mix is price. Pricing a product involves a certain amount of trial and error because there
are so many factors to consider. If you price too high, a lot of people simply won't buy your product. Or you might find yourself
facing competition from some other supplier that thinks it can beat your price. On the other hand, if you price too low, you might
not make enough profit to stay in business. So how do you decide on a price? Let's look at several pricing options that were
available to those marketers at Wow Wee who were responsible for pricing Robosapien. We'll begin by discussing two strategies
that are particularly applicable to products that are being newly introduced.

New Product Pricing Strategies

When Robosapien was introduced into the market, it had little direct competition in its product category. True, there were some
"toy" robots available, but they were not nearly as sophisticated. Sony offered a pet dog robot called Aibo, but its price tag of
$1,800 was really high. Even higher up the price-point scale was the $3,600 iRobi robot made by the Korean company Yujin
Robotics to entertain kids and even teach them foreign languages. Parents could also monitor kids' interactions with the robot
through its own video-camera eyes; in fact, they could even use the robot itself to relay video messages telling kids to shut it off
and go to sleep (Edwards, 2004).

Skimming and Penetration Pricing

Because Wow Wee was introducing an innovative product in an emerging market with few direct competitors, it considered one of
two pricing strategies:

    With skimming pricing, Wow Wee would start off with the highest price that keenly interested customers would pay. This
    approach would generate early profits, but when competition enters--and it will, because healthy profits can be made in the
    market--Wow Wee would have to lower its price.
    Using penetration pricing, Wow Wee would initially charge a low price, both to discourage competition and to grab a sizable
    share of the market. This strategy might give the company some competitive breathing room (potential competitors won't be
    attracted to low prices and modest profits). Over time, as its growing market discourages competition, Wow Wee could push up
    its prices.

This page titled 9.4: Pricing a Product is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4033
9.5: Placing a Product

  Learning Objectives
       Explore various product-distribution strategies.
       Explain how companies create value through effective supply chain management.

The next element in the marketing mix is place, which refers to strategies for distribution. Distribution entails all activities
involved in getting the right quantity of your product to your customers at the right time and at a reasonable cost. Thus, distribution
involves selecting the most appropriate distribution channels and handling the physical distribution of products.

Distribution Channels

Companies must decide how they will distribute their products. Will they sell directly to customers (perhaps over the Internet)? Or
will they sell through an intermediary--a wholesaler or retailer who helps move products from their original source to the end
user? As you can see from Figure 9.7, various marketing channels are available to companies.

                                                                    Figure 9.7 Distribution Channels

Selling Directly to Customers

Many businesses, especially small ones and those just starting up, sell directly to customers. Michael Dell, for example, started out
selling computers from his dorm room. Tom First and Tom Story began operations at Nantucket Nectars by peddling home-brewed
fruit drinks to boaters in Nantucket Harbor. Most service companies sell directly to their customers; it's impossible to give a
haircut, fit contact lenses, mow a lawn, or repair a car through an intermediary. Many business-to-business sales take place through
direct contact between producer and buyer. Toyota, for instance, buys components directly from suppliers.

The Internet has greatly expanded the number of companies using direct distribution, either as their only distribution channel or as
an additional means of selling. Dell sells only online, while Adidas and Apple sell both on Web sites and in stores. The eBay online
auction site has become the channel of choice for countless small businesses. Many of the companies selling over the Internet are
enjoying tremendous sales growth. The largest of the online retailers--Amazon--was founded by Jeff Bezos in 1995 as an online
bookstore. In its fifteen-plus years in business, the company has experienced tremendous success, generating more than $34 billion
in revenues during 2010. With sales soaring by 51 percent, the future looks bright for the company (Yahoo!, 2011; Los Angeles
Times, 2011).

The advantage of this approach of selling direct to the customer is a certain degree of control over prices and selling activities: you
don't have to depend on or pay an intermediary. On the other hand, you must commit your own resources to the selling process,

9.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4034
and that strategy isn't appropriate for all businesses. It would hardly be practical for Wow Wee to sell directly to individual
consumers scattered around the world.

Selling through Retailers

Retailers buy goods from producers and sell them to consumers, whether in stores, by phone, through direct mailings, or over the
Internet. Best Buy, for example, buys Robosapiens from Wow Wee and sells them to customers in its stores. Moreover, it promotes
Robosapiens to its customers and furnishes technical information and assistance. Each Best Buy outlet features a special display at
which customers can examine Robosapien and even try it out. On the other hand, selling through retailers means giving up some
control over pricing and promotion. The wholesale price you get from a retailer, who has to have room to mark up a retail price, is
substantially lower than you'd get if you sold directly to consumers.

Selling through Wholesalers

Selling through retailers works fine if you're dealing with only a few stores (or chains). But what if you produce a product--
bandages--that you need to sell through thousands of stores, including pharmacies, food stores, and discount stores. You'll also
want to sell to hospitals, day-care centers, and even college health centers. In this case, you'd be committing an immense portion of
your resources to the selling process. Besides, buyers like the ones you need don't want to deal directly with you. Imagine a chain
like CVS Pharmacy negotiating sales transactions with the maker of every single product that it carries in its stores. CVS deals with
wholesalers (sometimes called distributors): intermediaries who buy goods from suppliers and sell them to businesses that will
either resell or use them. Likewise, you'd sell your bandages to a wholesaler of health care products, which would, in turn, sell
them both to businesses like CVS, Kmart, and Giant Supermarkets and to institutions, such as hospitals and college health care
centers.

The wholesaler doesn't provide this service for free. Here's how it works. Let's say that CVS is willing to pay $2 a box for your
bandages. If you go through a wholesaler, you'll probably get only $1.50 a box. In other words, you'd make $0.50 less on each box
sold. Your profit margin--the amount you earn on each box--would therefore be less.

While selling through wholesalers will cut into your profit margins, the practice has several advantages. For one thing, wholesalers
make it their business to find the best outlets for the goods in which they specialize. They're often equipped to warehouse goods for
suppliers and to transport them from the suppliers' plants to the point of final sale. These advantages would appeal to Wow Wee. If
it sold Robosapien's to just a few retailers, it wouldn't need to go through a distributor. However, the company needs wholesalers to
supply an expanding base of retailers who want to carry the product.

Finally, intermediaries, such as wholesalers, can make the distribution channel more cost-effective. Look, for example, at Figure
9.8 . Because every contact between a producer and a consumer incurs costs, the more contacts in the process (panel a), the higher
the overall costs to consumers. The presence of an intermediary substantially reduces the total number of contacts (panel b).

9.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4034
                                                               Figure 9.8 What an Intermediary Can Do

This page titled 9.5: Placing a Product is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4034
9.6: Promoting a Product

  Learning Objective

       Describe the elements of the promotion mix.

Your promotion mix--the means by which you communicate with customers--may include advertising, personal selling, sales
promotion, and publicity. These are all tools for telling people about your product and persuading potential customers, whether
consumers or organizational users, to buy it. Before deciding on an appropriate promotional strategy, you should consider a few
questions:

 1. What's the main purpose of the promotion? Am I simply trying to make people aware of my product, or am I trying to get
    people to buy it right now? Am I trying to develop long-term customers? Am I trying to connect with my current customers?
    Am I trying to promote my company's image?

 2. What's my target market? What's the best way to reach it?
 3. Which product features (quality, price, service, availability, innovativeness) should I emphasize? How does my product differ

    from those of competitors?
 4. How much can I afford to invest in a promotion campaign?
 5. How do my competitors promote their products? Should I take a similar approach?

To promote a product, you need to imprint a clear image of it in the minds of your target audience. What do you think of, for
instance, when you hear "Ritz-Carlton"? What about "Motel 6"? They're both hotel chains, but the names certainly conjure up
different images. Both have been quite successful in the hospitality industry, but they project very different images to appeal to
different clienteles. The differences are evident in their promotions. The Ritz-Carlton Web site describes "luxury hotels" and
promises that the chain provides "the finest personal service and facilities throughout the world" (Ritz-Carlton, 2011). Motel 6, by
contrast, characterizes its facilities as "discount hotels" and assures you that you'll pay "discount hotel rates" (Motel 6, 2011).

Promotional Tools

We'll now examine each of the elements that can go into the promotion mix--advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, and
publicity. Then we'll see how Wow Wee incorporated them into a promotion mix to create a demand for Robosapien.

Advertising

Advertising is paid, nonpersonal communication designed to create an awareness of a product or company. Ads are everywhere--in
print media (such as newspapers, magazines, the Yellow Pages), on billboards, in broadcast media (radio and TV), and on the
Internet. It's hard to escape the constant barrage of advertising messages; indeed, it's estimated that the average consumer is
confronted by about five thousand ad messages each day (compared with about five hundred ads a day in the 1970s) (Johnson,
2011). For this very reason, ironically, ads aren't as effective as they used to be. Because we've learned to tune them out,
companies now have to come up with innovative ways to get through to potential customers. A New York Times article (Story,
2007) claims that "anywhere the eye can see, it's likely to see an ad." Subway turnstyles are plastered with ads for GEICO auto
insurance, Chinese food containers are decorated with ads for Continential Airways, parking meters display ads for Campbell's
Soup (Godin, 1999), examining tables in pediatricians' offices are covered with ads for Disney's Little Einsteins DVDs, school
buses play radio ads for children, "Got Milk" billboards at San Francisco bus stops give off the smell of chocolate chip cookies,
and U.S. Airways is even selling ads on motion sickness bags (yuck!) (Story, 2007). Even so, advertising is still the most prevalent
form of promotion.

Your choice of advertising media depends on your product, your target audience, and your budget. A travel agency selling spring-
break getaways to college students might post flyers on campus bulletin boards or run ads in campus newspapers. A pharmaceutical
company trying to develop a market for a new allergy drug might focus on TV ads that reach a broad audience of allergy sufferers.
A fitness center might purchase a Google ad that appears next to the search results when someone puts in a relevant keyword, such
as fitness. A small hot dog and hamburger stand will probably spend its limited advertising budget on ads in the Yellow Pages and
local newspapers (or pay a broke college student to stand by the side of the road dressed in a hot dog costume and hold a sign that
entices potential customers to "come on in"). The cofounders of Nantucket Nectars found radio ads particularly effective. Rather

9.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4035
than pay professionals, they produced their own ads themselves. (Actually, they just got on the radio and started rambling about
their product or their lives or anything else that seemed interesting at the time.) (Nantucket Allserve, Inc., 2011) As unprofessional
as they sounded, the ads worked, and the business grew.

Personal Selling

Personal selling refers to one-on-one communication with customers or potential customers. This type of interaction is necessary in
selling large-ticket items, such as homes, and it's also effective in situations in which personal attention helps to close a sale, such
as sales of cars and insurance policies.

Many retail stores depend on the expertise and enthusiasm of their salespeople to persuade customers to buy. Home Depot has
grown into a home-goods giant in large part because it fosters one-on-one interactions between salespeople and customers. The real
difference between Home Depot and everyone else, says one of its cofounders, isn't the merchandise; it's the friendly, easy-to-
understand advice that salespeople give to novice homeowners. Customers who never thought they could fix anything suddenly
feel empowered to install a carpet or hang wallpaper (Clancy, 2001).

"Congratulations! You can spend two free nights at any Hyatt Hotel in the world! All you have to do is sign up for a Hyatt-branded
credit card" (Hyatt Hotels and Resorts, 2011). This tactic is a form of sales promotion in which a company provides an incentive
for a potential customer to buy something. Most sales promotions are more straightforward than our hotel stay/credit-card offer.
Promotional giveaways might feature free samples or money-off coupons. Promotions can involve in-store demonstrations or trade-
show displays. They can be cheaper than advertising and can encourage customers to buy something quickly.

Apple Inc. and Starbucks partner to promote the iTunes experience by giving away free iTunes products, including a "Pick of the
Week" music download, apps, book samples from the iBookstore, TV shows, and games. The current app giveaway is the Shazam
Encore App, a music recognition service that allows users to immediately identify any song that's playing, see the lyrics, watch the
music videos, purchase concert tickets, and buy the track and share it with friends on Facebook and Twitter. The joint promotion
benefits both companies: Apple gets to plug its iTunes download and other products, and Starbucks entices customers to come into
its stores, enjoy free Wi-Fi, and buy coffee (Kelly B., 2011).

Publicity and Public Relations

Free publicity--say, getting your company or your product mentioned in a newspaper or on TV--can often generate more customer
interest than a costly ad. You may remember the holiday season buying frenzy surrounding a fuzzy red doll named "Tickle Me
Elmo." The big break for this product came when the marketing team sent a doll to the one-year-old son of talk-show host Rosie
O'Donnell. Two months before Christmas, O'Donnell started tossing dolls into the audience every time a guest said the word wall.
The product took off, and the campaign didn't cost marketers anything except a few hundred dolls (Media Awareness Network,
2011).

Consumer perception of a company is often important to a company's success. Many companies, therefore, manage their public
relations in an effort to garner favorable publicity for themselves and their products. When the company does something
noteworthy, such as sponsoring a fund-raising event, the public relations department may issue a press release to promote the event.
When the company does something negative, such as selling a prescription drug that has unexpected side effects, the public
relations department will work to control the damage to the company. Each year, the accounting firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers
and the Financial Times jointly survey more than a thousand CEOs in twenty countries to identify companies that have exhibited
exceptional integrity or commitment to corporate governance and social responsibility. Among the companies circulating positive
public relations as a result of a survey were General Electric, Microsoft, Coca-Cola, and IBM (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2011).

This page titled 9.6: Promoting a Product is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4035
9.7: Interacting with Your Customers

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain how companies manage customer relationships.
    2. Describe social media marketing and identify its advantages and disadvantages.

Customer-Relationship Management

Customers are the most important asset that any business has. Without enough good customers, no company can survive, and to
survive, a firm must not only attract new customers but, perhaps more importantly, also hold on to its current customers. Why?
Because repeat customers are more profitable. It's estimated that it costs as much as six times more to attract and sell to a new
customer than to an existing one (Bean, 1999). Repeat customers also tend to spend more, and they're much more likely to
recommend you to other people.

Retaining customers is the purpose of customer-relationship management--a marketing strategy that focuses on using information
about current customers to nurture and maintain strong relationships with them. The underlying theory is fairly basic: to keep
customers happy, you treat them well, give them what they want, listen to them, reward them with discounts and other loyalty
incentives, and deal effectively with their complaints.

Take Caesars Entertainment Corporation (formerly Harrah's Entertainment), which operates more than fifty casinos under several
brands, including Caesars, Harrah's, Bally's, and Horseshoe. Each year, it sponsors the World Series of Poker with a top prize of $9
million. Caesars gains some brand recognition when the twenty-two-hour event is televised on ESPN, but the real benefit derives
from the information cards filled out by the seven thousand entrants who put up $10,000 for a chance to walk away with $9
million. Data from these cards is fed into Caesars database, and almost immediately every entrant starts getting special attention,
including party invitations, free entertainment tickets, and room discounts. The program is all part of Harrah's strategy for targeting
serious gamers and recognizing them as its best customers (ESPN Poker, 2010; Fitch, 2004).

        Figure 9.11: Customer-relationship management is especially important to businesses that provide services. A concierge ensures
        that hotel guests are treated well during their stay. Manchester City Library - Customer Service on Day 357 - CC BY-SA 2.0.

Sheraton Hotels uses a softer approach to entice return customers. Sensing that its resorts needed both a new look and a new
strategy for attracting repeat customers, Sheraton launched its "Year of the Bed" campaign: in addition to replacing all its old beds
with luxurious new mattresses and coverings, it issued a "service promise guarantee"--a policy that any guest who's dissatisfied
with his or her Sheraton stay will be compensated. The program also calls for a customer-satisfaction survey and discount offers,
both designed to keep the hotel chain in touch with its customers (Hotel News Resource, 2011).

Another advantage of keeping in touch with customers is the opportunity to offer them additional products. Amazon.com is a
master at this strategy. When you make your first purchase at Amazon.com, you're also making a lifelong "friend"--one who will
suggest (based on what you've bought before) other things that you might like to buy. Because Amazon.com continually updates its
data on your preferences, the company gets better at making suggestions. Now that the Internet firm has expanded past books,

9.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4036
Amazon.com can draw on its huge database to promote a vast range of products, and shopping for a variety of products at
Amazon.com appeals to people who value time above all else.

Permission versus Interruption Marketing

Underlying Amazon.com's success in communicating with customers is the fact that customers have given the company permission
to contact them. Companies that ask for customers' cooperation engage in permission marketing (Godin, 1999). The big advantage
is focusing on an audience of people who have already shown an interest in what they have to offer. Compare this approach with
mass marketing--the practice of sending out messages to a vast audience of anonymous people. If you advertise on TV, you're
hoping that people will listen, even though you're interrupting them; that's why some marketers call such standard approaches
interruption marketing (Bianco, 2004). Remember, however, that permission marketing isn't free. Because winning and keeping
customers means giving them incentives, Caesars lets high rollers sleep and eat free (or at a deep discount), Norwegian Cruise Line
gives members of its past guest program, Latitudes, discounts on sailings, priority check-in, and members-only cocktail parties.
Customer-relations management and permission marketing have actually been around for a long time. But recent advances in
technology, especially the Internet, now allow companies to practice these approaches in more cost-effective ways.

This page titled 9.7: Interacting with Your Customers is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4036
9.8: The Product Life Cycle

  Learning Objective
    1. Explain how a product moves through its life cycle and how this brings about shifts in marketing-mix strategies.

Did you play with LEGO blocks when you were a kid? Almost everyone did. They were a big deal. Store shelves were stacked
with boxes of plastic bricks, wheels, and windows, plus packages containing just the pieces you needed to make something special,
like a LEGO helicopter. McDonald's put LEGO sets in Happy Meals. If you walk down a toy-store aisle today, you'll still find
LEGOs. They're shelved alongside the XBOX Kinect, Buzz Lightyear, and other playthings that appeal to contemporary kids. Like
these products, they're more sophisticated. They're often tied in with movies, such as Toy Story, Cars, Star Wars, and Harry Potter.

        Figure 9.12: LEGO has decided to go back to basics and focus on the classic bricks rather than complicated kits. Mark Nicolson -
        Lego house - CC BY 2.0.

Nowadays, the seventy-nine-year old Denmark company is doing very well: in 2010, its sales rose 37 percent and profits were up
70 percent (Reuters, 2011). The LEGO Group has moved its way up to the fifth largest toy company in the world based on sales
(Brown, 2011). Things were very different seven years earlier--LEGO sales had declined drastically in the early 2000s. In its 2003
annual report, its CEO admitted that "2003 was a very disappointing year for LEGO Company." Net sales fell by 26 percent,
resulting in a loss in earnings for the year and significant decline in market share. LEGO planned to drop many of its recent
initiatives and focus on its classic LEGO brick products (LEGO Group, 2003).

Let's look closer and find out what happened to the LEGO brand prior to its turnaround seven years ago. It was moving through
stages of development and decline (KeepMedia, 2004; KeepMedia, 2004; Fishman, 2001). Marketers call this process the product
life cycle, which is illustrated in Figure 9.13 . In theory, it's a lot like the life cycle that people go through. Once it's developed, a
new product is introduced to the market. With any success at all, it begins to grow, attracting more buyers. At some point, the
market stabilizes, and the product becomes mature. Eventually, however, its appeal diminishes, and it's overtaken by competing
brands or substitute products. Sales decline, and it's ultimately taken off the market.

9.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4037
                                                                   Figure 9.13 The Product Life Cycle

This is a simplified version of the cycle. There are lots of exceptions to the product life-cycle rules. For one thing, most products
never make it past the introduction stage; they die an early death. Second, some products (like some people) avoid premature
demise by reinventing themselves. This is what the LEGO Group did. The company had been reinventing itself during the fifteen-
year period of 1990 to 2005, launching new products in an effort to recover its customer base and overcome a series of financial
crises. Unfortunately, this strategy was unsuccessful. As pointed out by its CEO, the introduction of new products and the resulting
costs "have not produced the desired results. In some cases," admits the company, "new products have even cannibalized on the
sales of LEGO Company's core products and thus eroded earnings" (LEGO Group, 2003).

A take-over threat by Mattel Toy Company forced its CEO into action (Batra, 2010). His first stop in formulating a resurrection
plan was to fly to Virginia and attend a convention for adult fans of LEGO's. The attendees' stories of how LEGOs helped shape
their minds gave him hope that the family-owned company could be saved. He returned to Denmark and put into place a plan that
included downsizing the number of employees, selling its LEGOLAND theme parks, simplifying product designs, cutting
unprofitable product lines, and focusing on what made the company great: LEGO building blocks.

Life Cycle and the Changing Marketing Mix

As a product or brand moves through its life cycle, the company that markets it will shift its marketing-mix strategies. Let's see
how the mix might be changed at each stage.

Introduction

At this stage, most companies invest in advertising to make consumers aware of a product. If it faces only limited competition, it
might use a skimming-pricing approach. Typically, because it will sell only a relatively small quantity of the product, it will
distribute through just a few channels. Because sales are low while advertising and other costs are high, the company tends to lose
money during this stage.

Growth

As the company focuses on building sales, which are increasing rapidly at this stage, its advertising costs will go up. If competition
appears, it may respond by lowering prices and distributing through multiple distribution channels. With sales going up and costs
going down, the product becomes more profitable.

Maturity

If a product survives the growth stage, it will probably remain in the maturity stage for a long time. Sales still grow, though at a
decreasing rate, and will eventually stabilize. Advertising will be used to differentiate the product from competition. Price wars
may occur, but profits will be good because sales volume will remain high. As the product becomes outdated, the company may
make changes in keeping with changing consumer preferences.

9.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4037
Decline
In 2004, LEGO was in this stage: demand had declined as more innovative products absorbed the attention of kids. Price
competition had become more intense, and profits were harder to come by; in fact, in some years, they had turned into losses. But,
unlike most products that enter the decline stage, LEGO avoided its likely demise by reinventing itself. Now, as the Danish phrase
leg godt, from which the name LEGO was coined, suggests, children all over the world can take out their LEGOs and "play-well."

Key Takeaways

The stages of development and decline that products go through over their lives is called the product life cycle.

    The stages a product goes through are introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.
     1. Once it's developed, a new product is introduced to the market.
     2. With any success at all, it begins to grow, attracting more buyers.
     3. At some point the market stabilizes, and the product becomes mature.
     4. Eventually, its appeal diminishes, and it's overtaken by competing brands or substitute products. Sales decline and it's

        ultimately taken off the market.
    As a product moves through its life cycle, the company that markets it will shift its marketing-mix strategies.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Did you ever have a Nintendo Game Boy? Is the product still popular? Like all products, Game Boy has a product life cycle. Your
job is to describe that product life cycle. To learn something about the product, go to the Web, log on to your favorite search engine
(Google, Yahoo!), and enter the phrase "Game Boy history." Identify each of the product life stages that Game Boy has gone
through, and speculate on the marketing actions that Nintendo would have taken during each stage. Where do you think Game Boy
is now in its product life cycle? Where do you think it will be in five years? Justify your answers.

This page titled 9.8: The Product Life Cycle is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4037
9.9: The Marketing Environment

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the external marketing environment in which businesses operate.
    2. Discuss the factors that influence consumer behavior.

By and large, managers can control the four Ps of the marketing mix: they can decide which products to offer, what prices to charge
for them, how to distribute them, and how to reach target audiences. Unfortunately, there are other forces at work in the marketing
world--forces over which marketers have much less control. These forces make up a company's external marketing environment,
which, as you can see in Figure 9.14, we can divide into five sets of factors:

 1. Political and regulatory
 2. Economic
 3. Competitive
 4. Technological
 5. Social and cultural

                                                                Figure 9.14 The Marketing Environment

These factors--and changes in them--present both threats and opportunities that require shifts in marketing plans. To spot trends
and other signals that conditions may be in flux, marketers must continually monitor the environment in which their companies
operate. To get a better idea of how they affect a firm's marketing activities, let's look at each of the five areas of the external
environment.

The Political and Regulatory Environment

Federal, state, and local bodies can set rules or restrictions on the conduct of businesses. The purpose of regulation is to protect
both consumers and businesses. Businesses favor some regulations (such as patent laws) while chafing under others (such as
restrictions on advertising). The tobacco industry, for example, has had to learn to live with a federal ban on TV and radio
advertising. More recently, many companies in the food industry have expressed unhappiness over regulations requiring the
labeling of trans-fat content. The broadcasting industry is increasingly concerned about fines being imposed by the Federal

9.9.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4038
Communications Commission for offenses against "standards of decency." The loudest outcry probably came from telemarketers in
response to the establishment of "do-not-call" registries.

All these actions occasioned changes in the marketing strategies of affected companies. Tobacco companies rerouted advertising
dollars from TV to print media. Food companies reduced trans-fat levels and began targeting health-conscious consumers. Talent
coordinators posted red flags next to the names of Janet Jackson (of the now-famous malfunctioning costume) and other
performers. The telemarketing industry fired workers and scrambled to reinvent its entire business model.

The Economic Environment

Every day, marketing managers face a barrage of economic news. They must digest it, assess its impact, and alter marketing plans
accordingly. Sometimes (but not recently), the news is cause for optimism--the economy's improving, unemployment's declining,
consumer confidence is up. At other times (like today), the news makes them nervous--our economy is weak, industrial production
is down, jobless claims are rising, consumer confidence has plummeted, credit is hard to get. Naturally, business thrives when the
economy is growing, employment is full, and prices are stable. Marketing products is easier because consumers are willing to buy.
On the other hand, when the economy is slowing (or stalled) and unemployment is rising, people have less money to spend, and the
marketer's job is harder.

Then there's inflation, which pushes interest rates upward. If you're trying to sell cars, you know that people facing higher interest
rates aren't so anxious to take out car loans. Sales will slip, and to counteract the anticipated slowdown, you might have to add
generous rebates to your promotional plans.

Moreover, if you operate in foreign markets, you can't focus on solely domestic economic conditions: you have to monitor the
economy in every region where you do business. For example, if you're the marketing director for a U.S. company whose goods
are manufactured in China and sold in Brazil, you'll need to know as much as you can about the economies in three countries: the
United States, China, and Brazil. For one thing, you'll have to pay particular attention to fluctuations in exchange rates, because
changes will affect both your sales and your profits.

The Competitive Environment

Imagine playing tennis without watching what your opponent was doing. Marketers who don't pay attention to their competitors
are playing a losing game. In particular, they need to monitor the activities of two groups of competitors: the makers of competing
brands and the makers of substitute products. Coke and Pepsi, for instance, are brand competitors who have engaged in the so-
called cola wars for decades. Each tries to capture market share by convincing people that its soft drinks are better. Because neither
wants to lose share to the other, they tend to resort to similar tactics. In summer 2004, both companies came out with nearly
identical new colas boasting half the sugar, half the calories, and half the carbohydrates of regular colas. Coke called its product
Coke C2, while Pepsi named its competing brand PepsiEdge. Both companies targeted cola drinkers who want the flavor of a
regular soda but fewer calories. (By the way, both products failed and were taken off the market.)

Meanwhile, Coke and Pepsi have to watch Nantucket Nectars, whose fruit drinks are substitute products. What if Nantucket
Nectars managed to get its drinks into the soda machines at more fast-food restaurants? How would Coke and Pepsi respond? What
if Nantucket Nectars, which markets an ice tea with caffeine, introduced an ice tea drink with mega amounts of caffeine? Would
marketers at Coke and Pepsi take action? What if Nantucket Nectars launched a marketing campaign promoting the health benefits
of fruit drinks over soda? Would Coke and Pepsi reply with campaigns of their own? Would they respond by introducing new non-
cola products?

The Technological Environment

When's the last time you rented a VHS tape of a new movie? If you had trouble finding it, that's because DVDs are in and
videotapes are out. Videotape makers who were monitoring technological trends in the industry would probably have taken steps to
keep up (go into DVDs) or otherwise protect themselves from losses (maybe even getting out of the market). In addition to making
old products obsolete, technological advances create new products. Where would we be without the cell phone, digital cameras,
text messaging, LASIK surgery, and global positioning systems?

9.9.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4038
        Figure 9.15: Web sites like iTunes and Amazon.com are now offering customers the option of downloading movies. Do you think
        DVDs will suffer the same fate as videocassettes? (Sergio Carrasco - Tecnologia Obsoleta - CC BY-SA 2.0.)

New technologies also transform the marketing mix in another important way: they alter the way companies market their products.
Consider the revolutionary changes brought about by the Internet, which offers marketers a new medium for promoting and selling
a vast range of goods and services. Marketers must keep abreast of technological advances and adapt their strategies, both to take
advantage of the opportunities and to ward off threats.

The Social and Cultural Environment

Marketers also have to stay tuned to social and cultural factors that can affect sales. The values and attitudes of American
consumers are in a state of almost constant flux; what's cool one year is out of style the next. Think about the clothes you wore five
years ago: would you wear them today? A lot of people wouldn't--they're the wrong style, the wrong fit, the wrong material, the
wrong color, or just plain wrong. Now put yourself in the place of a marketer for a clothing company that targets teenagers and
young adults. You wouldn't survive if you tried to sell the same styles every year. As we said at the outset of this chapter, the key to
successful marketing is meeting the needs of customers. This means knowing what they want right now, not last year.

Here's another illustration. The last few decades have witnessed monumental shifts in the makeup of the American workforce. The
number of women at all levels has increased significantly, the workforce has become more diverse, and telecommuting is more
common. More people place more importance on balancing their work lives with the rest of their lives, and fewer people are
willing to sacrifice their health to the demands of hectic work schedules. With these changes have come new marketing
opportunities. As women spend more time at work, the traditional duties of the "homemaker" have shifted to day-care centers,
nannies, house-cleaning services, and (for those who can afford them) child chauffeurs, birthday-party coordinators, and even
family-photo assemblers (Loh, 2003). The number of gyms has mushroomed, the selection of home office furniture has expanded,
and McDonald's has bowed to the wishes of the health-conscious by eliminating its "super-size" option.

Generation Gaps

Clothiers who target teens and young adults (such as Gap and Abercrombie & Fitch) must estimate the size of both current and
future audiences. So must companies that specialize in products aimed at customers in other age brackets--say, young children or
retirees. Marketers pay particular attention to population shifts because they can have dramatic effects on a consumer base, either
increasing or decreasing the number of potential customers.

Marketers tend to assign most Americans born in the last sixty years to one of three groups: the baby-boom generation (those born
between 1946 and 1964), Generation X (1965 to 1975), and Generation Y--also known as "echo baby boomers" or "millenniums"
(1976 to 2001) (Sincavage, 2004). In addition to age, members of each group tend to share common experiences, values, and
attitudes that stay with them as they mature. These values and attitudes have a profound effect on both the products they want and
the marketing efforts designed to sell products to them. Let's look a little more closely at some of the defining characteristics of
each group.

9.9.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4038
Baby Boomers

The huge wave of baby boomers began arriving in 1946, following World War II, and marketers have been catering to them ever
since. What are they like? Sociologists have attributed to them such characteristics as "individuality, tolerance, and self-absorption"
(Leo, 2003). There are seventy million of them (Neuborne & Kerwin, 2006), and as they marched through life over the course of
five decades, marketers crowded the roadside to supply them with toys, clothes, cars, homes, and appliances--whatever they
needed at the time. They're still a major marketing force, but their needs have changed: they're now the target market for Botox,
pharmaceutical products, knee surgery, financial investments, cruises, vacation homes, and retirement communities.

Generation X

Because birth rates had declined by the time the "Gen X" babies first arrived in 1965, this group had just one decade to grow its
numbers. Thus, it's considerably smaller (seventeen million (Neuborne & Kerwin, 1999)) than the baby-boomer group, and it has
also borne the brunt of rising divorce rates and the arrival of AIDS. Experts say, however, that they're diverse, savvy, and pragmatic
(Neuborne & Kerwin, 1999) and point out that even though they were once thought of as "slackers," they actually tend to be self-
reliant and successful. At this point in their lives, most are at their peak earning power and affluent enough to make marketers stand
up and take notice.

Generation Y

When they became parents, baby boomers delivered a group to rival their own. Born between 1976 and 2001, their sixty million
(Neuborn & Kerwin, 1999) children are sometimes called "echo boomers" (because their population boom is a reverberation of the
baby boom). They're still evolving, but they've already been assigned some attributes: they're committed to integrity and honesty,
family oriented and close to parents, ethnically diverse and accepting of differences, upbeat and optimistic about the future
(although the troubled economy is lessening their optimism), education focused, independent, and goal oriented (Neuborne &
Kerwin, 1999; Richardson, 2002; Fernandez-Cruz, 2006). They also seem to be coping fairly well: among today's teens, arrests,
drug use, drunk driving, and school dropout rates are all down (Tulgan & Martin, 2001).

Generation Ys are being courted by carmakers. Global car manufacturers have launched a number of 2012 cars designed to cater to
the members of Generation Y (Brauer, 2011). Advertisers are also busy trying to find innovative ways to reach this group, but
they're finding that it's not easy. Generation Ys grew up with computers and other modes of high technology, and they're used to
doing several things at once--simultaneously watching TV, texting, and playing games on the computer. As a result, they're quite
adept at tuning out ads. Try to reach them through TV ads and they'll channel-surf right past them or hit their TiVo remotes
(Bianco, 2004). You can't get to them over the Internet because they know all about pop-up blockers. In one desperate attempt to
get their attention, an advertiser paid college students fifty cents to view thirty-second ads on their computers (Baker, 2004).
Advertisers keep trying, because Generation Y is big enough to wreck a brand by giving it a cold shoulder.

This page titled 9.9: The Marketing Environment is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.9.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4038
9.10: Careers in Marketing

  Learning Objective

       Describe opportunities in the field of marketing.

The field of marketing is extensive, and so are the opportunities for someone graduating with a marketing degree. While one person
may seek out the excitement of an advertising agency that serves multiple clients, another might prefer to focus on brand
management at a single organization. For someone else, working as a buyer for a retail chain is appealing. A few people might want
to get into marketing research. Others might have an aptitude for supply chain management or logistics management, the aspect of
supply chain management that focuses on the flow of products between suppliers and customers. Many people are attracted to sales
positions because of the potential financial rewards. Let's look more closely at a few of your options.

Advertising

If you're interested in advertising, you'll probably start out at an advertising agency--a marketing consulting firm that develops
and executes promotional campaigns for clients. Professionals work on either the "creative" side (developing ads and other
campaign materials) or the business side (acting as liaisons between the firm and its clients). If you're new, you'll probably begin
as an assistant and work your way up. You might, for example, start as an assistant copywriter, helping to develop advertising
messages. Or you could assist an account coordinator, helping in the management of accounts, including the planning and
implementation of marketing campaigns.

Brand and Product Management

Brand and product managers are responsible for all aspects of the development and marketing of assigned products. They oversee
the marketing program, including marketing research, pricing, distribution, and promotion. They track and analyze sales, gather
feedback from customers, and assess the competition. You'd probably join the company as a brand assistant assigned to a more
senior-level manager. After a few years, you may be promoted to assistant brand manager and, eventually, to brand manager. At this
point, you'd be given responsibility for your own brand or product.

Marketing Research

Marketing researchers meet with company managers to determine their information needs. Then they gather and analyze relevant
data, write reports, and present their findings and recommendations. If you want to get into this field, you'll need to acquire some
skills in disciplines outside marketing, including statistics, research methods, and psychology. You'll start out as an assistant, but
you may advance comparatively quickly.

Supply Chain and Logistics Management

Effective supply chain management is vital to success in today's business environment. Those who start their careers in supply
chain management typically work in one of the following areas: purchasing and supply management, transportation and logistics,
operations management, or inventory management and control. If this field appeals to you, you'll need to take courses in several
disciplines: management, marketing, operations management, and accounting. If you want to specialize in logistics management,
you'll be happy to know that many organizations--manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, service providers, and transportation
carriers--are looking for people interested in physical distribution. If you want to go into this field, you'll need strong quantitative
skills in addition to a background in business with a specialization in marketing.

Retailing

Retailing offers all sorts of options, such as merchandise buying and store management. As a buyer, you'd select and buy
merchandise for a department, a store, or maybe even an entire chain. Store managers display merchandise, supervise personnel,
and handle day-to-day operations. Graduates looking for jobs in both areas generally start as trainees and work their way up.

9.10.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4039
Sales

Many marketing graduates begin their careers in sales positions, often for service organizations, such as insurance, real estate, and
financial-services companies. Others are employed in the wholesale and retail trades or enter the manufacturing sector, selling
anything from industrial goods to pharmaceuticals. To succeed in sales, you need a thorough understanding of customers' needs
and an extensive knowledge of your product. You should also be able to communicate well, and you'll need strong interpersonal
skills. Bear in mind that experience in sales is excellent preparation for almost any position in business.

Key Takeaways

    The field of marketing is extensive, and so are the opportunities for someone graduating with a marketing degree.
    A few of the options available include advertising, brand and product management, marketing research, supply chain and
    logistics management, retailing, and sales.

Exercise

Do you find a career in marketing interesting? Why or why not? Which of the following marketing career options are most
appealing to you--advertising, brand and product management, marketing research, supply chain and logistics management,
retailing, or sales? Why?

This page titled 9.10: Careers in Marketing is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

9.10.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4039
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

10: Product Design and Development

  10.1: What Is a Product?
  10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?
  10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
  10.4: Understand Your Industry
  10.5: Forecasting Demand
  10.6: Breakeven Analysis
  10.7: Product Development
  10.8: Protecting Your Idea
  10.9: Cases and Problems
This page titled 10: Product Design and Development is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
10.1: What Is a Product?

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define product.
    2. Describe the four major categories of product developments: new-to-the-market, new-to-the-company, improvement of

       existing product, and extension of product line.

Basically, a product is something that can be marketed to customers because it provides them with a benefit and satisfies a need. It
can be a physical good, such as the PowerSki Jetboard, or a service, such as a haircut or a taxi ride. The distinction between goods
and services isn't always clear-cut. Say, for example, that a company hires a professional to provide an in-house executive training
program on "netiquette" (e-mail etiquette). Off the top of our heads, most of us would say that the company is buying a service.
What if the program is offered online? We'd probably still argue that the product is a service. But what if the company buys
training materials that the trainer furnishes on DVD? Is the customer still buying a service? Probably not: we'd have to say that
when it buys the DVD, the company is buying a tangible good.

In this case, the product that satisfies the customer's need has both a tangible component (the training materials on DVD) and an
intangible component (the educational activities performed by the seller). Not surprisingly, many products have both tangible and
intangible components. If, for example, you buy a Hewlett-Packard computer, you get not only the computer (a tangible good) but
certain promises to answer any technical questions that you might have and certain guarantees to fix your computer if it breaks
within a specified time period (intangible services).

Types of Product Developments

New product developments can be grouped into four major categories: new-to-the-company, improvement of existing product,
extension of product line, and new-to-the-market.

          Figure 10.1: Holiday decorating kits have extended Just Born's product line beyond Peeps. (Mike Mozart - Peeps - CC BY 2.0.)

For examples of the first three types of new product developments, we'll take a look at Just Born. The company is known for its
famous "Marshmallow Peeps," and consequently its management is very interested in marshmallows. It conducted research that
revealed that families use marshmallows in lots of ways, including crafts and decorating. This led Just Born to develop an Easter
decorating kit that used Peeps marshmallows. It was such a hit that the company followed by creating decorating kits for
Halloween and the Christmas season. Because similar products are made by other companies, the decorating kits are not "new to
the market" but are "new to the company." Now, let's look at another product development involving Just Born's also famous Mike
& Ike's. The marketing people at Just Born discovered that teenagers prefer to buy candies that come in pouches (which fit into
their pants pockets) rather than in small boxes. In response, the company reduced the piece size, added some new ingredients, and
put the Mike & Ike's in pouches. This "improvement in an existing product" resulted in a 20 percent annual sales jump for Mike &
Ike's. Our last look at Just Born demonstrates an approach used by the company to "extend its existing product line." Most of us
like chocolate and most of us also like marshmallow, so how about putting them together? This is just what Just Born did--the
company extended its Peeps product line to include "Peeps in a chocolate egg." Consumers loved the combination, and its success
prompted the company to extend its product line again and launch a chocolate crispy version for Easter.

10.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4040
New-to-the-Market Products

The PowerSki Jetboard is a "new-to-the-market product." Before it was invented, no comparable product existed. Launching a
new-to-the-market product is very risky, and only about 10 percent of products created fall into this category. On a positive note,
introducing a new product to the market can be very profitable, because the product often enjoys a temporary monopolistic
position.

Entreprenerial Start-Ups

Inventors of new-to-the-market products often form entrepreneurial start-ups to refine their product idea and bring it to market.
This was the path taken by Bob Montgomery, inventor of the PowerSki Jetboard. As is typical of entrepreneurial start-ups, the
company that Montgomery founded has these characteristics (Coulter, 2001):

    It's characterized by innovative products and/or practices. Before the PowerSki Jetboard was invented, no comparable product
    existed.
    Its goals include profitability and growth. Because the patented Jetboard enjoys a temporary monopolistic position, PowerSki
    potentially could be very profitable.
    It focuses on new opportunities. Bob Montgomery dreamed of creating the first motorized surfboard. This dream began when he
    and a few of his surfer friends (all around age twelve) missed a wave because it was too far down the beach for them to catch.
    He imagined that if he was on a motorized surfboard (instead of an ordinary one that you had to paddle), he would have been
    able to catch that wave. His dream became the mission of his company: "PowerSki International Corp. was founded to deliver
    the patented PowerSki Jetboard, the world's only motorized surfboard, and its engine technology to the world market. It's
    PowerSki's goal to bring the experience of surfing to everyone on lakes, rivers, seas, and the ocean. `Now everybody has an
    ocean, and can ride an endless wave'" (PowerSki's Web site, 2011).
    Its owners are willing to take risks. Anybody who starts any business is taking a risk of some kind. The key to entrepreneurial
    risk is related to the idea of innovation: as Woody Allen once put it, "If you're not failing every now and again, it's a sign you're
    not doing anything very innovative" (Brainy Quote, 2008).

How to Take a Calculated Risk

As Montgomery learned, the introduction of an innovative product to the market is more unpredictable, and thus more risky, than
the introduction of a market-tested product. Starting up a store to sell an improved version of an existing surfboard entails one level
of risk; starting up a business to market the first motorized surfboard entails quite another. Even though the introduction of new-to-
the-market products are more risky, some of this risk can be avoided. What if, for example, Montgomery had brought the Jetboard
to market only to discover that many of the buyers in his target market--water-sports enthusiasts--couldn't easily maneuver the
Jetboard? We could then say that he took an unnecessarily risky step in bringing his product to market, but we could also say that
he simply attempted to market his product without adequate information. Surely a little research would have alerted Montgomery
to the probable consequences of his decision to go to market when he did and with his product in its current state of development.

A couple of final words, therefore, about introducing an entirely new product to the market. First, this type of product introduction
is about carefully calculated risks, not unnecessary risks. Second, though little is certain in the entrepreneurial world, most decision
making can be improved with input from one or both of two sources:

 1. Information gathered from research
 2. Knowledge gained from personal experience

Again, you can't be certain about any results, but remember that uncertainty reflects merely the lack of complete knowledge or
information; thus, the more knowledge and information that you can bring to bear on a situation, the less uncertain--and the less
risky--the decision becomes (Coulter, 2001). In short, always do your homework, and if you're new to entrepreneurship or to your
market, make it a point to work with people who know from experience what they're talking about.

Key Takeaways

A product is something that can be marketed to customers because it provides them with a benefit and satisfies a need. Products
can be goods or services or a combination of both.

10.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4040
    A "new-to-the-company product" is a good or a service that is new to the company but has been sold by a competitor in the past
    --for example, Peeps marshmallow Easter decorating kits.
    An "improvement in an existing product" is an enhancement of a product already on the market--for example, a change of
    ingredients and packaging for Mike & Ike's.
    An "extension to an existing product line" is a new product developed as a variation of an already existing product--for
    example, Peeps chocolate eggs.
    A "new-to-the-market product" is a good or a service that has not been available to consumers or manufacturers in the past--for
    example, the PowerSki Jetboard.
    Four characteristics of the entrepreneurial start-up are:

     1. It's characterized by innovative products and/or practices.
     2. Its goals include profitability and growth.
     3. It focuses on new opportunities.
     4. Its owners are willing to take risks.

    Entrepreneurship is about carefully calculated risks, not unnecessary risks. Most entrepreneurial decision making can be
    improved with input from one or both of two sources:

     1. Information gathered from research
     2. Knowledge gained from personal experience

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Identify a good or a service for each of the following product development categories: new-to-the-market, new-to-the-company,
improvement of existing product, and extension of product line. To come up with the products, you might visit a grocery store or a
mall. Don't use the Just Born examples presented in the chapter.

This page titled 10.1: What Is a Product? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4040
10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?

  Learning Objective

       Explain where product ideas come from.

For some people, coming up with a great product idea is a gratifying adventure. For most, however, it's a daunting task. The key to
coming up with a product idea is identifying something that customers want--or, perhaps more important, filling an unmet
customer need. In coming up with a product idea, ask not "what do I want to sell?" but rather "what does the customer want to
buy?" (Thurm, 2005) With this piece of advice in mind, let's get back to the task of coming up with a product idea. Nobel Prize-
winning chemist Linus Pauling suggested that "the best way to have a good idea is to have lots of ideas," and though this notion
might seem a little whimsical at first, it actually makes a lot of sense, especially if you're trying to be innovative in the
entrepreneurial sense. Every year, for example, companies launch about thirty thousand new food, beverage, and beauty products,
and up to 90 percent fail within a year (Catalina, 2011; Kotler & Armstrong, 2008). You might need ten good ideas just to have one
that stands a chance.

Purple Cow Ideas

So where do these ideas come from? Product ideas can originate from almost anywhere. How many times have you looked at a
product that just hit the market and said, "I could have thought of that"? Just about anybody can come up with a product idea;
basically, you just need a little imagination. Success is more likely to result from a truly remarkable product--something that grabs
the attention of consumers. Entrepreneur and marketing consultant Seth Godin refers to truly remarkable products as "purple cows"
(Godin, 2003). He came up with the term while driving through the countryside one day. As he drove along, his interest was
attracted by the hundreds of cows dotting the countryside. After a while, however, he started to ignore the cows because looking at
them had become tedious. For one thing, they were all brown, and it occurred to him that a glimpse of a purple cow would be
worth writing home about. People would tend to remember a purple cow; in fact, they might even want one.

Who thinks up "purple cow" ideas? Where do the truly remarkable business ideas come from? As we pointed out in an earlier
chapter, entrepreneurs and small business owners are a rich source of new product ideas (according to the Small Business
Administration, 55 percent of all new product innovations come from small businesses). Take Dean Kamen, inventor of the Segway
Human Transporter, a battery-operated vehicle that responds to the rider's movements: lean forward and you can go straight ahead
at 12.5 miles per hour; to stop, just tilt backward. This revolutionary product is only one of Kamen's many remarkable business
ideas. He invented his first product--a wearable infusion pump for administering chemotherapy and other drugs--while he was
still a college undergraduate (Segway, 2011; Finder, 2006). Jacob Dunnack is also getting an early entrepreneurial start. At age six,
Jacob became frustrated one day when he took his baseball bat to his grandmother's house but forgot to take some baseballs as
well. His solution? A hollow baseball bat that holds baseballs. Dunnack's invention, now called the JD Batball, was quickly
developed and sold in stores such as Toys "R" Us (The Great Idea Finder, 2011; SolidWorks Express, 2011).

Why do so many entrepreneurs and small businesspeople come up with so many purple cows? For one thing, entrepreneurs are
often creative people; moreover, they're often willing to take risks. This is certainly true of Bob Montgomery, inventor of the
PowerSki Jetboard (which undoubtedly qualifies as a purple cow). With more than twenty years' experience in the water-sports
industry and considerable knowledge of the personal-watercraft market, Montgomery finally decided to follow his long-cherished
dream of creating an entirely new and conceptually different product--one that would offer users ease of operations, high
performance, speed, and quality. His creative efforts have earned him the prestigious Popular Science "Best of What's New" award
(PowerSki Jet boards, 2011).

To remain competitive, medium and large organizations alike must also identify product development opportunities. Many
companies actively solicit product ideas from people inside the organization, including marketing, sales, research, and
manufacturing personnel, and some even establish internal "entrepreneurial" units. Others seek product ideas from outside the
organization by talking to customers and paying attention to what the competition is doing. In addition to looking out for new
product ideas, most companies constantly seek out ways to make incremental improvements in existing products by adding features
that will broaden their consumer appeal. As you can see from Figure 10.2, the market leaders in most industries are the firms that
are most successful at developing new products.

10.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4041
                                                                  Figure 10.2 Sales from New Products

A novel approach to generating new-to-the-world product ideas is hiring "creativity" consultants. One of the best is Doug Hall,
who's been called "America's Number 1 Idea Guru." At a Cincinnati idea factory called Eureka!Ranch, Hall and other members of
his consulting firm specialize in helping corporate executives get their creative juices flowing (Eureka!Ranch, 2011). Hall's job is
getting people to invent products that make a real difference to consumers, and his strategies are designed to help corporate clients
become more innovative--to jump-start their brains. As Hall puts it, "You have to swing to hit home runs" (CNN Money, 1997).
Eureka!Ranch's client list includes Disney, Kellogg, Johnson & Johnson, and Procter & Gamble, as well as a number of budding
entrepreneurs. Hall boasts that the average home uses eighteen goods or services that the Ranch helped shape, and if he's right, you
yourself have probably benefited from one of the company's idea-generating sessions (Eureka!Ranch, 2011).

Key Takeaways

    The majority of product ideas come from entrepreneurs and small business owners, though medium and large organizations also
    must identify product-development opportunities in order to remain competitive.
    Firms seek product ideas from people inside the organization, including those in marketing, sales, research, and manufacturing,
    as well as from customers and others outside the organization.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

The "Strange New Products" Web site brags that it displays the "weirdest, funniest, stupidest, and [most] ingenious new products
entering the marketplace." This seems to be an accurate statement. Visit the site (www.strangenewproducts.com) and do the
following:

 1. Pick your favorite new product.
 2. Describe the idea.
 3. Explain how the product works.
 4. Indicate whether you believe the product fills an unmet need. Explain why or why not.
 5. Rate the product's likelihood of success on a scale from 1 (extremely unlikely) to 10 (very likely). Explain your rating.

This page titled 10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From? is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4041
10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain how an idea turns into a business opportunity.
    2. Describe the four types of utility provided by a product: time, place, ownership, and form.

An idea turns into a business opportunity when it has commercial potential--when you can make money by selling the product.
But needless to say, not all ideas generate business opportunities. Consider these products that made the list of the "Top 25 Biggest
Product Flops of All Time" (WalletPop, 2011):

    Bic underwear. When you think of Bic you think of inexpensive pens and disposable razors and lighters. But disposable
    underwear? Women didn't find the idea of buying intimate attire from a pen manufacturer appealing, and the disposability
    factor was just plain weird.
    Harley Davidson perfume. Even its loyal fans found the idea of Harley-Davidson perfume peculiar (and they weren't terribly
    fond of the Harley-Davidson aftershave, either). Perhaps they were afraid they would end up smelling like a motorcycle.
    Bottled water for pets. OK, so people love their pets and cater to them, but does it really make sense to serve Thirsty Cat! and
    Thirsty Dog! bottled water to your four-legged friends? Even though the water came in tantalizing flavors such as Crispy Beef
    and Tangy Fish, it never caught on. Do you wonder why?
    Colgate kitchen entrees. Colgate's entrance into food products wasn't well received. Maybe the company believed customers
    would buy into the idea of eating one of its prepared meals and then brushing their teeth with Colgate toothpaste. For most of
    us, the name Colgate doesn't get our taste buds tingling.

        Figure 10.3: There might be many creative ways for Bic to extend its product lines, aside from the disposable underwear idea. Can
        you think of a product idea that might be more successful for Bic? (Kevin - bic - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)

Utility

Remember: being in business is not about you--it's about the customer. Successful businesspeople don't ask themselves "What do
I want to sell?" but rather "What does the customer want to buy?" Customers buy products to fill unmet needs and because they
expect to derive some value or utility from them. People don't buy Alka-Seltzer because they like the taste or even because the price
is right: they buy it because it makes their indigestion go away. They don't shop at Amazon.com because the Web site is
entertaining: they shop there because they want their purchases delivered quickly. The realization that this kind of service would
meet customer needs made Amazon.com a genuine business opportunity.

Products provide customers with four types of utility or benefit:

 1. Time utility. The value to a consumer of having a good or a service available at a convenient time. A concessionaire selling
    bottled water at a summer concert is making liquid refreshment available when it's needed.

 2. Place utility. The value to a consumer of having a product available in a convenient location. A street vendor selling hotdogs
    outside an office building is making fast food available where it's needed.

10.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4042
 3. Ownership utility. Value created by transferring a product's ownership. A real estate agent helping a young couple buy a home is
    transferring ownership from someone who doesn't need it to someone who does.

 4. Form utility. The value to consumers from changing the composition of a product. A company that makes apparel is turning raw
    material (fabric) into a form (clothing) that people need. A company that produces liquid detergent, rather than powdered
    detergent, is adding form utility for some consumers.

How can you decide whether an idea provides utility and has the potential to become a business opportunity? You should start by
asking yourself the questions in Figure 10.4: if you can't come up with good answers to these questions, you probably don't have a
highly promising product. On the other hand, if you conclude that you have a potential product for which people would pay money,
you're ready to take the next step: analyze the market to see whether you should go forward with the development of the product.

                                                        Figure 10.4 When Is an Idea a Business Opportunity?

Key Takeaways

    An idea turns into a business opportunity when it has commercial potential--when you can make money by selling the product.
    Time utility provides value by having a product available at a convenient time.
    Place utility provides value by having a product available in a convenient location.
    Ownership utility provides value by transferring a product's ownership.
    Form utility provides value by changing the composition of a product.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Provide two examples of each of the four types of utility: time, place, ownership, and form. Don't use the examples given in the
book.

This page titled 10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4042
10.4: Understand Your Industry

  Learning Objective

       Explain how to research an industry.

Before you invest a lot of time and money to develop a new product, you need to understand the industry in which it's going to be
sold. As inventor of the PowerSki Jetboard, Bob Montgomery had the advantage of being quite familiar with the industry that he
proposed to enter. With more than twenty years' experience in the water-sports and personal-watercraft industry, he felt at home in
this business environment. He knew who his potential customers were, and he knew who his competitors were. He had experience
in marketing similar products, and he was familiar with industry regulations.

Most people don't have the same head start as Montgomery. So, how does the average would-be businessperson learn about an
industry? What should you want to know about it? Let's tackle the first question first.

Evaluating Your Industry

Before you can study an industry, you need to know what industry to study. An industry is a group of related businesses: they do
similar things and they compete with each other. In the footwear industry, for example, firms make footwear, sell it, or both.
Players in the industry include Nike and Adidas, both of which specialize in athletic footwear; but the industry is also sprinkled
with companies like Candies (which sells young women's fashion footwear) and Florsheim (quality men's dress shoes).

Let's say that you want to know something about the footwear industry because your potential purple cow is a line of jogging shoes
designed specifically for older people (those over sixty-five) who live in the Southeast. You'd certainly need a broad understanding
of the footwear industry, but would general knowledge be enough? Wouldn't you feel more comfortable about pursuing your idea if
you could focus on a smaller segment of the industry--namely, the segment that specializes in products similar to the one you plan
to sell? Here's a method that will help you narrow your focus (Allen, 2001).

Segmenting Your Market

Begin with the overall industry--in this case, the footwear industry. Within this industry, there are several groups of customers,
each of which is a market. You're interested in the consumer market--retail customers. But this, too, is a fairly broad market; it
includes everybody who buys shoes at retail. Your next step, then, is to subdivide this market into smaller market segments--
groups of potential customers with common characteristics that influence their buying decisions. You can use a variety of standard
characteristics, including demographics (age, sex, income), geography (region, climate, city size), and psychographics (lifestyle,
activities, interests). The segment you're interested in consists of older people (a demographic variable) living in the Southeast (a
geographic variable) who jog (a psychographic variable). Within this market segment, you might want to subdivide further and find
a niche--an unmet need. Your niche might turn out to be providing high-quality jogging shoes to active adults living in retirement
communities in Florida.

The goal of this process is to identify progressively narrower sectors of a given industry. You need to become familiar with the
whole industry--not only with the footwear industry but also with the retail market for jogging shoes designed for older people.
You also need to understand your niche market, which consists of older people who live active lives in Florida.

Now that we know something about the process of focusing in on an industry, let's look at another example. Suppose that your
product idea is offering dedicated cruises for college students. You'd begin by looking at the recreational-activities industry. Your
market would be people who travel for leisure, and within that market, you'd focus on the market segment consisting of people
who take cruises. Your niche would be college students who want to take cruises.

Assessing Your Competition

Now that you've identified your industry and its various sectors, you're ready to consider such questions as the following (Allen,
2001):

    Is the industry growing or contracting? Are sales revenues increasing or decreasing?
    Who are your major competitors? How does your product differ from those of your competitors?

10.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4043
    What opportunities exist in the industry? What threats?
    Has the industry undergone recent changes? Where is it headed?
    How important is technology to the industry? Has it brought about changes?
    Is the industry mature, or are new companies successfully entering it?
    Do companies in the industry make reasonable profits?

Where do you find answers to questions such as these? A good place to start is by studying your competitors: Who are their
customers? What products do they sell? How do they price their products? How do they market them? How do they treat their
customers? Do they seem to be operating successfully? Observe their operations and buy their goods and services. Search for
published information on your competitors and the industry. For example, there's a great deal of information about companies on
the Internet, particularly in company Web sites. The Internet is also a good source of industry information. Look for the site posted
by the industry trade association. Find out whether it publishes a magazine or other materials. Talk with people in the industry--
business owners, managers, suppliers; these people are usually experts. And talk with customers. What do they like or dislike about
the products that are currently available? What benefits are they looking for? What benefits are they getting?

Key Takeaways

    Before developing a new product, you need to understand the industry in which it will be sold.
    An industry is a group of related businesses that do similar things and compete with each other.
    To research an industry, you begin by studying the overall industry and then progressively narrow your search by looking at
    smaller sectors of the industry, including markets (or groups of customers) and market segments (smaller groups of customers
    with common characteristics that influence their buying decisions).
    Within a market segment, you might want to subdivide further to isolate a niche, or unmet need.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

To introduce a successful new service, you should understand the industry in which you'll be offering the service. Select a service
business that you'd like to run and explain what information you'd collect on its industry. How would you find it?

This page titled 10.4: Understand Your Industry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4043
10.5: Forecasting Demand

  Learning Objective

       Forecast demand for a product.

It goes without saying, but we'll say it anyway: without enough customers, your business will go nowhere. So, before you delve
into the complex, expensive world of developing and marketing a new product, ask yourself questions like those in Figure 10.5 .
When Bob Montgomery asked himself these questions, he concluded that he had two groups of customers for the PowerSki
Jetboard: (1) the dealerships that would sell the product and (2) the water-sports enthusiasts who would buy and use it. His job,
therefore, was to design a product that dealers would want to sell and enthusiasts would buy. When he was confident that he could
satisfy these criteria, he moved forward with his plans to develop the PowerSki Jetboard.

                                                      Figure 10.5 When to Develop and Market a New Product

After you've identified a group of potential customers, your next step is finding out as much as you can about what they think of
your product idea. Remember: because your ultimate goal is to roll out a product that satisfies customer needs, you need to know
ahead of time what your potential customers want. Precisely what are their unmet needs? Ask them questions such as these (Ulrich
& Eppinger, 2000; Allen, 2001):

    What do you like about this product idea? What don't you like?
    What improvements would you make?
    What benefits would you get from it?
    Would you buy it? Why, or why not?
    What would it take for you to buy it?

Before making a substantial investment in the development of a product, you need to ask yourself yet another question: are there
enough customers willing to buy my product at a price that will allow me to make a profit? Answering this question means
performing one of the hardest tasks in business: forecasting demand for your proposed product. There are several possible
approaches to this task that can be used alone or in combination.

People in Similar Businesses

Though some businesspeople are reluctant to share proprietary information, such as sales volume, others are willing to help out
individuals starting new businesses or launching new products. Talking to people in your prospective industry (or one that's
similar) can be especially helpful if your proposed product is a service. Say, for example, that you plan to open a pizza parlor with a
soap opera theme: customers will be able to eat pizza while watching reruns of their favorite soap operas on personal TV/DVD
sets. If you visited a few local restaurants and asked owners how many customers they served every day, you'd probably learn

10.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4044
enough to estimate the number of pizzas that you'd serve during your first year. If the owners weren't cooperative, you could just
hang out and make an informal count of the customers.

Potential Customers

You can also learn a lot by talking with potential customers. Ask them how often they buy products similar to the one you want to
launch. Where do they buy them and in what quantity? What factors affect demand for them? If you were contemplating a frozen
yogurt store in Michigan, it wouldn't hurt to ask customers coming out of a bakery whether they'd buy frozen yogurt in the winter.

Published Industry Data

To get some idea of the total market for products like the one you want to launch, you might begin by examining pertinent industry
research. For example, to estimate demand for jogging shoes among consumers sixty-five and older, you could look at data
published on the industry association's Web site, National Sporting Goods Association, www.nsga.org/i4a/pages/index.cfm?
pageid=1 (Running USA, 2011; National Sporting Goods Association, 2011). Here you'd find that forty million jogging/running
shoes were sold in the United States in 2008 at an average price of $58 per pair. The Web site also reports that the number of
athletes who are at least forty and who participate in road events increased by more than 50 percent over a ten year period (USA
Track & Field, 2011). To find more specific information--say, the number of joggers older than sixty-five--you could call or e-
mail USA Track and Field. You might find this information in an eighty-seven-page statistical study of retail sporting-goods sales
published by the National Sporting Goods Association (2011). If you still don't get a useful answer, try contacting organizations
that sell industry data. American Sports Data, for instance, provides demographic information on no fewer than twenty-eight fitness
activities, including jogging (American Sports Data, 1987). You'd want to ask them for data on the number of joggers older than
sixty-five living in Florida. There's a lot of valuable and available industry-related information that you can use to estimate demand
for your product.

Now, let's say that your research turns up the fact that there are three million joggers older than sixty-five and that six hundred
thousand of them live in Florida, which attracts 20 percent of all people who move when they retire (Zagier, 2003). How do you
use this information to estimate the number of jogging shoes that you'll be able to sell during your first year of business? First, you
have to estimate your market share: your portion of total sales in the older-than-sixty-five jogging shoe market in Florida. Being
realistic (but having faith in an excellent product), you estimate that you'll capture 2 percent of the market during your first year. So
you do the math: 600,000 pairs of jogging shoes sold in Florida  0.02 (a 2 percent share of the market) = 12,000, the estimated
first-year demand for your proposed product.

Granted, this is just an estimate. But at least it's an educated guess rather than a wild one. You'll still want to talk with people in the
industry, as well as potential customers, to hear their views on the demand for your product. Only then would you use your sales
estimate to make financial projections and decide whether your proposed business is financially feasible. We'll discuss this process
in a later chapter.

Key Takeaways

    After you've identified a group of potential customers, your next step is finding out as much as you can about what they think
    of your product idea.
    Before making a substantial investment in the development of a product, you need to ask yourself: are there enough customers
    willing to buy my product at a price that will allow me to make a profit?
    Answering this question means performing one of the hardest tasks in business: forecasting demand for your proposed product.
    There are several possible approaches to this task that can be used alone or in combination.
    You can obtain helpful information about product demand by talking with people in similar businesses and potential customers.
    You can also examine published industry data to estimate the total market for products like yours and estimate your market
    share, or portion of the targeted market.

Exercise

10.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4044
(AACSB) Analysis
Your friends say you make the best pizzas they've ever eaten, and they're constantly encouraging you to set up a pizza business in
your city. You have located a small storefront in a busy section of town. It doesn't have space for an eat-in restaurant, but it will
allow customers to pick up their pizzas. You will also deliver pizzas. Before you sign a lease and start the business, you need to
estimate the number of pizzas you will sell in your first year. At this point you plan to offer pizza in only one size.

Before arriving at an estimate, answer these questions:

 1. What factors would you consider in estimating pizza sales?
 2. What assumptions will you use in estimating sales (for example, the hours your pizza shop will be open)?
 3. Where would you obtain needed information to calculate an estimate?

Then, estimate the number of pizzas you will sell in your first year of operations.

This page titled 10.5: Forecasting Demand is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4044
10.6: Breakeven Analysis

  Learning Objective

       Learn how to use breakeven analysis to estimate the number of sales units at which net income is zero.

Forecasting sales of shoes has started you thinking. Selling twelve thousand pair of shoes the first year you run the business sounds
great, but you still need to find an answer to the all-important question: are there enough customers willing to buy my jogging
shoes at a price that will allow me to make a profit? Is there some way to figure out the level of sales I would need to avoid losing
money--to "break even"? Fortunately, an accountant friend of yours informs you that there is. Not surprisingly, it's called
breakeven analysis, and here's how it works: to break even (have no profit or loss), total sales revenue must exactly equal all your
expenses (both variable and fixed). To determine the level of sales at which this will occur, you need to do the following:

    Fixed costs= $210,000 salaries + $60,000 rent + $10,000 advertising + $8,000 insurance + 12,000 other fixed costs = $300,000
    Variable cost per unit = $40 (cost of each pair of shoes) + $5 sales commission = $45
    Contribution margin per unit = $80 selling price minus $45 variable cost per unit = $35
    Breakeven in units = $300,000 fixed costs  $35 contribution margin per unit = 8,571 units

Your calculation means that if you sell 8,571 pairs of shoes, you will end up with zero profit (or loss) and will exactly break even.

If your sales estimate is realistic (a big "if"), then you should be optimistic about starting the business. All your fixed costs will be
covered once you sell 8,571 pairs of shoes. Any sales above that level will be pure profit. So, if you sell your expected level of
twelve thousand pairs of shoes, you'll make a profit of $120,015 for the first year. Here's how we calculated that profit:

  12,000 expected sales level - 8,571 breakeven sales level = 3,429 units  $35 contribution margin per unit = $120,015 first-year
                                                                            profit

As you can see, breakeven analysis is pretty handy. It allows you to determine the level of sales that you must reach to avoid losing
money and the profit you'll make if you reach a higher sales goal. Such information will help you plan for your business.

Key Takeaways

    Breakeven analysis is a method of determining the level of sales at which the company will break even (have no profit or loss).
    The following information is used in calculating the breakeven point: fixed costs, variable costs, and contribution margin per
    unit.
    Fixed costs are costs that don't change when the amount of goods sold changes. For example, rent is a fixed cost.
    Variable costs are costs that vary, in total, as the quantity of goods sold changes but stay constant on a per-unit basis. For
    example, sales commissions paid based on unit sales are a variable cost.
    Contribution margin per unit is the excess revenue per unit over the variable cost per unit.
    The breakeven point in units is calculated with this formula: fixed costs divided by contribution margin per unit (selling price
    per unit less variable cost per unit).

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
For the past ten years, you've worked at a PETCO Salon as a dog groomer. You're thinking of starting your own dog grooming
business. You found a place you could rent that's right next to a popular shopping center, and two of your friends (who are also dog
groomers) have agreed to work for you. The problem is that you need to borrow money to start the business and your banker has
asked for a breakeven analysis. You have prepared the following cost estimates for your first year of operations:

10.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4045
Fixed Costs            $105,000
Salaries               $36,000
Rent and utilities     $2,000
Advertising            $3,000
Equipment

Variable Cost per Dog  $2.00
Shampoo                $1.50
Coat conditioner       $0.75
Pet cologne            $1.25
Dog treats             $0.50
Hair ribbons

You went online and researched grooming prices in your area. Based on your review, you have decided to charge $32 for each
grooming.

Part 1:
    What's the breakeven point in units--how many dogs will you need to groom in the first year to break even?
    If you and your two employees groomed dogs five days a week, seven hours a day, fifty weeks a year, how many dogs would
    each of you need to groom each day? Is this realistic given that it takes one hour to groom a dog?

Part 2:
    If you raised your grooming fee to $38, how many dogs would you need to groom to break even?
    At this new price, how many dogs will each of you have to groom each day (assuming, again, that the three of you groom dogs
    fifty weeks a year, five days a week, seven hours a day)?

Part 3:
    Would you start this business?
    What price would you charge to groom a dog?
    How could you lower the breakeven point and make the business more profitable?

This page titled 10.6: Breakeven Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                       10.6.2    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4045
10.7: Product Development

  Learning Objective

       Describe the process of developing a product that meets customer needs.

Like PowerSki, every organization--whether it produces goods or provides services--sees Job 1 as furnishing customers with
quality products. The success of a business depends on its ability to identify the unmet needs of consumers and to develop products
that meet those needs at a low cost (Ulrich & Eppinger, 2000). In other words, effective product development results in goods and
services that can be sold at a profit. In addition, it results in high-quality products that not only satisfy consumer needs but also can
be developed in a timely, cost-efficient manner. Accomplishing these goals entails a collaborative effort by individuals from all
areas of an organization: operations management (including representatives from engineering, design, and manufacturing),
marketing, accounting, and finance. In fact, companies increasingly assign representatives from various functional areas who work
together as a project team throughout the product development processes. This approach allows individuals with varied
backgrounds and experience to provide input as the product is being developed.

Product Development Is a Risky Proposition

Not surprisingly, developing profitable products is difficult, and the success rate is low. On average, for every successful product, a
company has twelve failures. At this rate, the firms on the Fortune 1000 list waste over $60 billion a year in research and
development (Ulwick & Eisenhauer, 2006). There are several reasons why product development is such a risky proposition:

    Trade-offs. You might, for instance, be able to make your jogging shoes lighter than your competitors', but if you do, they
    probably won't wear as well. They could be of higher quality, but that will make them more costly (they might price themselves
    out of the market).
    Time pressure. Developing a product can require hundreds of decisions that must be made quickly and with imperfect
    information.
    Economics. Because developing a product requires a lot of time and money, there's always pressure to make sure that the
    project not only results in a successful product but also gets it to market at the most opportune time. Failure to be first to market
    with an otherwise desirable new product can cost a company a great deal of money.

Even so, organizations continue to dedicate immense resources to developing new products. Your supermarket, for example, can
choose from about one hundred thousand items to carry on its shelves--including twenty thousand new products every year.
Unfortunately, the typical supermarket can stock only thirty thousand products (Hannaford, 2006).

                                                                   Bill Cosby New Coke Commercial

10.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4046
Even the mighty Coca-Cola has had its share of failures--New Coke, anyone?

This page titled 10.7: Product Development is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4046
10.8: Protecting Your Idea

  Learning Objective

       Learn how to protect your product idea by applying for a patent.

You can protect your rights to your idea with a patent from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, which grants you "the right to
exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling" the invention in the United States for twenty years (U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, 2011).

What do you need to know about applying for a patent? For one thing, document your idea as soon as you think of it. Simply fill
out a form, stating the purpose of your invention and the current date. Then sign it and get someone to witness it. The procedure
sounds fairly informal, but you may need this document to strengthen your claim that you came up with the idea before someone
else who also claims it. Later, you'll apply formally for a patent by filling out an application (generally with the help of a lawyer),
sending it to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, and waiting. Nothing moves quickly through the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office, and it takes a long time for any application to get through the process.

Will your application get through at all? There's a good chance if your invention meets all the following criteria:

    It's new. No one else can have known about it, used it, or written about it before you filed your patent application (so keep it to
    yourself until you've filed).
    It's not obvious. It has to be sufficiently different from everything that's been used for the purpose in the past (you can't patent a
    new color for a cell phone).
    It has utility. It can't be useless; it must have some value.

Applying for a U.S. patent is only the first step. If you plan to export your product outside the United States, you'll need patent
protection in each country in which you plan to do business, and as you've no doubt guessed, getting a foreign patent isn't any
easier than getting a U.S. patent. The process keeps lawyers busy: during a three-year period, PowerSki International had to take
out more than eighty patents on the PowerSki Jetboard. It still has a long way to go to match the number of patents issued to some
extremely large corporations. Microsoft, for example, recently obtained its ten thousandth patent (Fried, 2011).

Clearly, the patent business is booming. The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office issued more than a half million patents in 2010
(U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 2011). One reason for the recent proliferation of patents is the high-tech boom: over the last
decade, the number of patents granted has increased by more than 50 percent.

Key Takeaways

    You can protect your rights to your idea with a patent from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
    A patent grants you "the right to exclude others from making, using, offering for sale, or selling" the invention in the United
    States for twenty years.
    To be patentable, an invention must meet all the following criteria: it's new (no one else can have known about it, used it, or
    written about it before you filed your patent application); it's not obvious (it's sufficiently different from everything that's been
    used for the purpose in the past); and it has utility (it must have some value; it can't be useless).

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

A friend of yours described a product idea she had been working on. It is a child's swing set with a sensor to stop the swing if
anyone walks in front of it. She came to you for advice on protecting her product idea. What questions would you need to ask her
to determine whether her product idea is patentable? How would she apply for a patent? What protection would the patent give
her? How long would the patent apply?

10.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4047
References

Fried, I., "Microsoft Gets 10,000th Patent," CNET News, news.cnet.com/8301-13860_3-10157884-56.html (accessed October 28,
2011).

U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, http://www.uspto.gov/web/patents/howtopat.htm (accessed October 28, 2011).

This page titled 10.8: Protecting Your Idea is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4047
10.9: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Breaking Even on Burgers
You and your business partner plan to open a gourmet burger restaurant. Your partner estimated the new business will sell a
hundred fifty thousand burgers during its first year and a half of operations. You want to determine the number of burgers you must
sell to break even during this period.

Here are the figures you know so far:

The variable cost for each burger is $0.97 each.

    The fixed cost of making burgers for eighteen months is $140,000 (this includes costs such as rent, utilities, insurance).
    You will sell your burgers for $1.99 each.
    At the $1.99 per-unit selling price, how many burgers will you have to sell to break even?

Part 1: Using the previous information, manually calculate the breakeven number of burgers. How close is the breakeven number
of burgers to your partner's sales estimate of one hundred fifty thousand burgers? How confident are you that your restaurant will
be profitable?

Part 2: Now, recalculate the breakeven number of burgers using a higher selling price. Pretend that your likely customers are
burger fanatics and will pay $2.79 for a burger (rather than $1.99). Also pretend that the variable cost for each burger and your
fixed costs won't change (variable cost per burger is still $0.97 and fixed costs are still $140,000). Manually calculate the number
of burgers you must sell to break even at this higher selling price. Are you now more confident that the business will succeed?

Part 3: Without recalculating breakeven, answer these two questions:

 1. If the variable cost for each burger went down from $0.97 to $0.80 per burger (and your selling price stayed at $1.99), would
    you need to sell more or fewer burgers to break even?

 2. If fixed costs went down from $140,000 to $100,000 (and your selling price stayed at $1.99 and variable cost per burger
    returned to $0.97), would you need to sell more or fewer burgers to break even?

Career Opportunities

Being a "Big Idea" Person
Imagine a career in which you design the products people use every day. If you're a "big idea" person, have an active imagination,
have artistic flair, and possess the ability to understand how products function, then a career in product design and development
might be for you. To learn what opportunities are available in this field, go to the Job Bank section of the Product Development and
Management Association's Web site (www.pdma.org/job_bank.cfm) and click on "View Posted Jobs." Explore the various job
openings by clicking on a position (to highlight it); and then clicking on the "View Job Details" button at the bottom of the screen.
Find a position that interests you and look for answers to these questions:

 1. What's the job like?
 2. What educational background, work experience, and skills are needed for the job?
 3. What aspects of the job appeal to you? What aspects are unappealing?
 4. Are you cut out for a career in product design and development? Why, or why not?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Who's Getting Fat from Fast Food?
Product liability laws cover the responsibility of manufacturers, sellers, and others for injuries caused by defective products. Under
product liability laws, a toy manufacturer can be held liable if a child is harmed by a toy that's been marketed with a design flaw.
The manufacturer can also be held liable for defects in marketing the toy, such as giving improper instructions on its use or failing
to warn consumers about potential dangers. But what if the product isn't a toy, but rather a fast-food kid's meal? And what if the
harm isn't immediately obvious but emerges over time?

10.9.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4048
These questions are being debated in the legal and health professions (and the media). Some people believe that fast-food
restaurants should be held responsible (at least in part) for childhood obesity. They argue that fast-food products--such as kids'
meals made up of high-calorie burgers, fried chicken fingers, French fries, and sugary soft drinks--are helping to make U.S.
children overweight. They point out that while restaurant chains spend billions each year to advertise fast food to children, they
don't do nearly enough to warn parents of the dangers posed by such foods. On the other side of the debate are restaurant owners,
who argue that they're not the culprits. They say that their food can be a part of a child's diet--if it's eaten in moderation.

There's no disputing that 15 percent of American children are obese and that fast-food consumption by children has increased by
500 percent since 1970. Most observers also accept the data furnished by the U.S. Surgeon General: that obesity in the United
States claims some three hundred thousand lives a year and costs $117 billion in health care. The controversy centers on the
following questions:

 1. Who really is to blame for the increase in obesity among U.S. children?
 2. Under current consumer-protection laws, is fast-food marketing aimed at children misleading?
 3. Should fast-food restaurants be held legally liable for the health problems associated with their products?

What's your opinion? If you owned a fast-food restaurant, what action (if any) would you take in response to the charges leveled by
critics of your industry?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

The Great Idea
Get together with members of your team and brainstorm ideas for a new-to-the-market product. Begin the brainstorming session by
asking each person to write an idea on a sticky note. Post the idea and repeat the process four times. After the team has evaluated
and discussed the ideas, all members should vote. Each gets ten votes, which can be placed on one idea or spread over many. Once
the voting ends, add up the votes received by each idea and declare one idea the winner.

Write a group report that answers the following questions:

 1. What is the idea?
 2. How would the idea work?
 3. Who would our customers be?
 4. What unmet need does it fill?

2. Industry

What is the product's industry, segment, and niche?

    Is the industry growing or contracting?
    Who are our major competitors?
    How does our product differ from those of our competitors?
    What opportunities exist in the industry? What threats?

3. Product

What will the product look like?

    What features will it have?
    How will customers benefit from our product?
    Why will customers buy the product from us?
    Why will our product be financially successful?

The Global View (AACSB)

What to Do When the "False" Alarm Goes Off
If someone on the street tried to sell you a "Rolex" watch for $20, you'd probably suspect that it's a fake. But what about a pair of
New Balance athletic shoes? How do you know they're authentic? How can you tell? Often you can't. Counterfeiters are getting so
good at copying products that even experts have trouble telling a fake from the real thing. What if the counterfeit product in

10.9.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4048
question was a prescription drug? Even worse, what if it had been counterfeited with unsterile equipment or contained no active
ingredients?

How likely is it that you'll buy a counterfeit product in the next year? Unfortunately, it's very likely. To learn a little more about the
global counterfeiting business, go to the BusinessWeek and Washington Post Web sites. Read the BusinessWeek article "Fakes!"
(http://www.businessweek.com/magazine...9001_mz001.htm) and the Washington Post article "Counterfeit Goods That Trigger the
`False' Alarm" (http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P2-4576.html). After you read these articles, answer the following questions:

 1. How has the practice of counterfeiting changed over time? What factors have allowed it to escalate?
 2. What types of products are commonly counterfeited, and why might they be unsafe? What counterfeit products are particularly

    dangerous?
 3. How do the counterfeiters get goods onto the market? How can you reduce your chances of buying fake goods?
 4. Why is counterfeiting so profitable? How can counterfeiters compete on price with those making the authentic goods? How do

    counterfeiters harm U.S. businesses?
 5. What efforts are international companies and governments (including China) making to stop counterfeiters?
 6. If you know that a product is fake, is it ethical to buy it?

This page titled 10.9: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

10.9.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4048
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

11: Operations Management in Manufacturing                          and  Service  Industries

  11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
  11.2: Facility Layouts
  11.3: Managing the Production Process in a Manufacturing Company
  11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts
  11.5: The Technology of Goods Production
  11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
  11.7: Producing for Quality
  11.8: Cases and Problems

This page titled 11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and Service Industries is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                  1
11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define operations management, and discuss the role of the operations manager in a manufacturing company.
    2. Describe the decisions made in planning the production process in a manufacturing company.

Like PowerSki, every organization--whether it produces goods or provides services--sees Job 1 as furnishing customers with
quality products. Thus, to compete with other organizations, a company must convert resources (materials, labor, money,
information) into goods or services as efficiently as possible. The upper-level manager who directs this transformation process is
called an operations manager. The job of operations management (OM), then, consists of all the activities involved in transforming
a product idea into a finished product, as well as those involved in planning and controlling the systems that produce goods and
services. In other words, operations managers manage the process that transforms inputs into outputs. Figure 11.1 illustrates this
traditional function of operations management.

                                                                Figure 11.1 The Transformation Process

In the rest of this chapter, we'll discuss the major activities of operations managers. We'll start by describing the role that
operations managers play in the various processes designed to produce goods and offer services. Next, we'll look at the production
of goods in manufacturing firms; then, we'll describe operations management activities in companies that provide services. We'll
wrap up the chapter by explaining the role of operations management in such processes as quality control and outsourcing.

Operations Management in Manufacturing

Like PowerSki, all manufacturers set out to perform the same basic function: to transform resources into finished goods. To
perform this function in today's business environment, manufacturers must continually strive to improve operational efficiency.
They must fine-tune their production processes to focus on quality, to hold down the costs of materials and labor, and to eliminate
all costs that add no value to the finished product. Making the decisions involved in the effort to attain these goals is the job of the
operations manager. That person's responsibilities can be grouped as follows:

    Production planning. During production planning, managers determine how goods will be produced, where production will take
    place, and how manufacturing facilities will be laid out.
    Production control. Once the production process is under way, managers must continually schedule and monitor the activities
    that make up that process. They must solicit and respond to feedback and make adjustments where needed. At this stage, they
    also oversee the purchasing of raw materials and the handling of inventories.

11.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4049
    Quality control. Finally, the operations manager is directly involved in efforts to ensure that goods are produced according to
    specifications and that quality standards are maintained.

Let's take a closer look at each of these responsibilities.

Planning the Production Process

The decisions made in the planning stage have long-range implications and are crucial to a firm's success. Before making decisions
about the operations process, managers must consider the goals set by marketing managers. Does the company intend to be a low-
cost producer and to compete on the basis of price? Or does it plan to focus on quality and go after the high end of the market?
Perhaps it wants to build a reputation for reliability. What if it intends to offer a wide range of products? To make things even more
complicated, all these decisions involve trade-offs. Upholding a reputation for reliability isn't necessarily compatible with offering
a wide range of products. Low cost doesn't normally go hand in hand with high quality.

With these factors in mind, let's look at the specific types of decisions that have to be made in the production planning process.
We've divided these decisions into those dealing with production methods, site selection, facility layout, and components and
materials management.

Production-Method Decisions

The first step in production planning is deciding which type of production process is best for making the goods that your company
intends to manufacture. In reaching this decision, you should answer such questions as the following:

    How much input do I receive from a particular customer before producing my goods?
    Am I making a one-of-a-kind good based solely on customer specifications, or am I producing high-volume standardized goods
    to be sold later?
    Do I offer customers the option of "customizing" an otherwise standardized good to meet their specific needs?

One way to appreciate the nature of this decision is by comparing three basic types of processes or methods: make-to-order, mass
production, and mass customization. The task of the operations manager is to work with other managers, particularly marketers, to
select the process that best serves the needs of the company's customers.

Make-to-Order

At one time, most consumer goods, such as furniture and clothing, were made by individuals practicing various crafts. By their
very nature, products were customized to meet the needs of the buyers who ordered them. This process, which is called a make-to-
order strategy, is still commonly used by such businesses as print or sign shops that produce low-volume, high-variety goods
according to customer specifications.

Mass Production

Figure 11.2: Automakers produce a high volume of cars in anticipation of future demand. (Dawn Endico - Dealer Prep - CC BY-
SA 2.0.)

11.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4049
By the early twentieth century, however, a new concept of producing goods had been introduced: mass production (or make-to-
stock strategy) is the practice of producing high volumes of identical goods at a cost low enough to price them for large numbers of
customers. Goods are made in anticipation of future demand (based on forecasts) and kept in inventory for later sale. This approach
is particularly appropriate for standardized goods ranging from processed foods to electronic appliances.

Mass Customization

But there's a disadvantage to mass production: customers, as one contemporary advertising slogan puts it, can't "have it their way."
They have to accept standardized products as they come off assembly lines. Increasingly, however, customers are looking for
products that are designed to accommodate individual tastes or needs but can still be bought at reasonable prices. To meet the
demands of these consumers, many companies have turned to an approach called mass customization, which (as the term suggests)
combines the advantages of customized products with those of mass production.

This approach requires that a company interact with the customer to find out exactly what the customer wants and then
manufacture the good, using efficient production methods to hold down costs. One efficient method is to mass-produce a product
up to a certain cut-off point and then to customize it to satisfy different customers.

The list of companies devoting at least a portion of their operations to mass customization is growing steadily. One of the best-
known mass customizer is Nike, which has achieved success by allowing customers to configure their own athletic shoes, apparel,
and equipment through Nike's iD program. The Web has a lot to do with the growth of mass customization. Levi's, for instance,
lets a woman find a pair of perfect fitting jeans by going through an online fitting process that first identifies her "curve" type:
slight (straight figure), demi (evenly proportioned), bold (curvy figure, which experiences waist gapping in the back), and supreme
(curviest shape, which needs a higher rise in the back). Oakley offers customized sunglasses, goggles, watches, and backpacks,
while Mars, Inc. can make M&M's in any color the customer wants (say, school colors) as well as add text and pictures to the
candy1.

Naturally, mass customization doesn't work for all types of goods. Most people don't care about customized detergents or paper
products (although a customized Kleenex tissue box with your picture on it and a statement that says, "go ahead...cry over me!"
might come in handy after a relationship breakup with your significant other (Windisman, 2008).) And while many of us like the
idea of customized clothes, footwear, or sunglasses from Levi's, Nike, or Oakley, we often aren't willing to pay the higher prices
they command.

Facilities Decisions

After selecting the best production process, operations managers must then decide where the goods will be manufactured, how
large the manufacturing facilities will be, and how those facilities will be laid out.

Site Selection

In choosing a location, managers must consider several factors:

    To minimize shipping costs, both for raw materials coming into the plant and for finished goods going out, managers often want
    to locate plants close to suppliers, customers, or both.
    They generally want to locate in areas with ample numbers of skilled workers.
    They naturally prefer locations where they and their families will enjoy living.
    They want locations where costs for resources and other expenses--land, labor, construction, utilities, and taxes--are low.
    They look for locations with a favorable business climate--one in which, for example, local governments might offer financial
    incentives (such as tax breaks) to entice them to do business in their locales.

Managers rarely find locations that meet all these criteria. As a rule, they identify the most important criteria and aim at satisfying
them. In deciding to locate in San Clemente, California, for instance, PowerSki was able to satisfy three important criteria: (1)
proximity to the firm's suppliers, (2) availability of skilled engineers and technicians, and (3) favorable living conditions. These
factors were more important than operating in a low-cost region or getting financial incentives from local government. Because
PowerSki distributes its products throughout the world, proximity to customers was also unimportant.

11.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4049
Capacity Planning

Now that you know where you're going to locate, you have to decide on the quantity of products that you'll produce. You begin by
forecasting demand for your product. As we discussed in Chapter 10 "Product Design and Development", forecasting isn't easy. To
estimate the number of units that you're likely to sell over a given period, you have to understand the industry that you're in and
estimate your likely share of the market by reviewing industry data and conducting other forms of research.

Once you've forecasted the demand for your product, you can calculate the capacity requirements of your production facility--the
maximum number of goods that it can produce over a given time under normal working conditions. In turn, having calculated your
capacity requirements, you're ready to determine how much investment in plant and equipment you'll have to make, as well as the
number of labor hours required for the plant to produce at capacity.

Like forecasting, capacity planning is difficult. Unfortunately, failing to balance capacity and projected demand can be seriously
detrimental to your bottom line. If you set capacity too low (and so produce less than you should), you won't be able to meet
demand, and you'll lose sales and customers. If you set capacity too high (and turn out more units than you should), you'll waste
resources and inflate operating costs.

Key Takeaways

The job of operations management is to oversee the process of transforming resources into goods and services.

    The role of operations managers in the manufacturing sector includes production planning, production control, and quality
    control.
    During production planning, managers determine how goods will be produced (production process), where production will take
    place (site selection), and how manufacturing facilities will be laid out (layout planning).
    In selecting the appropriate production process, managers compare three basic methods: make-to-order strategy (goods are
    made to customer specifications), mass production or make-to-stock strategy (high volumes of goods are made and held in
    inventory for later sale), and mass customization (high volumes of customized goods are made).
    In choosing the site for a company's manufacturing operations, managers look for locations that minimize shipping costs, have
    an ample supply of skilled workers, provide a favorable community for workers and their families, offer resources at low cost,
    and have a favorable business climate.
    Managers estimate the quantity of products to be produced by forecasting demand for their product and then calculating the
    capacity requirements of the production facility--the maximum number of goods that it can produce over a given period under
    normal working conditions.

Exercises

(AACSB) Analysis

Two former surfers invented a material for surfboards that's lighter and stronger than anything manufacturers now use. They have
received funding to set up a production facility, and they want you to help them select a location. In addition to your
recommendation, identify the factors that you considered in reaching your decision.

(AACSB) Analysis

Compare and contrast three common types of production processes: make-to-order, make-to-stock, and mass customization. What
are the advantages and disadvantages of each? Why are more companies devoting at least a portion of their operations to mass
customization? Identify three goods that could probably be adapted to mass customization and three that probably couldn't.

This page titled 11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.1.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4049
11.2: Facility Layouts

  Learning Objective

       Describe four major types of facility layouts: process, product, cellular, and fixed position.

The next step in production planning is deciding on plant layout--how equipment, machinery, and people will be arranged to make
the production process as efficient as possible. In this section, we'll examine four common types of facility layouts: process,
product, cellular, and fixed position.

The process layout groups together workers or departments that perform similar tasks. Goods in process (goods not yet finished)
move from one workstation to another. At each position, workers use specialized equipment to perform a particular step in the
production process. To better understand how this layout works, we'll look at the production process at the Vermont Teddy Bear
Company. Let's say that you just placed an order for a personalized teddy bear--a "hiker bear" with khaki shorts, a white T-shirt
with your name embroidered on it, faux-leather hiking boots, and a nylon backpack with sleeping bag. Your bear begins at the fur-
cutting workstation, where its honey-brown "fur" coat is cut. It then moves to the stuffing and sewing workstation to get its insides
and have its sides stitched together. Next, it moves to the dressing station, where it's outfitted with all the cool clothes and gear that
you ordered. Finally, it winds up in the shipping station and starts its journey to your house. For a more colorful "Online Mini-
Tour" of this process, log on to the Vermont Teddy Bear Web site at http://www.vermontteddybear.com/Stat...mestation.aspx (or see
Figure 11.3 ).

                                                   Figure 11.3 Process Layout at Vermont Teddy Bear Company

In a product layout, high-volume goods are produced efficiently by people, equipment, or departments arranged in an assembly line
--that is, a series of workstations at which already-made parts are assembled. Just Born, a candy maker located in Bethlehem,
Pennsylvania, makes a product called Marshmallow Peeps on an assembly line. First, the ingredients are combined and whipped in
huge kettles. Then, sugar is added for color. At the next workstation, the mixture--colored warm marshmallow--is poured into
baby-chick-shaped molds carried on conveyor belts. The conveyor-belt parade of candy pieces then moves forward to stations
where workers add eyes or other details. When the finished candy reaches the packaging area, it's wrapped for shipment to stores
around the world. To take an online tour of the Marshmallow Peeps production process, log on to the Just Born Web site at
www.justborn.com/get-to-know-us/our-factory (or see Figure 11.4 ).

                                                             Figure 11.4 Product Layout at Just Born, Inc.

Both product and process layouts arrange work by function. At the Vermont Teddy Bear Company, for example, the cutting
function is performed in one place, the stuffing-and-sewing function in another place, and the dressing function in a third place. If
you're a cutter, you cut all day; if you're a sewer, you sew all day: that's your function. The same is true for the production of

11.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4050
Marshmallow Peeps at Just Born: if your function is to decorate peeps, you stand on an assembly line and decorate all day; if your
function is packing, you pack all day.

Arranging work by function, however, isn't always efficient. Production lines can back up, inventories can build up, workers can
get bored with repetitive jobs, and time can be wasted in transporting goods from one workstation to another. To counter some of
these problems, many manufacturers have adopted a cellular layout, in which small teams of workers handle all aspects of building
a component, a "family" of components, or even a finished product. Each team works in a small area, or cell, equipped with
everything that it needs to function as a self-contained unit. Machines are sometimes configured in a U-shape, with people working
inside the U. Because team members often share duties, they're trained to perform several different jobs. Teams monitor both the
quantity and the quality of their own output. This arrangement often results in faster completion time, lower inventory levels,
improved quality, and better employee morale. Cellular manufacturing is used by large manufacturers, such as Boeing, Raytheon,
and Pratt & Whitney (Chaneski, 1998), as well as by small companies, such as Little Enterprise, which makes components for
robots (Modern Machine Shop Magazine, 2001; Little Enterprises, Inc., 2011). Figure 11.5 illustrates a typical cellular layout.

                                                                       Figure 11.5 Cellular Layout

It's easy to move teddy bears and marshmallow candies around the factory while you're making them, but what about airplanes or
ships? In producing large items, manufacturers use fixed-position layout in which the product stays in one place and the workers
(and equipment) go to the product. This is the arrangement used by General Housing Corporation in constructing modular homes.
Each house is constructed at the company's factory in Bay City, Michigan, according to the customer's design. Because carpenters,
electricians, plumbers, and others work on each building inside the climate-controlled factory, the process can't be hindered by
weather. Once it's done, the house is transported in modules to the owner's building site and set up in one day. For a closer view of
General Housing Corporation's production process, go to the General Housing Web site at http://www.genhouse.com.

Key Takeaways

    Managers have several production layout choices, including process, product, cellular, and fixed-position.
    The process layout groups together workers or departments that perform similar tasks. At each position, workers use specialized
    equipment to perform a particular step in the production process.
    In a product layout, high-volume goods are produced in assembly-line fashion--that is, a series of workstations at which
    already-made parts are assembled.

11.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4050
    In a cellular layout, small teams of workers handle all aspects of building a component, a "family of components," or even a
    finished product.
    A fixed-position layout is used to make large items (such as ships or buildings) that stay in one place while workers and
    equipment go to the product.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
As purchasing manager for a company that flies corporate executives around the world, you're responsible for buying everything
from airplanes to onboard snacks. You plan to visit all the plants that make the things you buy: airplanes, passenger seats,
TV/DVDs that go in the back of the passenger seats, and the specially designed uniforms (with embroidered company logos) worn
by the flight attendants. What type of layout should you expect to find at each facility--process, product, or fixed-position? What
will each layout look like? Why is it appropriate for the company's production process? Could any of these plants switch to a
cellular layout? What would this type of layout look like? What would be its advantages?

References

Chaneski, W., "Cellular Manufacturing Can Help You," Modern Machine Shop, August 1, 1998,
http://www.mmsonline.com/columns/cellular-manufacturing-can-help-you (accessed November 1, 2011).

Little Enterprises, Inc., www.littleent.com/industries.html (accessed November 2, 2011).

Modern Machine Shop Magazine, 2001, "Better Production--Manufacturing Cell Boosts Profits and Flexibility," Modern Machine
Shop Magazine, May 2001, http://www.mmsonline.com/articles/manufacturing-cell-boosts-profits-and-flexibility (accessed
November 2, 2011)

This page titled 11.2: Facility Layouts is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4050
11.3: Managing the Production Process in a Manufacturing Company

  Learning Objective

       Identify the activities undertaken by the operations manager in overseeing the production process in a manufacturing
       company.

Once the production process is in place, the attention of the operations manager shifts to the daily activities of materials
management, which encompass the following activities: purchasing, inventory control, and work scheduling.

Purchasing and Supplier Selection

The process of acquiring the materials and services to be used in production is called purchasing (or procurement). For many
products, the costs of materials make up about 50 percent of total manufacturing costs. Not surprisingly, then, materials acquisition
gets a good deal of the operations manager's time and attention.

As a rule, there's no shortage of vendors willing to supply parts and other materials, but the trick is finding the best suppliers. In
selecting a supplier, operations managers must consider such questions as the following:

    Can the vendor supply the needed quantity of materials at a reasonable price?
    Is the quality good?
    Is the vendor reliable (will materials be delivered on time)?
    Does the vendor have a favorable reputation?
    Is the company easy to work with?

Getting the answers to these questions and making the right choices--a process known as supplier selection--is a key
responsibility of operations management.

E-Purchasing

Technology is changing the way businesses buy things. Through e-purchasing (or e-procurement), companies use the Internet to
interact with suppliers. The process is similar to the one you'd use to find a consumer good--say, a forty-two-inch LCD high-
definition TV--over the Internet. You might start by browsing the Web sites of TV manufacturers, such as Sony or Samsung, or
electronics retailers, such as Best Buy. To gather comparative prices, you might go to a comparison-shopping Web site, such as
Amazon.com, the world's largest online retailer. You might even consider placing a bid on eBay, an online marketplace where
sellers and buyers come together to do business through auctions. Once you've decided where to buy your TV, you'd complete
your transaction online, even paying for it electronically.

If you were a purchasing manager using the Internet to buy parts and supplies, you'd follow basically the same process. You'd
identify potential suppliers by going directly to private Web sites maintained by individual suppliers or to public Web sites that
collect information on numerous suppliers. You could do your shopping through online catalogs, or you might participate in an
online marketplace by indicating the type and quantity of materials you need and letting suppliers bid on prices. (Some of these e-
marketplaces are quite large. Covisint, for example, which was started by automakers to coordinate online transactions in the auto
industry, is used by more than two hundred and fifty thousand suppliers in the auto industry, as well as suppliers in the health care
field.) (Jingzhi, 2011) Finally, just as you paid for your TV electronically, you could use a system called electronic data interchange
(EDI) to process your transactions and transmit all your purchasing documents.

The Internet provides an additional benefit to purchasing managers by helping them communicate with suppliers and potential
suppliers. They can use the Internet to give suppliers specifications for parts and supplies, encourage them to bid on future
materials needs, alert them to changes in requirements, and give them instructions on doing business with their employers. Using
the Internet for business purchasing cuts the costs of purchased products and saves administrative costs related to transactions. And
it's faster for procurement and fosters better communications.

This page titled 11.3: Managing the Production Process in a Manufacturing Company is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was
authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4051
11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts

  Learning Objective

    1. Explain how to create and use both PERT and Gantt charts.

Because they also need to control the timing of all operations, managers set up schedules: They select jobs to be performed during
the production process, assign tasks to work groups, set timetables for the completion of tasks, and make sure that resources will be
available when and where they're needed. There are a number of scheduling techniques. We'll focus on two of the most common--
Gantt and PERT charts.

Gantt Charts

A Gantt chart, named after the designer, Henry Gantt, is an easy-to-use graphical tool that helps operations managers determine the
status of projects. Let's say that you're in charge of making the "hiking bear" that we ordered earlier from the Vermont Teddy Bear
Company. Figure 11.7 is a Gantt chart for the production of one hundred of these bears. As you can see, it shows that several
activities must be completed before the bears are dressed: the fur has to be cut, stuffed, and sewn; and the clothes and accessories
must be made. Our Gantt chart tells us that by day six, all accessories and clothing have been made. The stuffing and sewing,
however (which must be finished before the bears are dressed), isn't scheduled for completion until the end of day eight. As
operations manager, you'll have to pay close attention to the progress of the stuffing and sewing operations to ensure that finished
products are ready for shipment by their scheduled date.

                                                           Figure 11.7 Gantt Chart for Vermont Teddy Bear

PERT Charts

Gantt charts are useful when the production process is fairly simple and the activities aren't interrelated. For more complex
schedules, operations managers may use PERT charts. PERT (which stands for Program Evaluation and Review Technique) is
designed to diagram the activities required to produce a good, specify the time required to perform each activity in the process, and
organize activities in the most efficient sequence. It also identifies a critical path: the sequence of activities that will entail the
greatest amount of time. Figure 11.8 is a PERT diagram showing the same process for producing one "hiker" bear at Vermont
Teddy Bear.

11.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4052
                                                           Figure 11.8 PERT Chart for Vermont Teddy Bear

Our PERT chart shows how the activities involved in making a single bear are related. It indicates that the production process
begins at the cutting station. Next, the fur that's been cut for this particular bear moves first to the stuffing and sewing stations and
then to the dressing station. At the same time that its fur is moving through this sequence of steps, the bear's clothes are being cut
and sewn and its T-shirt is being embroidered. Its backpack and tent accessories are also being made at the same time. Note that fur,
clothes, and accessories all meet at the dressing station, where the bear is dressed and outfitted with its backpack. Finally, the
finished bear is packaged and shipped to the customer's house.

What was the critical path in this process? The path that took the longest amount of time was the sequence that included cutting,
stuffing, dressing, packaging, and shipping--a sequence of steps taking sixty-five minutes. If you wanted to produce a bear more
quickly, you'd have to save time on this path. Even if you saved the time on any of the other paths--say, the sequence of steps
involved in cutting, sewing, and embroidering the bear's clothes--you still wouldn't finish the entire job any sooner: the finished
clothes would just have to wait for the fur to be stuffed and sewn and moved to the dressing station. In other words, we can gain
efficiency only by improving our performance on one or more of the activities along the critical path.

Key Takeaways
    Gantt and PERT charts are two of the most common graphical tools used by operations managers to diagram the activities
    involved in producing goods.
    A Gantt chart is an easy-to-use graphical tool that helps operations managers determine the status of projects.
    PERT charts are used to diagram the activities required to produce a good, specify the time required to perform each activity in
    the process, and organize activities in the most efficient sequence.
    A PERT chart identifies a critical path--the sequence of activities that will entail the greatest amount of time.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Earning a college degree requires not only a lot of hard work but also, as you know, a lot of planning. You must, for example,
complete a specified number of credits and take many required courses, particularly in your major. Deciding which courses to take
and when to take them can be complicated when some of them have prerequisites. A PERT chart--which diagrams the activities
required to complete a goal--might help you determine the order in which you should take courses for your major. Pick a major
that interests you and find out what courses you'd need to complete it. Then prepare a PERT chart showing all the courses you'd
plan to take each semester to complete your major. (For example, if you select the accounting major, include only accounting

11.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4052
courses; don't include your other business courses or your elective courses.) Identify the critical path laid out in your chart. What
happens if you fail to take one of your critical-path courses on time?

This page titled 11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4052
11.5: The Technology of Goods Production

  Learning Objective

       Explain how manufacturing companies use technology to produce and deliver goods in an efficient, cost-effective manner.

PowerSki founder and CEO Bob Montgomery spent sixteen years designing the Jetboard and bringing it to production. At one
point, in his efforts to get the design just right, he'd constructed thirty different prototypes. Needless to say, this process took a very
long time, but even so, Montgomery thought that he could handle the designing of the engine without the aid of a computer. Before
long, however, he realized that it was impossible to keep track of all the changes.

Computer-Aided Design

That's when Montgomery turned to computer technology for help and began using a computer-aided design (CAD) software
package to design not only the engine but also the board itself and many of its components. The CAD program enabled
Montgomery and his team of engineers to test the product digitally and work out design problems before moving to the prototype
stage.

The sophisticated CAD software allowed Montgomery and his team to put their design paper in a drawer and to start building both
the board and the engine on a computer screen. By rotating the image on the screen, they could even view the design from every
angle. Having used their CAD program to make more than four hundred design changes, they were ready to test the Jetboard in the
water. During the tests, onboard sensors transmitted data to portable computers, allowing the team to make adjustments from the
shore while the prototype was still in the water. Nowadays, PowerSki uses collaboration software to transmit design changes to the
suppliers of the 340 components that make up the Jetboard.

Computer-Aided Manufacturing

For many companies, the next step is to link CAD to the manufacturing process. A computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) software
system determines the steps needed to produce the component and instructs the machines that do the work. Because CAD and
CAM programs can "talk" with each other, companies can build components that satisfy exactly the requirements set by the
computer-generated model. CAD/CAM systems permit companies to design and manufacture goods faster, more efficiently, and at
a lower cost, and they're also effective in helping firms monitor and improve quality. CAD/CAM technology is used in many
industries, including the auto industry, electronics, and clothing.

Computer-Integrated Manufacturing

By automating and integrating all aspects of a company's operations, computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems have
taken the integration of computer-aided design and manufacturing to a higher level--and are in fact revolutionizing the production
process. CIM systems expand the capabilities of CAD/CAM. In addition to design and production applications, they handle such
functions as order entry, inventory control, warehousing, and shipping. In the manufacturing plant, the CIM system controls the
functions of industrial robots--computer-controlled machines used to perform repetitive tasks that are also hard or dangerous for
human workers to perform.

Flexible Manufacturing Systems

Finally, a CIM system is a common element in flexible manufacturing systems (FMS), in which computer-controlled equipment
can easily be adapted to produce a variety of goods. An FMS has immense advantages over traditional production lines in which
machines are set up to produce only one type of good. When the firm needs to switch a production line to manufacture a new
product, substantial time and money are often spent in modifying equipment. An FMS makes it possible to change equipment
setups merely by reprogramming computer-controlled machines. Such flexibility is particularly valuable to companies that produce
customized products.

11.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4053
Key Takeaways

    In addition to creating high-quality products, companies must produce and deliver goods and services in an efficient, cost-
    effective manner.
    Sophisticated software systems, including computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided manufacturing (CAM),
    computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), and flexible manufacturing systems (FMS), are becoming increasingly
    important in this area.
    Computer-aided design software (CAD) is used to create models representing the design of a product.
    Many companies link CAD systems to the manufacturing process through computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) systems
    that not only determine the steps needed to produce components but also instruct machines to do the necessary work.
    A CAD/CAM system can be expanded by means of computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM), which integrates various
    operations (from design through production) with functional activities ranging from order taking to shipping.
    A CIM system is a common element in a flexible manufacturing system (FMS), in which computer-controlled equipment can
    easily be adapted to produce a variety of goods.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

The design and production of both goods and services can be facilitated by various high-tech tools, including CAD, CAM, CIM,
and FMS. What does CAD software do, and how does it improve a design process? What is CAM, and why is it beneficial to
integrate CAD and CAM programs? How do CIM systems expand the capabilities of CAD/CAM? What is an FMS, and what are
its advantages over traditional manufacturing systems?

This page titled 11.5: The Technology of Goods Production is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4053
11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers

  Learning Objectives
    1. List the characteristics that distinguish service operations from manufacturing operations.
    2. Describe the decisions made in planning the product delivery process in a service company.
    3. Identify the activities undertaken to manage operations in a service organization.

As the U.S. economy has changed from a goods producer to a service provider, the predominance of the manufacturing sector has
declined substantially over the last sixty years. Today, only about 9 percent of U.S. workers are employed in manufacturing, in
contrast to 30 percent in 1950 (The Global Language Monitor, 2010; Strauss, 2010). Most of us now hold jobs in the service sector,
which accounts for 77 percent of U.S. gross domestic product (International Monetary Fund, 2010; Wikipedia, 2011). Wal-Mart is
now America's largest employer, followed by IBM, United Parcel Service (UPS), McDonald's, and Target. Not until we drop down
to the seventh-largest employer--Hewlett Packard--do we find a company with even a manufacturing component (24/7 Wall
Street, 2011).

               Figure 11.9: Wal-Mart employs more than a million people in the United States. (Mike Mozart - Walmart - CC BY 2.0.)
Though the primary function of both manufacturers and service providers is to satisfy customer needs, there are several important
differences between the two types of operations. Let's focus on three of them:

    Intangibility. Manufacturers produce tangible products--things that can be touched or handled, such as automobiles and
    appliances. Service companies provide intangible products, such as banking, entertainment, or education.
    Customization. Manufactured goods are generally standardized; one twelve-ounce bottle of Pepsi is the same as any other
    twelve-ounce bottle of Pepsi. Services, by contrast, are often customized to satisfy the specific needs of a customer. When you
    go to the barber or the hairdresser, you ask for a haircut that looks good on you because of the shape of your face and the texture
    of your hair. When you go to the dentist, you ask him or her to fill or pull the tooth that's bothering you.
    Customer contact. You could spend your entire working life assembling cars in Detroit and never meet a customer who bought
    a car that you helped to make. But if you were a waitress, you'd interact with customers every day. In fact, their satisfaction
    with your product would be determined in part by the service that you provided. Unlike manufactured goods, many services are
    bought and consumed at the same time.

11.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
                            Figure 11.10: Here is just one of the over twelve thousand Burger King restaurants across the globe.

Not surprisingly, operational efficiency is just as important in service industries as it is in manufacturing. To get a better idea of the
role of operations management in the service sector, we'll look closely at Burger King (BK), home of the Whopper, and the world's
second-largest restaurant chain."Press Room," Burger King, http://www.bk.com/en/us/company-info/press/index.html (accessed
November 2, 2011). BK has grown substantially since selling the first Whopper (for $0.37) almost half a century ago. The instant
success of the fire-grilled burger encouraged the Miami founders of the company to expand by selling franchises. Today, there are
12,200 BK company- and independently-owned franchised restaurants in seventy-three countries (seven thousand of which are in
the United States), and they employ almost forty thousand people.SEC, 10K SEC Filings, Burger King Corporation, August 2010,
http://services.corporate-ir.net/SEC.Enhanced/SecCapsule.aspx?c=87140&fid=7105569 (accessed November 3, 2011). More than
eleven million customers visit BK each day."Press Room," Burger King, http://www.bk.com/en/us/company-info/press/index.html
(accessed November 2, 2011).

Operations Planning

When starting or expanding operations, businesses in the service sector must make a number of decisions quite similar to those
made by manufacturers:

    What services (and perhaps what goods) should they offer?
    How will they provide these services?
    Where will they locate their business, and what will their facilities look like?
    How will they forecast demand for their services?

Let's see how service firms like BK answer questions such as these.Information on Burger King was obtained from an interview
with David Sell, former vice president of Central, Eastern, and Northern Europe divisions and president of Burger King France and
Germany.

Operations Processes

Service organizations succeed by providing services that satisfy customers' needs. Companies that provide transportation, such as
airlines, have to get customers to their destinations as quickly and safely as possible. Companies that deliver packages, such as
FedEx, must pick up, sort, and deliver packages in a timely manner. Colleges must provide quality educations. Companies that
provide both services and goods, such as Domino's Pizza, have a dual challenge: they must produce a quality good and deliver it
satisfactorily.

Service providers that produce goods can, like manufacturers, adopt either a make-to-order or a make-to-stock approach to
manufacturing them. BK, which encourages patrons to customize burgers and other menu items, uses a make-to-order approach.
BK can customize products because it builds sandwiches one at a time rather than batch-process them. Meat patties, for example,
go from the grill to a steamer for holding until an order comes in. Then the patty is pulled from the steamer and requested
condiments are added. Finally, the completed sandwich chutes to a counter worker, who gives it to the customer. In contrast, many

11.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
of BK's competitors, including McDonald's, rely on a make-to-stock approach in which a number of sandwiches are made at the
same time with the same condiments. If a customer wants, say, a hamburger without onions, he or she has to wait for a new batch
of patties to be grilled. The procedure could take up to five minutes, whereas BK can process a special order in thirty seconds.

Like manufacturers, service providers must continuously look for ways to improve operational efficiency. Throughout its sixty-year
history, BK has introduced a number of innovations that have helped make the company (as well as the fast-food industry itself)
more efficient. BK, for example, was the first to offer drive-through service (which now accounts for 70 percent of its salesBob
Krummert, "Burger King: Headed For A Fast-Casual Flameout?," Restaurant Hospitality, http://restaurant-
hospitality.com/news/burger-king-headed-flameout-1019/ (accessed November 3, 2011). ).

It was also a BK vice president, David Sell, who came up with the idea of moving the drink station from behind the counter so that
customers could take over the time-consuming task of filling cups with ice and beverages. BK was able to cut back one employee
per day at every one of its more than eleven thousand restaurants. Material costs also went down because customers usually fill
cups with more ice, which is cheaper than a beverage. Moreover, there were savings on supply costs because most customers don't
bother with lids, and many don't use straws. On top of everything else, most customers liked the system (for one thing, it allowed
them to customize their own drinks by mixing beverages), and as a result, customer satisfaction went up, as well. Overall, the new
process was a major success and quickly became the industry standard.

Facilities

When starting or expanding a service business, owners and managers must invest a lot of time in selecting a location, determining
its size and layout, and forecasting demand. A poor location or a badly designed facility can cost customers, and inaccurate
estimates of demand for products can result in poor service, excessive costs, or both.

Site Selection

People in the real estate industry often say that the three most important factors to consider when you're buying a home are
location, location, location. The same principle applies when you're trying to locate a service business. To be successful in a
service industry, you need to be accessible to your customers. Some service businesses, such as cable-TV providers, package-
delivery services, and e-retailers, go to their customers. Many others, however--hotels, restaurants, stores, hospitals, and airports--
have to attract customers to their facilities. These businesses must locate where there's a high volume of available customers. Let's
see how BK decides where to place a restaurant.

"Through the light and to the right." This is a favorite catchphrase among BK planners who are looking for a promising spot for a
new restaurant (at least in the United States). In picking a location, BK planners perform a detailed analysis of demographics and
traffic patterns, yet the most important factor is usually traffic count--the number of cars or people that pass by a specific location
in the course of a day. In the United States, where we travel almost everywhere by car, BK looks for busy intersections, interstate
interchanges with easy off and on ramps, or such "primary destinations" as shopping malls, tourist attractions, downtown business
areas, or movie theaters. In Europe, where public transportation is much more common, planners focus on subway, train, bus, and
trolley stops.

Once planners find a site with an acceptable traffic count, they apply other criteria. It must, for example, be easy for vehicles to
enter and exit the site, which must also provide enough parking to handle projected dine-in business. Local zoning must permit
standard signage, especially along interstate highways. Finally, expected business must be high enough to justify the cost of the
land and building.

Size and Layout

Because manufacturers do business out of plants rarely visited by customers, they base the size and layout of their facilities solely
on production needs. In the service sector, however, most businesses must design their facilities with the customer in mind: they
must accommodate the needs of their customers while keeping costs as low as possible. Performing this twofold task isn't easy.
Let's see how BK has met the challenge.

For its first three decades, almost all BK restaurants were pretty much the same. They all sat on one acre of land (located "through
the light and to the right"), had about four thousand square feet of space, and held seating for seventy customers. All kitchens were
roughly the same size. As long as land was cheap and sites were readily available, this system worked well enough. By the early

11.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
1990s, however, most of the prime sites had been taken, if not by BK itself, then by one of its fast-food competitors or other
businesses needing a choice spot, including gas stations and convenience stores. With everyone bidding on the same sites, the cost
of a prime acre of land had increased from $100,000 to over $1 million in a few short years.

To continue growing, BK needed to change the way it found and developed its locations. Planners decided that they had to find
ways to reduce the size of a typical BK restaurant. For one thing, they could reduce the number of seats, because the business at a
typical outlet had shifted over time from 90 percent inside dining and 10 percent drive-through to a 50-50 split. BK customers
tended to be in a hurry, and more customers preferred the convenience of drive-through "dining."

David Sell (the same executive who had recommended letting customers fill their own drink cups) proposed to save space by
wrapping Whoppers in paper instead of serving them in the cardboard boxes that took up too much space in the back room of every
restaurant. So BK switched to a single paper wrapper with the label "Whopper" on one side and "Cheese Whopper" on the other.
To show which product was inside, employees just folded the wrapper in the right direction. Ultimately, BK replaced pallets piled
high with boxes with a few boxes full of wrappers.

Ideas like these helped BK trim the size of a restaurant from four thousand square feet to as little as one thousand. In turn, smaller
facilities enabled the company to enter markets that were once cost prohibitive. Now BK could locate profitably in airports, food
courts, strip malls, center-city areas, and even schools. The company even designed 10-foot-by-10-foot kiosks that could be
transported to special events, stadiums, and concerts.

Capacity Planning

Estimating capacity needs for a service business isn't the same thing as estimating those of a manufacturer. A manufacturer can
predict overall demand, produce the product, store it in inventory, and ship it to a customer when it's ordered. Service providers,
however, can't store their products for later use: hairdressers can't "inventory" haircuts, hospitals can't "inventory" operations, and
amusement parks can't "inventory" roller-coaster rides. Service firms have to build sufficient capacity to satisfy customers' needs
on an "as-demanded" basis. Like manufacturers, service providers must consider many variables when estimating demand and
capacity:

    How many customers will I have?
    When will they want my services (which days of the week, which times of the day)?
    How long will it take to serve each customer?
    How will external factors, such as weather or holidays, affect the demand for my services?

        Figure 11.11: Retailers have to be prepared to accommodate much heavier traffic than normal during the holiday season. (Pexel
        License; Vladimir Srajber via Pexels)

Forecasting demand is easier for companies like BK, which has a long history of planning facilities, than for brand-new service
businesses. BK can predict sales for a new restaurant by combining its knowledge of customer-service patterns at existing

11.6.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
restaurants with information collected about each new location, including the number of cars or people passing the proposed site
and the effect of nearby competition.

Managing Operations

Overseeing a service organization puts special demands on managers, especially those running firms, such as hotels, retail stores,
and restaurants, that have a high degree of contact with customers. Service firms provide customers with personal attention and
must satisfy their needs in a timely manner. This task is complicated by the fact that demand can vary greatly over the course of
any given day. Managers, therefore, must pay particular attention to employee work schedules and (in some cases) inventory
management. Let's see how BK deals with these problems.

Scheduling

In manufacturing, managers focus on scheduling the activities needed to transform raw materials into finished goods. In service
organizations, they focus on scheduling workers so that they're available to handle fluctuating customer demand. Each week,
therefore, every BK store manager schedules employees to cover not only the peak periods of breakfast, lunch, and dinner, but also
the slower periods in between. If he or she staffs too many people, labor cost per sales dollar will be too high. If there aren't enough
employees, customers have to wait in lines. Some get discouraged, and even leave, and many may never come back.

Scheduling is made easier by information provided by a point-of-sale device built into every BK cash register. The register keeps
track of every sandwich, beverage, and side order sold by the hour, every hour of the day, every day of the week. Thus, to
determine how many people will be needed for next Thursday's lunch hour, the manager reviews last Thursday's data, using sales
revenue and a specific BK formula to determine the appropriate staffing level. Each manager can adjust this forecast to account for
other factors, such as current marketing promotions or a local sporting event that will increase customer traffic.

Inventory Control

Businesses that provide both goods and services, such as retail stores and auto-repair shops, have the same inventory-control
problems as manufacturers: keeping levels too high costs money, while running out of inventory costs sales. Technology, such as
the point-of-sale registers used at BK, makes the job easier. BK's system tracks everything sold during a given time and lets each
store manager know how much of everything should be kept in inventory. It also makes it possible to count the number of burgers
and buns, bags and racks of fries, and boxes of beverage mixes at the beginning or end of each shift. Because there are fixed
numbers of supplies--say, beef patties or bags of fries--in each box, employees simply count boxes and multiply. In just a few
minutes, the manager knows whether the inventory is correct (and should be able to see if any theft has occurred on the shift).

Key Takeaways
    Though the primary function of both manufacturers and service providers is to satisfy customer needs, there are several
    important differences between the two types of operations.
    While manufacturers produce tangible, generally standardized products, service firms provide intangible products that are often
    customized to satisfy specific needs. Unlike manufactured goods, many services are bought and consumed at the same time.
    Operational efficiency is just as important in service industries as it is in manufacturing.
    Operations managers in the service sector make many decisions that are similar to those made by manufacturers: they decide
    which services to offer, how to provide these services, where to locate their businesses, what their facilities will look like, and
    what the demand will be for their services.
    Service providers that produce goods can, like manufacturers, adopt either a make-to-order approach (in which products are
    made to customer satisfaction) or make-to-stock approach (in which products are made for inventory) to manufacturing them.
    Estimating capacity needs for a service business is more difficult than for a manufacturer. Service providers can't store their
    services for later use: services must be delivered on an as-needed basis.
    Overseeing a service organization puts special demands on managers, especially services requiring a high degree of contact
    with customers.
    Given the importance of personalized service, scheduling workers is more complex in the service industry than in
    manufacturing. In manufacturing, operations managers focus on scheduling the activities needed to produce goods; in service
    organizations, they focus on scheduling workers to ensure that enough people are available to handle fluctuating customer
    demand.

11.6.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Starting a new business can be an exciting adventure. Here's your chance to start a "pretend" business. Select a service business
that you'd like to open, and answer these questions. Provide an explanation for each answer:

 1. What services (and perhaps goods) will I provide?
 2. How will I provide these services?
 3. Where will I locate my business?
 4. What will the facilities look like (how large will the facilities be and what will the layout look like)?
 5. How many customers will I serve each day?
 6. When will my customers want my services (which days of the week, which times of the day)?
 7. How long will it take to serve each customer?
 8. Why will my business succeed? Why will my customers return?

This page titled 11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.6.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4054
11.7: Producing for Quality

  Learning Objective

       Explain how manufacturing and service companies alike use total quality management and outsourcing to provide value to
       customers.

What do you do if you get it home and your brand-new DVD player doesn't work? What if you were late for class because it took
you twenty minutes to get a burger and order of fries at the drive-through window of a fast-food restaurant? Like most people,
you'd probably be more or less disgruntled. As a customer, you're constantly assured that when products make it to market, they're
of the highest possible quality, and you tend to avoid brands that have failed to live up to your expectations or to producers' claims.
You're told that workers in such businesses as restaurants are there to serve you, and you probably don't go back to establishments
where you've received poor-quality service.

But what is quality? According to the American Society for Quality, quality refers to "the characteristics of a product or service that
bear on its ability to satisfy stated or implied needs" (American Society of Quality, 2011). When you buy a DVD player, you expect
it to play DVDs. When it doesn't, you question its quality. When you go to a drive-through window, you expect to be served in a
reasonable amount of time. If you're forced to wait, you conclude that you're the victim of poor-quality service.

Quality Management

To compete today, companies must deliver quality goods and services that satisfy customers' needs. This is the objective of quality
management. Total quality management (TQM), or quality assurance, includes all the steps that a company takes to ensure that its
goods or services are of sufficiently high quality to meet customers' needs. Generally speaking, a company adheres to TQM
principles by focusing on three tasks:

 1. Customer satisfaction
 2. Employee involvement
 3. Continuous improvement

Let's take a closer look at these three principles.

Customer Satisfaction

Companies that are committed to TQM understand that the purpose of a business is to generate a profit by satisfying customer
needs. Thus, they let their customers define quality by identifying and offering those product features that satisfy customer needs.
They encourage customers to tell them how to make the right products, both goods and services, that work the right way.

Armed with this knowledge, they take steps to make sure that providing quality is a factor in every facet of their operations--from
design, to product planning and control, to sales and service. To get feedback on how well they're doing, many companies routinely
use surveys and other methods to monitor customer satisfaction. By tracking the results of feedback over time, they can see where
they need to improve.

Employee Involvement

Successful TQM requires that everyone in the organization, not simply upper-level management, commits to satisfying the
customer. When customers wait too long at a drive-through window, it's the responsibility of a number of employees, not the
manager alone. A defective DVD isn't solely the responsibility of the manufacturer's quality control department; it's the
responsibility of every employee involved in its design, production, and even shipping. To get everyone involved in the drive for
quality assurance, managers must communicate the importance of quality to subordinates and motivate them to focus on customer
satisfaction. Employees have to be properly trained not only to do their jobs but also to detect and correct quality problems.

In many companies, employees who perform similar jobs work as teams, sometimes called quality circles, to identify quality,
efficiency, and other work-related problems, to propose solutions, and to work with management in implementing their
recommendations.

11.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4055
Continuous Improvement

An integral part of TQM is continuous improvement: the commitment to making constant improvements in the design, production,
and delivery of goods and services. Improvements can almost always be made to increase efficiency, reduce costs, and improve
customer service and satisfaction. Everyone in the organization is constantly on the lookout for ways to do things better.

Statistical Process Control

Companies can use a variety of tools to identify areas for improvement. A common approach in manufacturing is called statistical
process control. This technique monitors production quality by testing a sample of output to see whether goods in process are being
made according to predetermined specifications.

Assume for a moment that you work for Kellogg's, the maker of Raisin Bran cereal. You know that it's the company's goal to pack
two scoops of raisins in every box of cereal. How can you test to determine whether this goal is being met? You could use a
statistical process control method called a sampling distribution. On a periodic basis, you would take a box of cereal off the
production line and measure the amount of raisins in the box. Then you'd record that amount on a control chart designed to
compare actual quantities of raisins with the desired quantity (two scoops). If your chart shows that several samples in a row are
low on raisins, you'd shut down the production line and take corrective action.

Benchmarking

Sometimes it also helps to look outside the organization for ideas on how to improve operations and to learn how your company
compares with others. Companies routinely use benchmarking to compare their performance on a number of dimensions with the
performance of other companies that excel in particular areas. Frequent benchmark targets include L.L. Bean, for its superior
performance in filling orders; 3M, for its record of introducing innovative products; Motorola, for its success in maintaining
consistent quality standards; and Mary Kay Cosmetics, for its skills in inventory control (Nuese, 1995).

This page titled 11.7: Producing for Quality is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4055
11.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

How to Build a BMW
How'd you like to own a Series 3 BMW? How about a convertible priced at $48,000 for those warm summer days? Or maybe a
less expensive coupe for $39,000? Or, if you need more space for hauling camping equipment, dogs, or kids, maybe you would
prefer a wagon at $37,000? We can't help you finance a BMW, but we can show you how they're made. Go to http://www.bmw-
plant-munich.com/ to link to the BMW Web site for a virtual tour of the company's Munich, Germany, plant.

First, click on "Location" and then on "The Plant in Figures." Before going any further, answer the following questions:

    How many associates (employees) work in the plant?
    How many apprentices (trainees) work there? Why does the plant have trainees?
    How many cars are made in the plant each day? How many engines?

Next, click on "Production" to open a drop-down list that looks like this:

 Fascination Production

 Press Shop

 Body Shop

 Paint Shop

 Engine Assembly

 Assembly

Click on "Fascination Production," and watch a video that zips you through the production steps needed to make a BMW. Continue
your tour by clicking on each progressive step taken to build a quality car: press shop, body shop, paint shop, engine assembly and
final assembly. After reading about and watching the brief video describing the work done in a particular area of the plant, pause
and answer the following questions (you will answer this set of questions five times--once for each of these areas of the factory:
press shop, body shop, paint shop, engine assembly, and final assembly):

 1. What production steps occurred in this area of the plant?
 2. What technology does BMW use in the production process?
 3. Approximately what percentage of the work was done by people?
 4. What procedures were followed to ensure the production of high-quality vehicles?

Career Opportunities

Wanted: Problem Solvers and Creative Thinkers
If you had a time machine plus a craving for a great hamburger, you could return to the early 1950s and swing by Dick and Mac
McDonald's burger stand in San Bernardino, California. Take a break from eating and watch the people in the kitchen. You'll see
an early application of operations management in the burger industry. Dick and Mac, in an effort to sell more burgers in less time,
redesigned their kitchen to use assembly-line procedures. As the number of happy customers grew, word spread about their speedy
system, and their business thrived. Curiously, it wasn't Dick and Mac who made McDonald's what it is today, but rather a traveling
milkshake-mixer salesman named Ray Kroc. He visited the hamburger stand to learn how they could sell twenty thousand shakes a
year. When he saw their operations and the lines of people walking away with bags filled with burgers, fries, and shakes, he knew
he had a winner. In cooperation with the McDonald brothers, he started selling franchises around the country, and the rest is history.

So, what does this story have to do with a career in operations management? If you're a problem solver like Dick and Mac (who
discovered a way to make burgers faster and cheaper) or a creative thinker like Ray Kroc (who recognized the value in an
assembly-line burger production system), then a career in operations management might be for you. The field is broad and offers a
variety of opportunities. To get a flavor of the choices available, go to www.wetfeet.com/Careers-and-I...perations.aspx to link to

11.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4056
the WetFeet Web site and review the dozen or so operations management positions listed. Provide a brief description of each
position. Indicate how interesting you find each position by rating it using a five-point scale (with 1 being uninteresting and 5 being
very interesting). Based on your assessment, pick the position you find most interesting and the one you find least interesting.
Explain why you made your selections.

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

In many ways, Eastman Kodak (a multinational manufacturer and distributor of photographic equipment and supplies) is a model
corporate citizen. Fortune magazine has ranked it as one of the country's most admired companies, applauding it in particular for
its treatment of minorities and women. Its community-affairs programs and contributions have also received praise, but Eastman
Kodak remains weak in one important aspect of corporate responsibility: it has consistently received low scores on environmental
practices. For example, the watchdog group Scorecard rated Eastman Kodak's Rochester, New York, facility as the third-worst
emitter of airborne carcinogens in the United States. Other reports have criticized the company for dumping cancer-causing
chemicals into the nation's waters.

Go to www.kodak.com/US/en/corp/HSE/homepage.jhtml?pd-path=2879/7196 to link to the Eastman Kodak Web site and read its
own assessment of its environmental practices. Then answer the following questions:

 1. Based on the information provided on its Web site, how favorable do you feel about Eastman Kodak's environmental practices?
 2. In what ways is the company responding to criticisms of its environmental practices and improving them?
 3. Do the statements on the Web site mesh with the criticism that the company has received? If not, what accounts for the

    differences?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Growing Accustomed to Your Fit

Instead of going to the store to try on several pairs of jeans that may or may not fit, wouldn't it be easier to go online and order a
pair of perfect-fitting jeans? Lands' End has made this kind of shopping possible through mass-customization techniques and some
sophisticated technology.

To gain some firsthand experience at shopping for mass-customized goods, have each member of your team go to Nike's iD site at
http://nikeid.nike.com. Each team member should go through the process of customizing a different Nike product but stop right
before placing an order. After everyone has gone through the process, get together and write a report in which the team explains
exactly what's entailed by online mass customization and details the process at Nike. Be sure to say which things impressed you
and which didn't. Explain why Nike developed this means of marketing products and, finally, offer some suggestions on how the
process could be improved.

The Global View (AACSB)

What's the State of Homeland Job Security?

Over the past several decades, more and more U.S. manufacturers began outsourcing production to such low-wage countries as
Mexico and China. The number of U.S. manufacturing jobs dwindled, and the United States became more of a service economy.
People who were directly affected were understandably unhappy about this turn of events, but most people in this country didn't
feel threatened. At least, not until service jobs also started going to countries that, like India, have large populations of well-
educated, English-speaking professionals. Today, more technology-oriented jobs, including those in programming and Internet
communications, are being outsourced to countries with lower wage rates. And tech workers aren't alone: the jobs of accountants,
analysts, bankers, medical technicians, paralegals, insurance adjusters, and even customer-service representatives have become
candidates for overseas outsourcing.

Many U.S. workers are concerned about job security (though the likelihood of a particular individual's losing a job to an overseas
worker is still fairly low). The issues are more complex than merely deciding where U.S. employers should be mailing paychecks,
and politicians, economists, business executives, and the general public differ about the causes and consequences of foreign
outsourcing. Some people think it's a threat to American quality of life, while others actually think that it's a good thing.

Spend some time researching trends in outsourcing. Formulate some opinions, and then answer the following questions:

11.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4056
 1. About what percentage of U.S. jobs have left the country in the last five years? What percentage will probably leave in the next
    five years?

 2. What kinds of jobs are being outsourced, and where are they going? What kinds of jobs can't be outsourced?
 3. How does global outsourcing help U.S. businesses? How does it hinder them?
 4. How has the trend in outsourcing manufacturing and service operations to foreign countries helped average Americans? How

    has it harmed them?
 5. Does overseas outsourcing help or hurt the U.S. economy? In what ways?

This page titled 11.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

11.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4056
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

12: The Role of Accounting in Business

  12.1: The Role of Accounting
  12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
  12.3: Accrual Accounting
  12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
  12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
  12.6: Cases and Problems
This page titled 12: The Role of Accounting in Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
12.1: The Role of Accounting

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define accounting and explain the differences between managerial accounting and financial accounting.
    2. Identify some of the users of accounting information and explain how they use it.

Accounting is often called "the language of business." Why? Because it communicates so much of the information that owners,
managers, and investors need to evaluate a company's financial performance. These people are all stakeholders in the business--
they're interested in its activities because they're affected by them. In fact, the purpose of accounting is to help stakeholders make
better business decisions by providing them with financial information. Obviously, you wouldn't try to run an organization or make
investment decisions without accurate and timely financial information, and it's the accountant who prepares this information.
More importantly, accountants make sure that stakeholders understand the meaning of financial information, and they work with
both individuals and organizations to help them use financial information to deal with business problems. Actually, collecting all
the numbers is the easy part--today, all you have to do is start up your accounting software. The hard part is analyzing,
interpreting, and communicating the information. Of course, you also have to present everything clearly while effectively
interacting with people from every business discipline. In any case, we're now ready to define accounting as the process of
measuring and summarizing business activities, interpreting financial information, and communicating the results to management
and other decision makers.

Fields of Accounting

Accountants typically work in one of two major fields. Management accountants provide information and analysis to decision
makers inside the organization in order to help them run it. Financial accountants furnish information to individuals and groups
both inside and outside the organization in order to help them assess its financial performance.

In other words, management accounting helps you keep your business running while financial accounting tells you how well you're
running it.

Management Accounting

Management accounting plays a key role in helping managers carry out their responsibilities. Because the information that it
provides is intended for use by people who perform a wide variety of jobs, the format for reporting information is flexible. Reports
are tailored to the needs of individual managers, and the purpose of such reports is to supply relevant, accurate, timely information
in a format that will aid managers in making decisions. In preparing, analyzing, and communicating such information, accountants
work with individuals from all the functional areas of the organization--human resources, operations, marketing, and finance.

Financial Accounting

Financial accounting is responsible for preparing the organization's financial statements--including the income statement, the
statement of owner's equity, the balance sheet, and the statement of cash flows--that summarize a company's past performance and
evaluate its current financial condition. In preparing financial statements, financial accountants adhere to a uniform set of rules
called generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)--the basic principles for financial reporting issued by an independent
agency called the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). Users want to be sure that financial statements have been
prepared according to GAAP because they want to be sure that the information reported in them is accurate. They also know that
they can compare the statements issued by one company to those of another company in the same industry.

12.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4057
        Figure 12.1: Financial statements provide a snapshot of a company's performance over a specific period. (Philippe Put - balance
        sheet ok - CC BY-ND 2.0.)

While companies headquartered in the United States follow U.S.-based GAAP, many companies located outside the United States
follow a different set of accounting principles called International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). These multinational
standards, which are issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), differ from U.S. GAAP in a number of
important ways. IFRS, for example, is a little stricter about the ways you can calculate the costs of inventory, but we're not going to
dwell unnecessarily on such fine distinctions. Bear in mind, however, that, according to most experts, a single set of worldwide
standards will eventually emerge to govern the accounting practices of both U.S. and non-U.S. companies.

This page titled 12.1: The Role of Accounting is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4057
12.2: Understanding Financial Statements

  Learning Objectives

       Understand the function of the income statement.
       Understand the function of the balance sheet.
       Understand the function of the statement of owner's equity.

We hope that, so far, we've made at least one thing clear: If you're in business, you need to understand financial statements. For
one thing, the law no longer allows high-ranking executives to plead ignorance or fall back on delegation of authority when it
comes to taking responsibility for a firm's financial reporting. In a business environment tainted by episodes of fraudulent financial
reporting and other corporate misdeeds, top managers are now being held accountable (so to speak) for the financial statements
issued by the people who report to them. For another thing, top managers need to know if the company is hitting on all cylinders or
sputtering down the road to bankruptcy. To put it another way (and to switch metaphors): if he didn't understand the financial
statements issued by the company's accountants, an executive would be like an airplane pilot who doesn't know how to read the
instrument in the cockpit--he might be able keep the plane in the air for a while, but he wouldn't recognize any signs of impending
trouble until it was too late.

The Function of Financial Statements

Put yourself in the place of the woman in Figure 12.4 . She runs Connie's Confections out of her home. She loves what she does,
and she feels that she's doing pretty well. In fact, she has an opportunity to take over a nearby store at very reasonable rent, and she
can expand by getting a modest bank loan and investing some more of her own money. So it's decision time for Connie: She knows
that the survival rate for start-ups isn't very good, and before taking the next step, she'd like to get a better idea of whether she's
actually doing well enough to justify the risk. As you can see, she has several pertinent questions. We aren't privy to Connie's
finances, but we can tell her how basic financial statements will give her some answers1.

Figure 12.4 What Connie Wants to Know  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4058
                      12.2.1
Toying with a Business Idea

We know what you're thinking: It's nice to know that accounting deals with real-life situations, but while you wish Connie the best,
you don't know enough about the confectionary business to appreciate either the business decisions or the financial details. Is there
any way to bring this lesson a little closer to home? Besides, while knowing what financial statements will tell you is one thing,
you want to know how to prepare them.

Agreed. So let's assume that you need to earn money while you're in college and that you've decided to start a small business. Your
business will involve selling stuff to other college students, and to keep things simple, we'll assume that you're going to operate on
a "cash" basis: you'll pay for everything with cash, and everyone who buys something from you will pay in cash.

A Word about Cash. You probably have at least a little cash on you right now--some currency, or paper money, and coins. In
accounting, however, the term cash refers to more than just paper money and coins. It also refers to the money that you have in
checking and savings accounts and includes items that you can deposit in these accounts, such as money orders and different types
of checks.

Your first task is to decide exactly what you're going to sell. You've noticed that with homework, exams, social commitments, and
the hectic lifestyle of the average college student, you and most of the people you know always seem to be under a lot of stress.
Sometimes you wish you could just lie back between meals and bounce a ball off the wall. And that's when the idea hits you:
Maybe you could make some money by selling a product called the "Stress-Buster Play Pack." Here's what you have in mind:
you'll buy small toys and other fun stuff--instant stress relievers--at a local dollar store and pack them in a rainbow-colored
plastic treasure chest labeled "Stress-Buster."

And here's where you stand: You have enough cash to buy a month's worth of plastic treasure chests and toys. After that, you'll use
the cash generated from sales of Stress-Buster Play Packs to replenish your supply. Each plastic chest will cost $1.00, and you'll fill
each one with a variety of five of the following toys, all of which you can buy for $1.00 each:

    A happy face stress ball
    A roomarang (an indoor boomerang)
    Some silly putty
    An inflatable beach ball
    A coil "slinky" spring
    A paddle-ball game
    A ball for bouncing off walls

You plan to sell each Stress-Buster Play Pack for $10 from a rented table stationed outside a major dining hall. Renting the table
will cost you $20 a month. Because your own grades aren't what your parents and the dean would like them to be, you decide to
hire fellow students (trustworthy people with better grades than yours) to staff the table at peak traffic periods. They'll be on duty
from noon until 2:00 p.m. each weekday, and you'll pay them $6 an hour. Wages, therefore, will cost you $240 a month (2 hours 
5 days  4 weeks = 40 hours  $6). Finally, you'll run ads in the college newspaper at a monthly cost of $40. Thus your total
monthly costs will amount to $300 ($20 + $240 + $40).

This page titled 12.2: Understanding Financial Statements is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4058
12.3: Accrual Accounting

  Learning Objectives

    1. Understand the difference between cash-basis and accrual accounting.
    2. Understand the purpose of a statement of cash flows and describe its format.

In this section, we're going to take a step further into the world of accounting by examining the principles of accrual accounting. In
our Stress-Buster illustration, we've assumed that all your transactions have been made in cash: You paid cash for your inputs
(plastic treasure chests and toys) and for your other expenses, and your customers paid cash when they bought Stress-Buster packs.
In the real world, of course, things are rarely that simple. In the following cases, timing plays a role in making and receiving
payments:

    Customers don't always pay in cash; they often buy something and pay later. When this happens, the seller is owed money and
    has an account receivable (it will receive something later).
    Companies don't generally pay cash for materials and other expenses--they often pay later. If this is the case, the buyer has an
    account payable (it will pay something later).
    Many companies manufacture or buy goods and hold them in inventory before selling them. Under these circumstances, they
    don't report payment for the goods until they've been sold.
    Companies buy long-term assets (also called fixed assets), such as cars, buildings, and equipment, which they plan to use over
    an extended period (as a rule, for more than one year).

What Is Accrual Accounting?

In situations such as these, firms use accrual accounting: a system in which the accountant records a transaction when it occurs,
without waiting until cash is paid out or received. Here are a few basic principles of accrual accounting:

    A sale is recognized on the income statement when it takes place, regardless of when cash is collected.
    An expense is recognized on the income statement when it's incurred, regardless of when payment is made.
    An item manufactured for later sale or bought for resale becomes part of inventory and appears on the balance sheet until it's
    actually sold; at that point, it goes on the income statement under cost of goods sold.
    A long-term asset that will be used for several years--for example, a vehicle, machine, or building--appears on the balance
    sheet. Its cost is spread over its useful life--the number of years that it will be used. Its annual allocated cost appears on the
    income statement as a depreciation expense.

Going to School on a New Business Idea

As we saw in our Stress-Buster illustration, it's easier to make sense of accounting concepts when you see some real--or at least
realistic--numbers being put to realistic use. So let's now assume that you successfully operated the Stress-Buster Company while
you were in college. Now fast-forward to graduation, and rather than work for someone else, you've decided to set up a more
ambitious business--some kind of retail outlet--close to the college. During your four years in school, you noticed that there was
no store near campus that met the wide range of students' specific needs. Thus the mission of your proposed retail business: to
provide products that satisfy the specific needs of college students.

12.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4059
                                        Figure 12.13 The College Shop. Zimri Diaz - Big Planet Comics - CC BY 2.0.

You've decided to call your store "The College Shop." Your product line will range from things needed to outfit a dorm room
(linens, towels, small appliances, desks, rugs, dorm refrigerators) to things that are just plain fun and make student life more
enjoyable (gift packages, posters, lava lamps, games, inflatable furniture, bean bag chairs, message boards, shower radios,
backpacks). And of course you'll also sell the original Stress-Buster Fun Pack. You'll advertise to students and parents through the
college newspaper and your own Web site.

This page titled 12.3: Accrual Accounting is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4059
12.4: Financial Statement Analysis

  Learning Objective
       Evaluate a company's performance using financial statements and ratio analysis.

Now that you know how financial statements are prepared, let's see how they're used to help owners, managers, investors, and
creditors assess a firm's performance and financial strength. You can glean a wealth of information from financial statements, but
first you need to learn a few basic principles for "unlocking" it.

The Comparative Income Statement

Let's fast-forward again and assume that your business--The College Shop--has just completed its second year of operations.
After creating your second-year income statement, you decide to compare the numbers from this statement with those from your
first statement. So you prepare the comparative income statement in Figure 12.19, which shows income figures for year 2 and year
1 (accountants generally put numbers for the most recent year in the inside column).

                                                Figure 12.19 Comparative Income Statement for The College Shop

Vertical Percentage Analysis

What does this statement tell us about your second year in business? Some things look good and some don't. Your sales went up
from $500,000 to $600,000 (a 20 percent increase--not bad). But your profit was down--from $30,000 to $18,000 (a bad sign). As
you stare at the statement, you're asking yourself the question: Why did my profit go down even though my sales went up? Does
this result make sense? Is there some way of comparing two income statements that will give me a more helpful view of my
company's financial health? One way is called vertical percentage analysis. It's useful because it reveals the relationship of each
item on the income statement to a specified base--generally sales--by expressing each item as a percentage of that base.

Figure 12.20 shows what comparative income statements look like when you use vertical percentage analysis showing each item as
a percentage of sales. Let's see if this helps clarify things. What do you think accounted for the company's drop in income even
though The College Shop sales went up?

12.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4060
                                       Figure 12.20 Comparative Income Statement Using Vertical Percentage Analysis

The percentages help you to analyze changes in the income statement items over time, but it might be easier if you think of the
percentages as pennies. In year 1, for example, for every $1.00 of sales, $0.55 went to pay for the goods that you sold, leaving
$0.45 to cover your other costs and leave you a profit. Operating expenses (salaries, rent, advertising, and so forth) used up $0.35
of every $1.00 of sales, while interest and taxes took up $0.02 each. After you covered all your costs, you had $0.06 profit for every
$1.00 of sales.

Asking the Right Questions

Now, compare these figures to those for year 2. Where is the major discrepancy? It's in Cost of goods sold. Instead of using $0.55
of every $1.00 of sales to buy the goods you sold, you used $0.64. As a result, you had $0.09 less ($0.64 - $0.55) to cover other
costs. This is the major reason why you weren't as profitable in year 2 as you were in year 1: your Gross profit as a percentage of
sales was lower in year 2 than it was in year 1. Though this information doesn't give you all the answers you'd like to have, it does,
however, raise some interesting questions. Why was there a change in the relationship between Sales and Cost of goods sold? Did
you have to pay more to buy goods for resale and, if so, were you unable to increase your selling price to cover the additional cost?
Did you have to reduce prices to move goods that weren't selling well? (If your costs stay the same but your selling price goes
down, you make less on each item sold.) Answers to these questions require further analysis, but at least you know what the useful
questions are.

This page titled 12.4: Financial Statement Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4060
12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities

  Learning Objectives

       Understand why it's not a good idea to falsify financial statements.
       Appreciate the background behind stricter legal and professional standards in U.S. business and accounting practice.
       Understand ethics and their importance in the accounting profession.
       Identify career opportunities in accounting.

Accountant, Audit Thyself?

Consider the following scenario. You feel good that you've managed to create relevant, accurate, timely financial statements for
your first year in business as The College Shop, but you find that you're disappointed about one thing--your net income figure. For
some time now, you've been trying to convince a friend to invest in The College Shop, telling him that the business would bring in
at least $40,000 in income during its first year. Every time you review the income statement in Figure 12.15 (shown in abbreviated
form below), however, you're forced to face the fact that you earned just $30,000--$10,000 short of your optimistic projection.

                              Revenues - Expenses (CGS, operating expenses, interest and taxes) = Net income
                                                            $500,000 - $470,000 = $30,000

As you stare one more time at your bottom line, you're wishing that there was some way to change that single bothersome digit and
transform $30,000 into $40,000. Then it hits you. You know that it's not exactly the most upright thing to do, but what if you were
to shift half of your first-year advertising expense of $20,000 into your second year of operation? If you did that, then you'd cut the
advertising expense on your first-year income statement by $10,000. Now, with your newly acquired understanding of accounting
principles, you know that if you reduce expenses on your income statement by $10,000, your net income will increase by the same
amount. So just to see what your "revised" income statement would look like, you go ahead and make your hypothetical change.
Sure enough, mission accomplished: Your income statement now reports a net income of $40,000--your actual net income of
$30,000 plus your upward "adjustment" of $10,000.

                              Revenues - Expenses (CGS, operating expenses, interest and taxes) = Net income
                                                            $500,000 - $460,000 = $40,000

Although you now feel even more satisfied than ever with your newfound expertise in accounting strategy, you're once again
forced to stop and think. If you merely change your net income and nothing else, the balance sheet in Figure 12.17 won't balance
any more. Why not? Because when you inflated your net income to $40,000 and added it to your beginning owner's equity balance
of $150,000, this increased your owner's equity by $10,000--from $180,000 to $190,000. To make sure that you've accurately
assessed the snag in your strategy, you plug in the accounting equation--

                                                          assets = liabilities + owner's equity

--and this, unfortunately, is what you get:

                                                           $360,000  $180,000 + $190,000.

So, now what? As you ponder the troublesome ramifications of your balance sheet, yet another accounting strategy pops into your
head. At the end of the year, you still owed $6,000 for radio ads and $4,000 for newspaper ads--$10,000 that's included in
accounts payable on your year-end balance sheet. What if you just reduced your accounts payable balance by $10,000? If you did
that, you'd also reduce by $10,000 the amount under liabilities and owner's equity, cutting it from $370,000 to $360,000. Wouldn't
that make everything balance? Plugging in the numbers from your latest brainstorm, you now get:

                                                           $360,000 = $170,000 + $190,000.

That's more like it. Now you can go ahead and "adjust" your financial statements, satisfied that you're well on your way to
mastering all of the accounting strategy that you'll need to handle the financial-reporting needs of your new business.

12.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4061
Accounting "Strategy," Ethics, and the Law

Unfortunately, you may also be well on your way to becoming the Bernie Ebbers of the small-business set. In 2002, when the giant
telecom company WorldCom collapsed under the weight of an $11 billion fraud scheme, CEO Ebbers, who was convicted of
securities fraud and conspiracy, got twenty-five years in a federal penitentiary ("I don't know accounting," he told the judge). And
Ebbers wasn't the only person on the WorldCom payroll who was charged with illegal activities: Accounting department managers
went down with him. Betty Vinson, for example, a forty-seven-year-old midlevel accountant who'd followed orders to falsify
accounting records, was sentenced to five months in jail. And she was lucky--she got minimal jail time because she cooperated
with federal prosecutors (Pulliam, 2003).

The damage done at WorldCom spread to innocent employees as well, not to mention investors, creditors, and business partners. In
2001, when Enron, the seventh-largest company in America, melted down in the heat of an investigation into its financial-reporting
practices, it took down an entire accounting firm with it--eighty-nine-year-old Arthur Andersen, then one of the "Big Five" public
accounting firms. Volumes have been written about what went wrong, but we can pretty much boil it down to this: Enron
executives behaved unethically and illegally, and Andersen auditors looked the other way. Instead of performing its role as public
watchdog, Andersen was watching its own pocketbook: The accounting firm protected the revenues generated by lucrative
consulting contracts with its client instead of protecting the client's stakeholders. In so doing, Andersen not only shirked its
responsibilities as a public auditor but also covered up evidence of its own inappropriate actions.

In 2002, Andersen gave up its licenses to practice as certified public accountants in the United States, and a company that had
employed 85,000 people only 10 years earlier now employs about 200, most of them to deal with lawsuits and to oversee the
process of shutting down the company for good (Moffett, 2004; Toffler & Reingold, 2003).

Who Can You Trust?

In a very real sense, the issue at the bottom of all this financial misconduct is trustworthiness. As we've seen, accountants are
supposed to provide users with financial reports that are useful because they're relevant, timely, and, most important, accurate. It
should go without saying that if users--whether internal or external--can't trust these reports to be accurate, they can't rely on
them to be as useful as they should be. Would you, for instance, invest in or loan money to a company whose financial reports you
can't trust?

Which--appropriately--brings us back to you and your little foray into falsifying accounting records. Let's say that in February of
your second year of operations, you have an unexpected opportunity to expand into the vacated store right next to The College
Shop. It's too good to pass up, but you'll need quite a bit of money to outfit the space and expand your inventory. First, you go to
the friend for whose benefit you "adjusted" your financial statements, but he's just lost a bundle in the stock market and can't help
you out. Your only option, then, is to get a bank loan. So you go to your banker, and some version of the following exchange occurs
early in the conversation:

       YOU:
       I need a loan.

       BANKER:
       Let me see your financial statements.

She means, of course, the first-year statements that you falsified, and if you're offered and accept a loan under these circumstances,
you could be guilty of a financial crime that, according to the FBI, is normally characterized by "deceit, concealment, or violation
of trust" and committed "to obtain personal or business advantage." The maximum you could get under federal law is twenty years,
although your case no doubt calls for a sentence measured in mere months (Federal Bureau of Investigations, 2005).

Are You Ethical?

We could give you the benefit of the doubt and agree that you wouldn't have gotten yourself into this mess had you known the
legal ramifications. We must assume, however, that you knew what you did was ethically wrong. Ethics refers to the ability and
willingness to distinguish right from wrong and to know when you're doing one or the other. Ethical and trustworthy behavior is
critical in both business and accounting, and although the vast majority of businesspeople and accountants behave ethically, all of
them--especially providers of financial information--constantly face ethical dilemmas in the course of their work.

12.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4061
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX)

It will be helpful to remember that both the law and the accounting profession have taken steps to remind you of your
responsibilities when you're reporting financial information. In the wake of corporate scandals like the ones we described above,
Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002, which was designed to encourage ethical corporate behavior and to
discourage fraud and other forms of corporate wrongdoing. Among other things, SOX requires its top executives to take
responsibility for a company's financial statements and subjects them to criminal penalties for falsely certifying its financial
reports. SOX also set up the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) to regulate accounting professionals,
especially in the area of auditing standards.

The Profession's Code of Ethics

Finally, you can always turn to the Code of Professional Ethics of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA),
which sets down two hallmarks of ethical behavior (American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, 2006):

    Integrity. An accountant should be "honest and candid" and should never subordinate the "public trust...to personal gain and
    advantage."
    Objectivity and independence. An accountant should be "impartial, intellectually honest, and free of conflicts of interest." He or
    she is "scrupulous in [the] application of generally accepted accounting principles and candid in all...dealings with members in
    public practice."

Careers in Accounting

You may know that Phil Knight is the founder of Nike. But you may not know that he began his business career as an accountant.
Another thing that you may not know is that accounting is a "people profession." A lot of people think that accountants spend the
day sitting behind desks crunching numbers, but this is a serious misconception. Accountants work with other people to solve
business problems. They need strong analytical skills to assess financial data, but they must also be able to work effectively with
colleagues. Thus they need good interpersonal skills, and because they must write and speak clearly and present complex financial
data in terms that everyone can understand, they need excellent communication skills as well.

Job Descriptions

If you choose a career in accounting, you have two career options:

    Work as a public accountant, whether for a "Big Four" public accounting firm or for a midsize or smaller company
    Work as a private accountant for a business, not-for-profit organization, or government agency

Let's take a closer look at these options. Public accounting firms provide clients with accounting and tax services in return for fees.
Most members of such firms are certified public accountants (CPAs) who have met educational and work requirements set by the
state and passed a rigorous exam. Although public accounting firms offer consulting and tax services, the hallmark of the
profession is performing external audits: the public accountant examines a company's financial statements and submits an opinion
on whether they've been prepared in accordance with GAAP. This "stamp of approval" provides the investing public with
confidence that a firm's financial reports are accurate. Typically, public accountants are self-employed, work for small, sometimes
regional firms, or are associated with one of the "Big Four" public accounting firms--Deloitte & Touche, Ernst & Young, KPMG,
and PricewaterhouseCoopers--or one of the large second-tier public accounting firms, such as BDO Seidman or Grant Thornton.

Often called management or corporate accountants, private accountants may work for specific companies, nonprofit organizations,
or government agencies. A firm's chief accounting officer is called a controller. As a rule, the controller reports to the
organization's chief financial officer (CFO), who's responsible for all of its accounting and other financial activities. The jobs of
private accountants vary according to the company or industry in which they're employed. Most private accountants record and
analyze financial information and provide support to other members of the organization in such diverse areas as marketing,
strategic planning, new product development, operations, human resources, and finance. Private accountants also conduct internal
audits. In this capacity, they ensure that accounting records are accurate, company policies are adhered to, assets are safeguarded,
and operations are efficiently conducted. Finally, they may also provide a variety of specialized services:

    Develop and prepare financial reports

12.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4061
    Prepare tax returns
    Perform cost accounting functions (that is, determine the cost of goods or services)
    Prepare and supervise budgets
    Manage such functions as payroll, accounts payable, and receivables

Accountants who pass a special exam and meet other professional requirements in the field of management accounting are
designated certified management accountants(CMAs). CMAs often have greater job responsibilities and receive higher
compensation than other accountants.

The Job and Its Prospects

So, what's the job like? For that matter, what's the professional life of an accountant like? Or perhaps even more important, what
are your prospects for getting a job in accounting, and what kind of income can you expect if you're able to make a career for
yourself in the field? "If you're looking for a career that's challenging and for which the dynamics change constantly...then this is
where its at," advises one practicing CPA (Start Here Go Places, 2010). Beatrice Sanders, former director of Academic and Career
Development for the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, agrees: "Whatever form of practice you choose,
accounting provides a challenging and rewarding career in which there are no limits on where you can go, or how far" (Gaylord &
Reid, 2006).

The Job Market Today

"The one great benefit of choosing accounting as your career is that you will always have a job when you graduate." Or so says one
accountant CPA (in fact, the same CPA who promises a challenging career in a dynamic profession). Obviously, we can't make any
guarantees, but in order to help you better assess your prospects for a satisfying career in accounting, we can offer you some
relevant facts and figures.

First of all, we can confirm that accounting graduates have always faced a favorable job market and that, according to a survey
conducted by the National Association of Colleges and Employers (NACE), the year 2010 is no different. In the June edition of its
Salary Survey, NACE reported that accounting employers extended the largest number of offers to new college graduates (National
Association of Colleges and Employers, 2010).And what about the area that probably interests you most right now--salary? For
the most part, we can report good news. The NACE survey, for example, reports that, with average salary offers of just over
$50,000, 2010 accounting graduates could expect to be among the highest-paid entrants into the workforce.

Key Takeaways

    Current statutes and standards governing U.S. business and accounting practice reflect public reaction to a wave of corporate
    misconduct in the 2000s.
    Ethical and trustworthy behavior is critical in accounting because users trust accountants to provide financial reports that are
    relevant, timely, and, most important, accurate.
    The federal Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) of 2002 was designed to encourage ethical corporate behavior and to discourage fraud
    and other forms of corporate malfeasance. The Code of Professional Ethics of the American Institute of Certified Public
    Accountants (AICPA) sets down two hallmarks of ethical behavior: integrity and objectivity and independence.
    If you choose a career in accounting, you have two career options: work as a public accountant or work as a private accountant.
    Public accounting firms provide clients with external audits in which they examine a company's financial statements and
    submit an opinion on whether they've been prepared in accordance with GAAP. They also provide other accounting and tax
    services.
    Most members of public accounting firms are certified public accountants (CPAs) who have met required educational and
    work requirements.
    Private accountants, often called management or corporate accountants, work for specific companies, nonprofit organizations,
    or government agencies.
    Most private accountants record and analyze financial information and provide support to other members of the organization.
    They also conduct internal audits as well as a variety of specialized services.
    Accountants who pass a special exam and meet other professional requirements in the field of management accounting are
    designated certified management accountants (CMAs).

12.5.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4061
Exercises

What is accounting and what purpose does it serve? What do accountants do? What career choices do they have? Which career
choice seems most interesting to you? Why?

(AACSB) Analysis
What actions have been taken to help restore the trust that the public once had in the accounting profession? Do you believe these
actions will help? Why, or why not? What other suggestions do you have to help the accounting profession and corporate America
regain the public trust?

References

American Institute of Certified Public Accountants, AICPA Code of Professional Conduct--Current and Historical Versions (2006-
2010), http://www.aicpa.org (accessed July 22, 2010.

Federal Bureau of Investigations, Financial Crimes Report to the Public (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Justice, 2005),
www.fbi.gov (accessed July 22, 2010).

Gaylord, G. A., and Glenda E. Reid, Careers in Accounting, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2006), http://books.google.com
(accessed July 27, 2010).

Moffett, M., What Happened at Enron? (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business Review, July 2004)

National Association of Colleges and Employers, "Top Employers for the Class of 2010," Knowledge Center, www.naceweb.org
(accessed July 26, 2010).

Pulliam, S., "How Following Orders Can Hurt Your Career," CFO.com, October 3, 2003, http://www.cfo.com (accessed July 22,
2010).

Start Here Go Places, "Ask a CPA," Start Here Go Places, http://www.startheregoplaces.com (accessed July 27, 2010).

Toffler, B. L., with Jennifer Reingold, Final Accounting: Ambition, Greed, and the Fall of Arthur Andersen (New York: Broadway
Books, 2003), http://books.google.com (accessed July 22, 2010).

This page titled 12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.5.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4061
12.6: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Discounting Retailers

There was a time when Kmart was America's number-one discount retailer and Sears, Roebuck & Co. was the seventh largest
corporation in the world. Things have changed since Wal-Mart came on the scene. In the fifty years since Sam Walton opened the
first Wal-Mart store in Rogers, Arkansas, the company has propelled itself to the number-one spot in discount retailing, and (even
more impressive) has higher sales than any other company in the world. Over this same fifty-year period, Target emerged as a
major player in the retail industry. The fifty-year period wasn't kind to Kmart and Sears, and both stores watched their dominance
in the retail market slip away. In an effort to reverse the downward spiral of both retailers, in November 2004, Sears and Kmart
merged into a new company called Sears Holdings. To learn more about how Wal-Mart, Target, and Sears Holdings are doing
today, go to the National Retail Federation's Web site (http://www.stores.org/STORES%20Magaz...-100-retailers) to access a report
that ranks the 2010 top 100 retailers. After reading the introduction and reviewing the list of top retailers, prepare a report
comparing the three retailers on the following:

    U.S. sales and percentage increase or decrease in sales
    Worldwide sales
    Number of stores and percentage increase or decrease in number of stores

Based on your analysis and reading of the introductory write-up, answer the following questions:

 1. Do you believe that Target will be able to compete against Wal-Mart in the future? If so, how?
 2. What about Sears Holdings? Will the company survive?
 3. Some people criticize Wal-Mart for forcing other retailers out of business and for lowering the average wage for retail workers.

    Is this a legitimate criticism? In your opinion, has Wal-Mart helped the American people or hurt them?

Career Opportunities

Is a Career in Accounting for You?

Do you want to learn what opportunities are available for people graduating with degrees in accounting? Go to the Web site of the
American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (http://www.startheregoplaces.com) and click on "Why Accounting?" (top, left).
Then click on "Career Options" (left side bar). Select two areas of interest. Click on each interest area and select a job in that area
that interests you. For each of two jobs selected (one from each interest area), answer the following questions:

    What is the job like?
    Why does the job seem interesting to you?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Counting Earnings before They Hatch

You recently ran into one of your former high school teachers. You were surprised to learn that he'd left teaching, gone back to
school, and, a little more than a year ago, started a business that creates Web sites for small companies. It so happens that he needs
a loan to expand his business, and the bank wants financial statements. When he found out that you were studying accounting, he
asked whether you'd look over a set of statements that he'd just prepared for his first year in business. Because you're anxious to
show off your accounting aptitude, you agreed.

First, he showed you his income statement. It looked fine: revenues (from designing Web sites) were $94,000, expenses were
$86,000, and net income was $8,000. When you observed how unusual it was that he'd earned a profit in his first year, he seemed a
little uneasy.

"Well," he confessed, "I fudged a little when I prepared the statements. Otherwise, I'd never get the loan."

He admitted that $10,000 of the fees shown on the income statement was for work he'd recently started doing for a client (who
happened to be in big trouble with the IRS). "It isn't like I won't be earning the money," he explained. "I'm just counting it a little
early. It was easy to do. I just added $10,000 to my revenues and recorded an accounts receivable for the same amount."

12.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4062
You quickly did the math: without the $10,000 payment for the client in question, his profit of $8,000 would become a loss of
$2,000 (revenues of $84,000 less expenses of $86,000).

As your former teacher turned to get his balance sheet, you realized that, as his accountant, you had to decide what you'd advise
him to do. The decision is troublesome because you agree that if he changes the income statement to reflect the real situation, he
won't get the bank loan.

 1. What did you decide to do, and why?
 2. Assuming that he doesn't change the income statement, will his balance sheet be incorrect? How about his statement of cash

    flows? What will happen to next year's income: will it be higher or lower than it should be?
 3. What would happen to your former teacher if he gave the bank the fraudulent financial statements and the bank discovered the

    truth? How could the bank learn the truth?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Taking Stock of Ratios

Your class has been told that each group of three students will receive a share of stock in one of three companies in the same
industry. But there's a catch: each group has to decide which of the companies it wants to own stock in. To reach this decision, your
team will use ratio analysis to compare the three companies. Each team member will analyze one of the companies using the ratios
presented in this chapter. Then, you'll get together, compare your results, and choose a company. Here are the details of the project:

1. The team selects a group of three companies in the same industry. Here are just a few examples:

    Auto manufacturers. Ford, General Motors, Toyota
    Airlines. Southwest, United Airlines, American Airlines
    Drug companies. GlaxoSmithKline, Eli Lilly & Co., Bristol-Myers Squibb
    Specialty retailers. Bed Bath & Beyond, Pottery Barn, Pier 1 Imports
    Computers. Hewlett Packard, Gateway, Apple Computer

 2. Every team member gets a copy of one company's most recent annual report (which includes its financial statements) from the
    company's Web site (investor section).

 3. Every member calculates the following ratios for the company for the last two years: gross profit margin, net profit margin,
    inventory turnover (if applicable), return on assets, current ratio, debt-to-equity, and interest coverage.

 4. Get together as a group and compare your results. Decide as a group which company you want to own stock in.
 5. Write a report indicating the company that your team selected and explain your choice. Attach the following items to your team

    report:

The Global View (AACSB)

Why Aren't Shoes Made in the USA?

Having just paid $70 for a pair of athletic shoes that were made in China, you wonder why they had to be made in that country.
Why weren't they made in the United States, where lots of people need good-paying jobs? You also figure that the shoe company

12.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4062
must be making a huge profit on each pair it sells. Fortunately, you were able to get a breakdown of the costs for making a pair of
$70 athletic shoes (Canderbilt, 1998):

Production labor                     $2.75
Materials                            9.00
Rent, equipment                      3.00
Supplier's operating profit          1.75
Duties                               3.00
Shipping                             0.50

Cost to the Manufacturer             $20.00
Research and development             0.25
Promotion and advertising            4.00
Sales, distribution, administration  5.00
Shoe company's operating profit      6.25

Cost to the Retailer                 $35.50
Retailer's Rent                      9.00
Personnel                            9.50
Other                                7.00
Retailer's operating profit          9.00

Cost to Consumer                     $70.00

You're surprised at a few of these items. First, out of the $70, the profit made by the manufacturer was only $6.25. Second, at
$2.75, labor accounted for only about 4 percent of the price you paid. The advertising cost ($4.00) was higher than the labor cost. If
labor isn't a very big factor in the cost of the shoes, why are they made in China?

Deciding to look further into this puzzle, you discover that the $2.75 labor cost was for two hours of work. Moreover, that $2.75
includes not only the wages paid to the workers, but also labor-related costs, such as food, housing, and medical care.

That's when you begin to wonder. How much would I have to pay for the same shoes if they were made in the United States? Or
what if they were made in Mexico? How about Spain? To answer these questions, you need to know the hourly wage rates in these
countries. Fortunately, you can get this information by going to the Foreign Labor section of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Web
site (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/ichcc.t08.htm). The table you want is "Production Workers: Hourly Compensation Costs in
U.S. Dollars." Use the most recent hourly compensation figures.

To investigate this issue further, you should do the following:

 1. Recalculate the cost of producing the shoes in the United States and two other countries of your choice. Because operating
    profit for the supplier, the shoe company, and the retailer will change as the cost to make the shoe changes, you have decided to
    determine this profit using the following percentage rates:

    Supplier's operating profit: 10 percent of its costs
    Shoe company's operating profit: 20 percent of its costs (including the cost paid to the supplier to make the shoes)
    Retailer's operating profit: 15 percent of its costs (including the cost paid to the shoe company)

 2. Prepare a report that does the following:

    Shows the selling price of the shoe for each manufacturing country (the United States and the other two countries you selected)

                                     12.6.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4062
    Lists any costs other than labor that might change if shoe production was moved to the United States
    Identifies other factors that should be considered when selecting a manufacturing country
    Indicates possible changes to production methods that would make production in the United States less costly
 3. Finally, draw some conclusions: Do you, as a U.S. citizen, benefit from shoe production in foreign countries? Does the United
    States benefit overall? Does the world benefit? Should shoe production return to the United States?

References

Vanderbilt, T., The Sneaker Book: Anatomy of an Industry and an Icon (New York: The New Press, 1998), 111.

This page titled 12.6: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

12.6.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4062
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

13: Managing Financial Resources

  13.1: The Functions of Money
  13.2: Financial Institutions
  13.3: The Federal Reserve System
  13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
  13.5: Understanding Securities Markets
  13.6: Financing the Going Concern
  13.7: Careers in Finance
  13.8: Cases and Problems
This page titled 13: Managing Financial Resources is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
13.1: The Functions of Money

  Learning Objective
    1. Identify the functions of money and describe the three government measures of the money supply.

Finance is about money. So our first question is, what is money? If you happen to have one on you, take a look at a $5 bill. What
you'll see is a piece of paper with a picture of Abraham Lincoln on one side and the Lincoln Memorial on the other. Though this
piece of paper--indeed, money itself--has no intrinsic value, it's certainly in demand. Why? Because money serves three basic
functions. Money is the following:
 1. A medium of exchange
 2. A measure of value
 3. A store of value

                                 Figure 13.1: Money itself has no intrinsic value. (401(K) 2012 - Money - CC BY-SA 2.0.)
This page titled 13.1: The Functions of Money is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4063
13.2: Financial Institutions

  Learning Objectives

       Distinguish among different types of financial institutions.
       Discuss the services that financial institutions provide and explain their role in expanding the money supply.

For financial transactions to happen, money must change hands. How do such exchanges occur? At any given point in time, some
individuals, businesses, and government agencies have more money than they need for current activities; some have less than they
need. Thus, we need a mechanism to match up savers (those with surplus money that they're willing to lend out) with borrowers
(those with deficits who want to borrow money). We could just let borrowers search out savers and negotiate loans, but the system
would be both inefficient and risky. Even if you had a few extra dollars, would you lend money to a total stranger? If you needed
money, would you want to walk around town looking for someone with a little to spare?

Depository and Nondepository Institutions

Now you know why we have financial institutions: they act as intermediaries between savers and borrowers and they direct the
flow of funds between them. With funds deposited by savers in checking, savings, and money market accounts, they make loans to
individual and commercial borrowers. In the next section, we'll discuss the most common types of depository institutions (banks
that accept deposits), including commercial banks, savings banks, and credit unions. We'll also discuss several nondepository
institutions (which provide financial services but don't accept deposits), including finance companies, insurance companies,
brokerage firms, and pension funds.

Commercial Banks

Commercial banks are the most common financial institutions in the United States, with total financial assets of about $13.5 trillion
(85 percent of the total assets of the banking institutions) (Insurance Information Institute, 2011). They generate profit not only by
charging borrowers higher interest rates than they pay to savers but also by providing such services as check processing, trust- and
retirement-account management, and electronic banking. The country's 7,000 commercial banks range in size from very large
(Bank of America, J.P. Morgan Chase) to very small (local community banks). Because of mergers and financial problems, the
number of banks has declined significantly in recent years, but, by the same token, surviving banks have grown quite large. If
you've been with one bank over the past ten years or so, you've probably seen the name change at least once or twice.

Savings Banks

Savings banks (also called thrift institutions and savings and loan associations, or S&Ls) were originally set up to encourage
personal saving and provide mortgages to local home buyers. Today, however, they provide a range of services similar to those
offered by commercial banks. Though not as dominant as commercial banks, they're an important component of the industry,
holding total financial assets of almost $1.5 trillion (10 percent of the total assets of the banking institutions) (Insurance
Information Institute, 2010). The largest S&L, Sovereign Bancorp, has close to 750 branches in nine Northeastern states. Savings
banks can be owned by their depositors (mutual ownership) or by shareholders (stock ownership).

Credit Unions

To bank at a credit union, you must be linked to a particular group, such as employees of United Airlines, employees of the state of
North Carolina, teachers in Pasadena, California, or current and former members of the U.S. Navy. Credit unions are owned by
their members, who receive shares of their profits. They offer almost anything that a commercial bank or savings and loan does,
including savings accounts, checking accounts, home and car loans, credit cards, and even some commercial loans (Pennsylvania
Association of Community Bankers, 2011). Collectively, they hold about $812 billion in financial assets (around 5 percent of the
total assets of the financial institutions).

Figure 13.3 summarizes the distribution of assets among the nation's depository institutions.

13.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4064
                                                              Figure 13.3 Where Our Money Is Deposited

Finance Companies

Finance companies are nondeposit institutions because they don't accept deposits from individuals or provide traditional banking
services, such as checking accounts. They do, however, make loans to individuals and businesses, using funds acquired by selling
securities or borrowed from commercial banks. They hold about $1.9 trillion in assets (Insurance Information Institute, 2010).
Those that lend money to businesses, such as General Electric Capital Corporation, are commercial finance companies, and those
that make loans to individuals or issue credit cards, such a Citgroup, are consumer finance companies. Some, such as General
Motors Acceptance Corporation, provide loans to both consumers (car buyers) and businesses (GM dealers).

Insurance Companies

Insurance companies sell protection against losses incurred by illness, disability, death, and property damage. To finance claims
payments, they collect premiums from policyholders, which they invest in stocks, bonds, and other assets. They also use a portion
of their funds to make loans to individuals, businesses, and government agencies.

Brokerage Firms

Companies like A.G. Edwards & Sons and T. Rowe Price, which buy and sell stocks, bonds, and other investments for clients, are
brokerage firms (also called securities investment dealers). A mutual fund invests money from a pool of investors in stocks, bonds,
and other securities. Investors become part owners of the fund. Mutual funds reduce risk by diversifying investment: because assets
are invested in dozens of companies in a variety of industries, poor performance by some firms is usually offset by good
performance by others. Mutual funds may be stock funds, bond funds, and money market funds, which invest in safe, highly liquid
securities. (Recall our definition of liquidity in Chapter 12 "The Role of Accounting in Business" as the speed with which an asset
can be converted into cash.)

Finally, pension funds, which manage contributions made by participating employees and employers and provide members with
retirement income, are also nondeposit institutions.

This page titled 13.2: Financial Institutions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4064
13.3: The Federal Reserve System

  Learning Objective
    1. Identify the goals of the Federal Reserve System and explain how it uses monetary policy to control the money supply and
       influence interest rates.

         Figure 13.5: The Federal Reserve Building in Washington, DC. (Tim Evanson - Federl Reserve Building - eagle - CC BY-SA 2.0.)
This page titled 13.3: The Federal Reserve System is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4065
13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain the ways in which a new business gets start-up cash.
    2. Identify approaches used by existing companies to finance operations and growth.

So far, we've focused our attention on the financial environment in which U.S. businesses operate. Now let's focus on the role that
finance plays within an organization. In Chapter 1 "The Foundations of Business", we defined finance as all the activities involved
in planning for, obtaining, and managing a company's funds. We also explained that a financial manager determines how much
money the company needs, how and where it will get the necessary funds, and how and when it will repay the money that it has
borrowed. The financial manager also decides what the company should do with its funds--what investments should be made in
plant and equipment, how much should be spent on research and development, and how excess funds should be invested.

Financing a New Company

Because new businesses usually need to borrow money in order to get off the ground, good financial management is particularly
important to start-ups. Let's suppose that you're about to start up a company that you intend to run from your dorm room. You
thought of the idea while rummaging through a pile of previously worn clothes to find something that wasn't about to get up and
walk to the laundry all by itself. "Wouldn't it be great," you thought, "if there was an on-campus laundry service that would come
and pick up my dirty clothes and bring them back to me washed and folded." Because you were also in the habit of running out of
cash at inopportune times, you were highly motivated to start some sort of money-making enterprise, and the laundry service
seemed to fit the bill (even though washing and folding clothes wasn't among your favorite activities--or skills).

Developing a Financial Plan

Because you didn't want your business to be so small that it stayed under the radar of fellow students and potential customers, you
knew that you'd need to raise funds to get started. So what are your cash needs? To answer this question, you need to draw up a
financial plan--a document that performs two functions:

 1. Calculating the amount of funds that a company needs for a specified period
 2. Detailing a strategy for getting those funds

Estimating Sales

Fortunately, you can draw on your newly acquired accounting skills to prepare the first section--the one in which you'll specify the
amount of cash you need. You start by estimating your sales (or, in your case, revenue from laundering clothes) for your first year
of operations. This is the most important estimate you'll make: without a realistic sales estimate, you can't accurately calculate
equipment needs and other costs. To predict sales, you'll need to estimate two figures:

 1. The number of loads of laundry that you'll handle
 2. The price that you'll charge per load

You calculate as follows: You estimate that 5 percent of the ten thousand students on campus will use the service. These five
hundred students will have one large load of laundry for each of the thirty-five weeks that they're on campus. Therefore, you'll do
17,500 loads (500  35 = 17,500 loads). You decide to price each load at $10. At first, this seemed high, but when you consider that
you'll have to pick up, wash, dry, fold, and return large loads, it seems reasonable.

Perhaps more important, when you projected your costs--including salaries (for some student workers), rent, utilities, depreciation
on equipment and a truck, supplies, maintenance, insurance, and advertising--you found that each load would cost $8, leaving a
profit of $2 per load and earning you $35,000 for your first year (which is worth your time, though not enough to make you rich).

13.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4066
        Figure 13.7: Determining a sound financial plan is the first step in starting a successful business. What would you be willing to pay
        to have someone else deal with your laundry? (soikkoratamo - Laundry day - CC BY-NC-ND 2.0.)

What things will you have to buy in order to get started? Using your estimate of sales, you've determined that you'd need the
following:

    Five washers and five dryers
    A truck to pick up and deliver the clothes (a used truck will do for now)
    An inventory of laundry detergent and other supplies, such as laundry baskets
    Rental space in a nearby building (which will need some work to accommodate a laundry)

And, you'll need cash--cash to carry you over while the business gets going and cash with which to pay your bills. Finally, you'd
better have some extra money for contingencies--things you don't expect, such as a machine overflowing and damaging the floor.
You're mildly surprised to find that your cash needs total $33,000. Your next task is to find out where you can get $33,000. In the
next section, we'll look at some options.

This page titled 13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4066
13.5: Understanding Securities Markets

  Learning Objectives

       Show how the securities market operates and how it's regulated.
       Understand how market performance is measured.

So, before long, you're a publicly traded company. Fortunately, because your degree in finance comes with a better-than-average
knowledge of financial markets, you're familiar with the ways in which investors will evaluate your company. Investors will look
at the overall quality of the company and ask some basic questions:

 1. How well is it managed?
 2. Is it in a growing industry? Is its market share increasing or decreasing?
 3. Does it have a good line of products? Is it coming out with innovative products?
 4. How is the company doing relative to its competitors?
 5. What is its future? What is the future of its industry?

Investors also analyze the company's performance over time and ask more-specific questions:

 1. Are its sales growing?
 2. Is its income going up?
 3. Is its stock price rising or falling?
 4. Are earnings per share rising?

They'll assess the company's financial strength, asking another series of specific questions:

 1. Can it pay its bills on time?
 2. Does it have too much debt?
 3. Is it managing its productive assets (such as inventory) efficiently?

Primary and Secondary Markets and Stock Exchanges

Security markets serve two functions:

    They help companies to raise funds by making the initial sale of their stock to the public.
    They provide a place where investors can trade already issued stock.

When you went through your IPO, shares were issued through a primary market--a market that deals in new financial assets. As
we've seen, the sale was handled by an investment banking firm, which matched you, as a corporation with stock to sell, with
investors who wanted to buy it.

Organized Exchanges

After a certain time elapsed, investors began buying and selling your stock on a secondary market. The proceeds of sales on this
market go to the investor who sells the stock, not to your company. The best-known of these markets is the New York Stock
Exchange (NYSE)1, where the stocks of the largest, most prestigious corporations in the world are traded. Other exchanges,
including the American Stock Exchange (AMEX) and regional exchanges located in places like Chicago and Boston, trade the
stock of smaller companies.

OTC Markets

Note that a "market" doesn't have to be a physical location. In the over-the-counter (OTC) market, securities are traded among
dealers over computer networks or by phone rather than on the floor of an organized exchange. Though there are exceptions, stocks
traded in the OTC market are generally those of smaller (and often riskier) companies. The best-known OTC electronic-exchange
system is the NASDAQ (National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system). It's home to almost five
thousand corporations, many of them technology companies. Unlike other OTC markets, the NASDAQ lists a variety of
companies, ranging from small start-ups to such giants as Google, Microsoft, and Intel.

13.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4067
This page titled 13.5: Understanding Securities Markets is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4067
13.6: Financing the Going Concern

  Learning Objective

       Define equity and debt financing, and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each financing approach.

Let's assume that taking your company public was a smart move: in posing questions like those that we've just listed, investors
have decided that your business is a good buy. With the influx of investment capital, the little laundry business that you started in
your dorm ten years ago has grown into a very large operation with laundries at more than seven hundred colleges all across the
country, and you're opening two or three laundries a week. But there's still a huge untapped market out there, and you've just left a
meeting with your board of directors at which it was decided that you'll seek additional funding for further growth. Everyone
agrees that you need about $8 million for the proposed expansion, yet there's a difference of opinion among your board members
on how to go about getting it. You have two options:

    Equity financing: raising the needed capital through the sale of stock
    Debt financing: raising the needed capital by selling bonds

Let's review some of the basics underlying your options.

Stock

If you decide to sell stock to finance your expansion, the proceeds from the sale will increase your stockholders' equity--the
amount invested in the business by its owners (which is the same thing that we called owner's equity in Chapter 12 "The Role of
Accounting in Business"). In general, an increase in stockholders' equity is good. Your assets--specifically, your cash--will
increase because you'll have more money with which to expand and operate your business (which is also good). But if you sell
additional shares of stock, you'll have more stockholders--a situation that, as we'll see later, isn't always good.

The Risk/Reward Trade-Off

To issue additional shares of stock, you'll need to find buyers interested in purchasing them. You need to ask yourself this question:
Why would anyone want to buy stock in your company? Stockholders, as we know, are part owners of the company and, as such,
share in the risks and rewards associated with ownership. If your company does well, they may benefit through dividends--
distributed earnings--or through appreciation in the value of their stock, or both. If your company does poorly, the value of their
stock will probably decline. Because the risk/reward trade-off varies according to the type of stock--common or preferred--we
need to know a little more about the difference between the two.

Common Stock

Holders of common stock bear the ultimate rewards and risks of ownership. Depending on the extent of their ownership, they could
exercise some control over the corporation. They're generally entitled to vote on members of the board of directors and other
important matters. If the company does well, they benefit more than holders of preferred stock; if it does poorly, they take a harder
hit. If it goes out of business, they're the last to get any money from the sale of what's left and can in fact lose their investments
entirely.

So who would buy common stock? It's a good option for individuals and institutions that are willing to take an investment roller-
coaster ride: for a chance to share in the growth and profits of a company (the ups), they have to be willing to risk losing all or part
of their investments (the downs).

Preferred Stock

Preferred stock is safer, but it doesn't have the upside potential. Unlike holders of common stock, whose return on investment
depends on the company's performance, preferred shareholders receive a fixed dividend every year. As usual, there are
disadvantages and advantages. They don't usually have voting rights, and unless the company does extremely well, their dividends
are limited to the fixed amount. On the other hand, they're preferred as to dividends: the company can pay no dividends to common
shareholders until it's paid all preferred dividends. If the company goes under, preferred stockholders also get their money back

13.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4068
before common shareholders get any of theirs. In many ways, they're more like creditors than investors in equity: though they can
usually count on a fixed, relatively safe income, they have little opportunity to share in a company's success.

Cumulative and Convertible Preferred Stock

There are a couple of ways to make preferred stock more attractive. With cumulative preferred stock, if a company fails to make a
dividend payment to preferred shareholders in a given year, it can pay no common dividends until preferred shareholders have been
paid in full for both current and missed dividends. Anyone holding convertible preferred stock may exchange it for common stock.
Thus, preferred shareholders can convert to common stock when and if the company's performance is strong--when its common
stock is likely to go up in value.

This page titled 13.6: Financing the Going Concern is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4068
13.7: Careers in Finance

  Learning Objective

       Discuss career opportunities in finance.

A financial career path offers a number of interesting, entry-level jobs that can develop into significant senior-level positions. In
addition to a strong finance education, you'll need to be familiar with both accounting and economics. Along with possessing
strong analytical skills and the ability to assess financial data, you'll need to work effectively with colleagues throughout an
organization. So you'll need good interpersonal and communication skills: you'll have to write and speak clearly and, in particular,
you'll have to be able to present complex financial data in terms that everyone can understand.

Generally, most positions in finance fall into one of three broad areas: commercial banking, corporate finance, and the investment
industry.

Positions in Commercial Banking

Commercial banks employ finance professionals as loan officers to work with clients requesting personal or business loans. It's the
borrower's responsibility, of course, to present a clear and coherent application, and it's the loan officer who evaluates it--who
decides whether the borrower will be able to meet the terms of the loan. Finance professionals also manage the deposits made at
commercial banks, providing the bank with additional revenue by investing funds that don't go into loans.

Positions in Corporate Finance

Every organization needs financial expertise. Large companies need finance professionals to manage their cash, their debt
requirements, and their pension investments. They're responsible for securing capital (whether through debt or equity), and they
may be called on for any of the following tasks:

    Analyzing industry trends
    Evaluating corporate investment in new plants, equipment, or products
    Conducting financial planning
    Evaluating acquisitions (deciding, for example, whether to buy another company)

Reviewing the financial needs of top management

In smaller firms, all these tasks may fall to a single finance professional. In addition, both large and small companies may
occasionally use the services of financial consultants. They may be provided by investment bankers, by specialized consulting
firms, or by the financial-advisory departments of a major accounting firm.

From an entry-level position--usually called analyst or junior analyst--the finance professional will advance from senior analyst
to a managerial position. With each step, you'll have greater exposure to senior management and face more important and more
complex issues. Within ten to fifteen years, you may become a director or vice president. The rungs on the career ladder are pretty
much the same in consulting and investment banking.

Positions in the Investment Industry

In the investment industry, finance professionals can be stockbrokers, investment analysts, or portfolio managers. Each of these
positions requires an ability to assimilate great quantities of information, not only about specific companies and their securities, but
also about entire industries and, indeed, the economy itself.

Some investment professionals work directly with individual clients. Others provide support to those who make sell or buy
recommendations. Still others manage portfolios in the mutual fund industry. A mutual fund gathers money--ranging upward from
a few hundred dollars--from thousands or even millions of investors and invests it in large portfolios of stocks and other
investment securities. Finance professionals review and recommend prospective investments to company managers.

Because real estate (both commercial and personal) and insurance are investment fields, many financial professionals can be found
working in these areas, as well.

13.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4069
Graduate Education and Certification

After completing the undergraduate degree with a major or concentration in finance, accounting, or economics, a finance
professional may start to think about graduate school. The typical path is an MBA with a finance track. Though some schools offer
a master's in finance degree, such a program is highly specialized, with rigorous math requirements that may not appeal to
everyone with an interest in finance.

Certification is a means of achieving professional distinction in a finance career. The most popular certifications include the
following:

    CFA or Chartered Financial Analyst (usually an investment-analyst designation)
    CFM or Certified Financial Manager (usually a corporate-finance designation)
    CCM or Certified Cash Manager (usually a corporate-treasury designation)
    CFP or Certified Financial Planner (usually an individual stockbroker designation)

The insurance and real estate industries have their own certifications. In addition, because the federal government requires anyone
who sells securities to be licensed, there is an entire set of licensing procedures that must be followed.

Key Takeaways

    Most positions in finance fall into one of these three areas: commercial banking, corporate finance, and the investment industry.
    Finance professionals employed in commercial banking help clients obtain personal or business loans. They also invest the
    bank's excess funds.
    Those employed in corporate finance obtain and manage their employing company's cash, debt, and investments. They provide
    financial analysis and advice to management.
    Financial professionals in the investment industry provide financial advice to their clients and help them buy and sell stocks.
    To pursue a career in finance, you'll need a strong finance education, as well as familiarity with both accounting and finance.

Exercise

When you hear on the news that banks around the world are cutting 330,000 jobs and expect to give pink slips to another eighteen
thousand in the next eighteen months, you have to wonder whether it makes sense to major in finance. If you are thinking of
majoring in finance, these two articles will cheer you up: "Finance: Post-Crisis, Still a Hot Major"
(http://www.businessweek.com/bschools...920_625085.htm), and "2011 Finance Employment Outlook" (career-
advice.monster.com/job...k/article.aspx). Read these articles and answer the following questions:

 1. If you had your choice, what type of finance position would you want after graduation? Why?
 2. If you were not able to find a position in your preferred area, what would be your second choice? Why?
 3. What could you do as a student to differentiate yourself and be more competitive in a tough job market?

This page titled 13.7: Careers in Finance is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.7.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4069
13.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

How Much Should You Reveal in Playboy?

What can you do if you're sitting around your dorm room with nothing else to do (or at least nothing else you want to do)? How
about starting a business? It worked for Michael Dell, who found assembling and selling computers more rewarding than attending
classes at the University of Texas. It also worked for two Stanford graduate students, Sergey Brin and Larry Page. They came up
with a novel (though fairly simple) idea for a search engine that ranked Web sites according to number of hits and online linkages.
Because their goal was to organize massive amounts of electronic data, they wanted a name that connoted seemingly infinite
volumes of information. They liked the word "googol" (a child's coinage for a very big number--1 followed by a hundred zeros),
but, unfortunately, someone already owned the domain name "Googol." So Brin and Page did a little letter juggling and settled (as
we all know by now) for "Google."

By 2004, the company that they'd started in 1998 was the number-one search engine in the world. Their next step, like that of so
many successful entrepreneurs before them, was to go public, and that's where our exercise starts. To learn more about this episode
in the epic story of Google--and to find out what role Playboy magazine plays in it--read the article, "Google Sets $2.7 Billion
IPO" (http://money.cnn.com/2004/04/29/technology/google), read Google's Playboy interview (http://www.google-
watch.org/playboy.html), and read the BusinessWeek article, "Google Dodges a Bullet"
(http://www.businessweek.com/technolo...0781_tc119.htm).

When you've finished reading the articles, answer the following questions:

 1. What's an IPO? Why did Brin and Page take their company public? What disadvantages did they incur by going public? Are
    they likely to lose control of their company?

 2. How does a Playboy interview enter into the Google story? What did Brin and Page do wrong? (By the way, the interview
    appeared in the August 2004 issue of Playboy; because Google incorporated the text into its revised IPO filing, it's now in the
    public domain and available online.)

 3. Did the Google founders get off the hook? Was the punishment (or lack of it) appropriate? Quitting school to run Google paid
    off big for Brin and Page. Their combined net worth as a result of the IPO suddenly skyrocketed to $8 billion. But how about
    you? Could you have gotten rich if you'd jumped on the Google bandwagon just as it started to roll? Could you at least have
    earned enough to pay another year's tuition? To respond to these questions, you need to know two things: (1) the IPO price of
    Google stock--$85--and (2) Google's current stock price. To find the current price, go to finance.yahoo.com to link to the
    finance section of the Yahoo.com Web site. Enter Google's stock symbol--GOOG--and click "Go." When you find the current
    stock price, answer the following questions:

        If you'd bought Google stock on the IPO date and sold it today, how many shares of Google would you have had to buy in
        order to make enough to cover this year's tuition?
        If you owned Google stock today, would you sell it or hold it? Explain your answer.

Career Opportunities

Financial Futures

One advantage of a finance major is that it prepares you for a wide range of careers. Some graduates head for Wall Street to make
big bucks in investment banking. Others prefer the security of working in the corporate finance department of a large firm, while
still others combine finance and selling in fields such as insurance or real estate. If you like working with other people's finances,
you might end up in commercial banking or financial planning. To better acquaint yourself with the range of available finance
careers, go to http://www.careers-in-finance.com/ to link to the Careers in Finance Web site. After reviewing the descriptions of
each career option, select two areas that you find particularly interesting and two that you find unattractive. For each of your four
selections, answer the following questions:

 1. Why do you find a given area interesting (or unattractive)?
 2. What experience and expertise are entailed by a career in a given area?

13.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4070
Ethics Angle (AACSB)

The Inside Story

You're the founder and CEO of a publicly traded biotech firm that recently came up with a promising cancer drug. Right now, life
on Wall Street is good: investors are high on your company, and your stock price is rising. On top of everything else, your personal
wealth is burgeoning because you own a lot of stock in the company. You're simply waiting to hear from the FDA, which is
expected to approve the product. But when the call comes, the news is bad: the FDA has decided to delay approval because of
insufficient data on the drug's effectiveness. You know that when investors hear the news, the company's stock price will plummet.
The family and friends that you encouraged to buy into your company will lose money, and you'll take a major hit.

Quickly, you place an order to sell about $5 million worth of your own stock. Then you start making phone calls. You tell your
daughter to dump her stock, and you advise your friends to do the same thing. When you tell your stockbroker the news, he gets on
the phone and gives a heads-up to his other clients. Unfortunately, he can't reach one client (who happens to be a good friend of
yours), so he instructs his assistant to contact her and tell her what's happened. As a result, the client places an order to sell four
thousand shares of stock at a market value of $225,000.

Let's pause at this point to answer a few questions:

 1. Are you being a nice guy or doing something illegal?
 2. Is your stockbroker doing something illegal?
 3. Is the assistant doing something illegal or merely following orders?
 4. Is the stockbroker's client acting illegally?

Fast-forward a few months. Federal investigators are interested in the sale of your stock and the sale of your daughter's stock.
Because all signs point to the truth as being an invitation to trouble, you lie. When they talked with your friend about her sale, say
investigators, she explained a standing agreement that instructed her broker to sell the stock when the market price went below a
specified level. It sounds like a good explanation, so you go along with it.

Now, answer this question.

What have you done wrong? What has your client friend done wrong?

The Reality Version of the Story

At this point, let's stop protecting the not-so-innocent and name some names. The biotech company is ImClone, and its founder and
CEO is Dr. Samuel Waksal. The Merrill Lynch broker is named Peter Bacanovic and his assistant Douglas Faneuil. The client
friend who dumped her stock is Martha Stewart.

Let's focus on Stewart, who is the founder of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, a prosperous lifestyle empire. Her actions and
their consequences are detailed in an article titled "Martha's Fall," which you can access by going to www.newsweek.com/id/53363
and linking to the MSNBC Web site. Read the article and then answer the following questions:

 1. Do you believe Stewart's story that she sold the stock because of a preexisting sell order and not because she learned that the
    cancer drug wouldn't be approved? What did she do that was illegal? What was she actually convicted of doing?

 2. Waksal got seven years in prison for insider trading (and a few other illegal schemes). Bacanovic (Stewart's broker) got five
    months in jail and five months of home confinement for lying and obstructing the investigation into the sale of ImClone stock.
    In return for helping the prosecutors convict Stewart, Faneuil (the broker's assistant) got a federal "get-out-of-jail" card but was
    fined $2,000 for accepting a payoff (namely, an extra week of vacation and a bump in his commission) to stonewall
    investigators. Stewart went to prison for five months and spent another five under house arrest. Was her punishment too lenient?
    Too harsh? If you'd been the judge, what sentence would you have given her?

 3. How could Stewart have avoided prison? Did her celebrity status or reputation help or hurt her? Did she, as some people claim,
    become a poster CEO for corporate wrongdoing?

 4. Why are government agencies, such as the SEC, concerned about insider trading? Who's hurt by it? Who's helped by
    government enforcement of insider-trading laws?

13.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4070
Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Looking for a High-Flying Stock

Congratulations! Your team has just been awarded $100,000 in hypothetical capital. There is, however, a catch: you have to spend
the money on airline stocks. Rather than fly by the seat of your pants, you'll want to research a number of stocks. To familiarize
yourself with the airline industry, go to www.airlines.org/Economics/Re...yEconomic.aspx to link to and read the article: "2010
Airline Industry Economic Perspective."

Each team member is responsible for researching and writing a brief report on a different company. Don't duplicate your research.
Be sure to include low-cost airlines as well as larger carriers. To cover the industry, pick airlines from the following list. The URLs
bring you to each airline's information page on Yahoo! Finance. If any of the links listed below do not work, you can get to that
airline's page by doing the following: Go to beta.finance.yahoo.com/; under "Investing" on the top bar, select "Industries" from the
drop-down list. Then click on "Complete Industry List" on left sidebar. Under "Services" click on "Major Airlines" and then
"Company Index" to find the first four airlines listed below (AMR/American, Delta, U.S. Airways, and Spirit); click on "Regional
Airlines" to find the remaining two airlines (Jet Blue and Southwest).

    AMR Corporation (American Airlines) (biz.yahoo.com/ic/10/10021.html)
    Delta Air Lines (biz.yahoo.com/ic/10/10448.html)
    U.S. Airways (biz.yahoo.com/ic/11/11527.html)
    Spirit Airlines (biz.yahoo.com/ic/11/11527.html)
    Jet Blue Airways (http://biz.yahoo.com/ic/99/99674.html)
    Southwest Airlines (biz.yahoo.com/ic/11/11377.html)

Each member should prepare a report detailing the following information about his or her chosen company:

    A description of the airline
    The percentage change in revenue over the last fiscal year
    The percentage change in net income over the last fiscal year
    A chart comparing the movement in the company's stock price over the past year with the movement of the DJIA
    Current earnings per share (EPS): net income divided by number of common shareholders
    Current PE ratio
    Current stock price

Here are some hints for finding this information on the Yahoo! page devoted to a given company:

    The company will be described in a "Company Profile" appearing toward the top of the page.
    You can get the remaining information by going to the bottom of the page and clicking on the following:
    "Financials" for changes in revenues and net income
    "Chart" for trends in stock prices
    "Quote" for EPS, PE ratio, and current stock price

When reviewing financial statements to calculate percentage changes in revenues and net income, be sure you click on "Annual
Data" to get information for the entire year rather than for just the quarter.

Team Report

Once each member has researched one airline, the team should get together and decide how to invest its $100,000. Announce your
decision in a final report that includes the following items:

    An overall description and assessment of the airline industry, including a report on opportunities, threats, and future outlook
    A decision on how you'll invest your $100,000, including the names of the stock or stocks that you plan to purchase, current
    market prices, and numbers of shares
    An explanation of the team's investment decision
    Individual member reports on each researched company

13.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4070
Follow-Up

A few weeks later, you might want to check on the stock prices of your picks to see how you'd have done if you'd actually invested
$100,000.

The Global View (AACSB)

Where's the Energy in the Chinese Stock Market?

Warren Buffett is the third-richest man in the world (behind Bill Gates). As CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, a holding company with
large stakes in a broad portfolio of investments, Buffett spends a lot of his time looking for companies with promising futures. His
time has been quite well spent: the market price of a share in Berkshire Hathaway now tops $115,000--up from $16 a share in
1964.

In 2002 and 2003, Berkshire Hathaway paid $488 million for two million shares in PetroChina, an energy firm 90 percent owned
by the Chinese government. In 2007, he sold the stock for $4 billion, realizing an incredible more than 700 percent gain. To
evaluate Buffett's thinking in buying and then selling stock in PetroChina, you'll need to do some research.

First, find out something about the company by going to www.petrochina.com.cn/ptr and linking to the English version of the
PetroChina Web site. Explore the sections "About PetroChina" and "Investor Relations." Look for answers to the following
questions:

    What does the company do? What products and services does it provide? How does it distribute its products?
    On which stock exchanges are its shares sold?

Next, to learn about the company's financial performance, go to http://finance.yahoo.com to link to the Finance section of the
Yahoo.com Web site. Enter the company's stock symbol--PTR--and review the information provided on the site. To see what
analysts think of the stock, for example, click on "Analyst Opinion." To gain insight into why Buffett sold his stock and whether it
was a good or a bad move, read these articles: "Should We Buy the PetroChina Stock Warren Buffett Sold?"
(www.peridotcapitalist.com/200...ck-warren.html) and "Buffett's PetroChina Sale: Fiscal or Social Move,"
(investorsagainstgenocide.net/page1001126)

Now, answer the following questions:

 1. What do analysts think of the stock?
 2. Should Buffett have bought the stock in PetroChina? Was it a good decision at the time? Why or why not?
 3. Should Buffett have sold his stock in the company? Why do you think he sold the stock? Was it a good decision at the time?

    Why or why not?
 4. If you personally had $50,000 to invest, how likely is it that you'd buy stock in PetroChina? What factors would you consider in

    making your decision?

To learn more about the pros and cons of buying stock in Chinese companies, go to www.newsweek.com/id/54174 to link to the
MSNBC Web site and read the article "Nice Place to Visit." Then answer these final questions:

 1. What are the advantages of inveting in the stock of Chinese companies? What are the disadvantages?
 2. In your opinion, should the average investor put money in Chinese stock? Why, or why not?

This page titled 13.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

13.8.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4070
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

14: Personal Finances

  14.1: Financial Planning
  14.2: Time Is Money
  14.3: The Financial Planning Process
  14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons from the Subprime Crisis
  14.5: Cases and Problems
This page titled 14: Personal Finances is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
14.1: Financial Planning

  Learning Objectives

       Define personal finances and financial planning.
       Explain the financial planning life cycle.
       Discuss the advantages of a college education in meeting short- and long-term financial goals.
       Describe the steps you'd take to get a job offer and evaluate alternative job offers, taking benefits into account.
       Understand the ways to finance a college education.

Before we go any further, we need to nail down a couple of key concepts. First, just what, exactly, do we mean by personal
finances? Finance itself concerns the flow of money from one place to another, and your personal finances concern your money
and what you plan to do with it as it flows in and out of your possession. Essentially, then, personal finance is the application of
financial principles to the monetary decisions that you make either for your individual benefit or for that of your family.

Second, as we suggested in Section 14--and as we'll insist in the rest of it--monetary decisions work out much more beneficially
when they're planned rather than improvised. Thus our emphasis on financial planning--the ongoing process of managing your
personal finances in order to meet goals that you've set for yourself or your family.

Financial planning requires you to address several questions, some of them relatively simple:

    What's my annual income?
    How much debt do I have, and what are my monthly payments on that debt?

Others will require some investigation and calculation:

    What's the value of my assets?
    How can I best budget my annual income?

Still others will require some forethought and forecasting:

How much wealth can I expect to accumulate during my working lifetime?

How much money will I need when I retire?

The Financial Planning Life Cycle

Another question that you might ask yourself--and certainly would do if you were a professional in financial planning--is
something like, "How will my financial plans change over the course of my life?" Figure 14.3 illustrates the financial life cycle of a
typical individual--one whose financial outlook and likely outcomes are probably a lot like yours (Keown, 2007). As you can see,
our diagram divides this individual's life into three stages, each of which is characterized by different life events (such as beginning
a family, buying a home, planning an estate, retiring). At each stage, too, there are recommended changes in the focus of the
individual's financial planning:

14.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4071
                                                                    Figure 14.3 Financial Life Cycle

At each stage, of course, complications can set in--say, changes in such conditions as marital or employment status or in the
overall economic outlook. Finally, as you can also see, your financial needs will probably peak somewhere in stage 2, at
approximately age fifty-five, or ten years before typical retirement age.

    In stage 1, the focus is on building wealth.
    In stage 2, the focus shifts to the process of preserving and increasing the wealth that one has accumulated and continues to
    accumulate.
    In stage 3, the focus turns to the process of living on (and, if possible, continuing to grow) one's saved wealth.

Choosing a Career

Until you're eighteen or so, you probably won't generate much income; for the most part, you'll be living off your parents' wealth.
In our hypothetical life cycle, however, financial planning begins in the individual's early twenties. If that seems like rushing
things, consider a basic fact of life: this is the age at which you'll be choosing your career--not only the sort of work you want to
do during your prime income-generating years, but also the kind of lifestyle you want to live in the process (Keown, 2007).

What about college? Most readers of this book, of course, have decided to go to college. If you haven't yet decided, you need to
know that college is an extremely good investment of both money and time.

Table 14.1 "Education and Average Income", for example, summarizes the findings of a study conducted by the U.S. Census
Bureau (U.S. Census Bureau, 2008). A quick review shows that people who graduate from high school can expect to increase their
average annual earnings by about 49 percent over those of people who don't, and those who go on to finish college can expect to
generate 82 percent more annual income than that. Over the course of the financial life cycle, families headed by those college
graduates will earn about $1.6 million more than families headed by high school graduates who didn't attend college. (With better
access to health care--and, studies show, with better dietary and health practices--college graduates will also live longer. And so
will their children.) (U.S. Census Bureau, 2008)

                                                               Table 1:.1 Education and Average Income

14.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4071
Education                         Average income          Percentage increase over next-highest level
High school dropout               $20,873                 --
High school diploma               $31,071                 48.9%
College degree                    $56,788                 82.8%
Advanced higher-education degree  $82,320                 45.0%

And what about the debt that so many people accumulate to finish college? For every $1 that you spend on your college education,
you can expect to earn about $35 during the course of your financial life cycle (Hansen, 2008). At that rate of return, you should be
able to pay off your student loans (unless, of course, you fail to practice reasonable financial planning).

Naturally, there are exceptions to these average outcomes. You'll find English-lit majors stocking shelves at 7-Eleven, and you'll
find college dropouts running multibillion-dollar enterprises. Microsoft cofounder Bill Gates dropped out of college after two
years, as did his founding partner, Paul Allen. Current Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer finished his undergraduate degree but quit his
MBA program to join Microsoft (where he apparently fit in among the other dropouts in top management). It's always good to
remember, however, that though exceptions to rules (and average outcomes) occasionally modify the rules, they invariably fall far
short of disproving them: in entrepreneurship as in most other walks of adult life, the better your education, the more promising
your financial future. One expert in the field puts the case for the average person bluntly: educational credentials "are about being
employable, becoming a legitimate candidate for a job with a future. They are about climbing out of the dead-end job market"
(Ramsay, 2008).

Finally, does it make any difference what you study in college? To a perhaps surprising extent, not necessarily. Some career areas,
such as engineering, architecture, teaching, and law, require targeted degrees, but the area of study designated on your degree often
doesn't matter much when you're applying for a job. If, for instance, a job ad says, "Business, communications, or other degree
required," most applicants and hires will have those "other" degrees. When poring over rsums for a lot of jobs, potential
employers look for the degree and simply note that a candidate has one; they often don't need to focus on the particulars (Roth,
2008).

This is not to say, however, that all degrees promise equal job prospects. Figure 14.4, for example, summarizes a U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics projection of the thirty fast-growing occupations for the years 2006-2016. Veterinary technicians and makeup
artists will be in demand as never before, but as you can see, occupational prospects are fairly diverse1.

                                                  14.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4071
                                                        Figure 14.4 Top 25 Fastest-Growing Jobs, 2006-2016

Nor, of course, do all degrees pay off equally. In Table 14.2 "College Majors and Average Annual Earnings", we've extracted the
findings of a study conducted by the National Science Foundation on the earnings of individuals with degrees in various
undergraduate fields (Penrice, 1999; Harrington & Sum, 2011). Clearly, some degrees--notably in the engineering fields--promise
much higher average earnings than others. Chemical engineers, for instance, can earn nearly twice as much as elementary school
teachers, but there's a catch: if you graduate with a degree in chemical engineering, your average annual salary will be about
$67,000 if you can find a job related to that degree; if you can't, you may have to settle for as much as 40 percent less (Penrice,
1999). (Supermodel Cindy Crawford cut short her studies in chemical engineering because there was more money to be made on
the runway.)

                                                      Table 1:.2 College Majors and Average Annual Earnings

14.1.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4071
Major                   Average Earnings with  Major                 Average Earnings with
                        Bachelor's Degree                            Bachelor's Degree
Chemical engineering    $67,425                History               $45,926
Aerospace engineering   $65,649                Biology               $45,532
Computer engineering    $62,527                Nursing               $45,538
Physics                 $62,104                Psychology            $43,963
Electrical engineering  $61,534                English               $43,614
Mechanical engineering  $61,382                Health technology     $42,524
Industrial engineering  $61,030                Criminal justice      $41,129
Civil engineering       $58,993                Physical education    $40,207
Accounting              $56,637                Secondary education   $39,976
Finance                 $55,104                Fine arts             $38,857
Computer science        $52,615                Philosophy            $38,239
Business management     $52,321                Dramatic arts         $37,091
Marketing               $51,107                Music                 $36,811
Journalism              $46,835                Elementary education  $34,564
Information systems     $46,519                Special education     $34,196

In short, when you're planning what to do with the rest of your life, it's a good idea to check into the fine points and realities, as
well as the statistical data. If you talk to career counselors and people in the workforce, you might be surprised by what you learn
about the relationship between certain college majors and various occupations. Onetime Hewlett-Packard CEO Carly Fiorina
majored in medieval history and philosophy.

This page titled 14.1: Financial Planning is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                               14.1.5                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4071
14.2: Time Is Money

  Learning Objectives

       Explain compound interest and the time value of money.
       Discuss the value of getting an early start on your plans for saving.

The fact that you have to choose a career at an early stage in your financial life cycle isn't the only reason that you need to start
early on your financial planning. Let's assume, for instance, that it's your eighteenth birthday and that on this day you take
possession of $10,000 that your grandparents put in trust for you. You could, of course, spend it; in particular, it would probably
cover the cost of flight training for a private pilot's license--something you've always wanted but were convinced that you
couldn't afford for another ten or fifteen years. Your grandfather, of course, suggests that you put it into some kind of savings
account. If you just wait until you finish college, he says, and if you can find a savings plan that pays 5 percent interest, you'll have
the $10,000 plus another $2,209 to buy a pretty good used car.

The total amount you'll have-- $12,209--piques your interest. If that $10,000 could turn itself into $12,209 after sitting around for
four years, what would it be worth if you actually held on to it until you did retire--say, at age sixty-five? A quick trip to the
Internet to find a compound-interest calculator informs you that, forty-seven years later, your $10,000 will have grown to $104,345
(assuming a 5 percent interest rate). That's not really enough to retire on, but after all, you'd at least have some cash, even if you
hadn't saved another dime for nearly half a century. On the other hand, what if that four years in college had paid off the way you
planned, so that (once you get a good job) you're able to add, say, another $10,000 to your retirement savings account every year
until age sixty-five? At that rate, you'll have amassed a nice little nest egg of slightly more than $1.6 million.

Compound Interest

In your efforts to appreciate the potential of your $10,000 to multiply itself, you have acquainted yourself with two of the most
important concepts in finance. As we've already indicated, one is the principle of compound interest, which refers to the effect of
earning interest on your interest.

Let's say, for example, that you take your grandfather's advice and invest your $10,000 (your principal) in a savings account at an
annual interest rate of 5 percent. Over the course of the first year, your investment will earn $512 in interest and grow to $10,512. If
you now reinvest the entire $10,512 at the same 5 percent annual rate, you'll earn another $537 in interest, giving you a total
investment at the end of year 2 of $11,049. And so forth. And that's how you can end up with $104,345 at age sixty-five.

Time Value of Money

You've also encountered the principle of the time value of money--the principle whereby a dollar received in the present is worth
more than a dollar received in the future. If there's one thing that we've stressed throughout this chapter so far, it's the fact that, for
better or for worse, most people prefer to consume now rather than in the future. This is true for both borrowers and lenders. If you
borrow money from me, it's because you can't otherwise buy something that you want at the present time. If I lend it to you, it's
because I'm willing to postpone the opportunity to purchase something I want at the present time--perhaps a risk-free, ten-year
U.S. Treasury bond with a present yield rate of 3 percent.

I'm willing to forego my opportunity, however, only if I can get some compensation for its loss, and that's why I'm going to charge
you interest. And you're going to pay the interest because you need the money to buy what you want to buy. How much interest
should we agree on? In theory, it could be just enough to cover the cost of my lost opportunity, but there are, of course, other
factors. Inflation, for example, will have eroded the value of my money by the time I get it back from you. In addition, while I
would be taking no risk in loaning money to the U.S. government (as I would be doing if I bought that Treasury bond), I am taking
a risk in loaning it to you. Our agreed-on rate will reflect such factors (Gallager & Andrews Jr., 2003).

Finally, the time value of money principle also states that a dollar received today starts earning interest sooner than one received
tomorrow. Let's say, for example, that you receive $2,000 in cash gifts when you graduate from college. At age twenty-three, with
your college degree in hand, you get a decent job and don't have an immediate need for that $2,000. So you put it into an account
that pays 10 percent compounded and you add another $2,000 ($167 per month) to your account every year for the next eleven

14.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4072
years1. The left panel of Table 14.3 "Why to Start Saving Early (I)" shows how much your account will earn each year and how
much money you'll have at certain ages between twenty-three and sixty-seven. As you can see, you'd have nearly $52,000 at age
thirty-six and a little more than $196,000 at age fifty; at age sixty-seven, you'd be just a bit short of $1 million. The right panel of
the same table shows what you'd have if you hadn't started saving $2,000 a year until you were age thirty-six. As you can also see,
you'd have a respectable sum at age sixty-seven--but less than half of what you would have accumulated by starting at age twenty-
three. More important, even to accumulate that much, you'd have to add $2,000 per year for a total of thirty-two years, not just
twelve.

                     Table 1:.3 Why to Start Saving Early (I)

    Savings accumulated from age 23, with deposits of  Savings accumulated from age 36, with deposits of
    $2,000 annually until age 67                       $2,000 annually until age 67

Age Annual deposit Annual interest Total saved at the earned end of the year Annual deposit Annual interest Total saved at the earned end of the year

23  $0.00   $0.00       $0.00                          $0.00   $0.00       $0.00

24  $2,000  $200.00     $2,200                         $0.00   $0.00       $0.00

25  $2,000  $420.00     $4,620                         $0.00   $0.00       $0.00

30  $2,000  $1,897.43   $20,871.78                     $0.00   $0.00       $0.00

35  $2,000  $4,276.86   $47,045.42                     $0.00   $0.00       $0.00

36  $0.00   $4,704.54   $51,749.97                     $2,000  $200.00     $2,200.00

40  $0.00   $6,887.92   $75,767.13                     $2,000  $1,221.02   $13,431.22

45  $0.00   $11,093.06  $122,023.71                    $2,000  $3,187.48   $35,062.33

50  $0.00   $17,865.49  $196,520.41                    $2,000  $6,354.50   $69,899.46

55  $0.00   $28,772.55  $316,498.09                    $2,000  $11,455.00  $126,005.00

60  $0.00   $46,338.49  $509,723.34                    $2,000  $19,669.41  $216,363.53

65  $0.00   $74,628.59  $820,914.53                    $2,000  $32,898.80  $361,886.65

67  $0.00   $90,300.60  $993,306.53                    $2,000  $40,277.55  $442,503.09

Source: Data from Consumer Credit Counseling Service of Maryland and Delaware Inc., "Power of Saving Early" (2008),
www.cccs-inc.org/tools/tools_saving_early.php (accessed November 15, 2008).

Here's another way of looking at the same principle. Suppose that you're twenty years old, don't have $2,000, and don't want to
attend college full-time. You are, however, a hard worker and a conscientious saver, and one of your (very general) financial goals
is to accumulate a $1 million retirement nest egg. As a matter of fact, if you can put $33 a month into an account that pays 12
percent interest compounded1, you can have your $1 million by age sixty-seven. That is, if you start at age twenty. As you can see
from Table 14.4 "Why to Start Saving Early (II)", if you wait until you're twenty-one to start saving, you'll need $37 a month. If
you wait until you're thirty, you'll have to save $109 a month, and if you procrastinate until you're forty, the ante goes up to $366 a
month (Keown, 2007).

                                                                Table 1:.4 Why to Start Saving Early (II)

                        14.2.2                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4072
First Payment When You Turn  Required Monthly Payment  First Payment When You Turn  Required Monthly Payment
20                           $33                       30                           $109
21                           $37                       31                           $123
22                           $42                       32                           $138
23                           $47                       33                           $156
24                           $53                       34                           $176
25                           $60                       35                           $199
26                           $67                       40                           $366
27                           $76                       50                           $1,319
28                           $85                       60                           $6,253
29                           $96

Source: Arthur J. Keown, Personal Finance: Turning Money into Wealth, 4th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education,
2007), 23.

The moral here should be fairly obvious: a dollar saved today not only starts earning interest sooner than one saved tomorrow (or
ten years from now) but also can ultimately earn a lot more money in the long run. Starting early means in your twenties--early in
stage 1 of your financial life cycle. As one well-known financial advisor puts it, "If you're in your 20s and you haven't yet learned
how to delay gratification, your life is likely to be a constant financial struggle" (Clements, 2006).

Key Takeaways

    The principle of compound interest refers to the effect of earning interest on your interest.
    The principle of the time value of money is the principle whereby a dollar received in the present is worth more than a dollar
    received in the future.
    The principle of the time value of money also states that a dollar received today starts earning interest sooner than one received
    tomorrow.
    Together, these two principles give a significant financial advantage to individuals who begin saving early during the financial-
    planning life cycle.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Everyone wants to be a millionaire (except those who are already billionaires). To find out how old you'll be when you become a
millionaire, go to www.youngmoney.com/calculator...ire_calculator and input these assumptions:

       Age: your actual age

       Amount currently invested: $10,000

       Expected rate of return (interest rate): 5 percent

       Millionaire target age: 65

       Savings per month: $500

       Expected inflation rate: 3 percent

Click "calculate" and you'll learn when you'll become a millionaire (given the previous assumptions).

Now, let's change things. We'll go through this process three times. Change only the items described. Keep all other assumptions
the same as those listed previously.

                                                       14.2.3                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4072
    Change the interest rate to 3 percent and then to 6 percent.
    Change the savings amount to $200 and then to $800.
    Change your age from "your age" to "your age plus 5" and then to "your age minus 5."

Write a brief report describing the sensitivity of becoming a millionaire, based on changing interest rates, monthly savings amount,
and age at which you begin to invest.

This page titled 14.2: Time Is Money is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

14.2.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4072
14.3: The Financial Planning Process

  Learning Objectives

    1. Identify the three stages of the personal-finances planning process.
    2. Explain how to draw up a personal net-worth statement, a personal cash-flow statement, and a personal budget.

We've divided the financial planning process into three steps:

 1. Evaluate your current financial status by creating a net worth statement and a cash flow analysis.
 2. Set short-term, intermediate-term, and long-term financial goals.
 3. Use a budget to plan your future cash inflows and outflows and to assess your financial performance by comparing budgeted

    figures with actual amounts.

Step 1: Evaluating Your Current Financial Situation

Just how are you doing, financially speaking? You should ask yourself this question every now and then, and it should certainly be
your starting point when you decide to initiate a more or less formal financial plan. The first step in addressing this question is
collecting and analyzing the records of what you own and what you owe and then applying a few accounting terms to the results:

    Your personal assets consist of what you own.
    Your personal liabilities are what you owe--your obligations to various creditors, big and small.

Preparing Your Net-Worth Statement

Your net worth (accounting term for your wealth) is the difference between your assets and your liabilities. Thus the formula for
determining net worth is:

                                                            Assets - Liabilities = Net worth

If you own more than you owe, your net worth will be positive; if you owe more than you own, it will be negative. To find out
whether your net worth is on the plus or minus side, you can prepare a personal net worth statement like the one in Figure 14.6,
which we've drawn up for a fictional student named Joe College. (Note that we've included lines for items that may be relevant to
some people's net worth statements but left them blank when they don't apply to Joe.)

14.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4073
                                                                    Figure 14.6 Net Worth Statement

Assets

Joe has two types of assets:

    First are his monetary or liquid assets--his cash, the money in his checking accounts, and the value of any savings, CDs, and
    money market accounts. They're called liquid because either they're cash or they can readily be turned into cash.
    Everything else is a tangible asset--something that Joe can use, as opposed to an investment. (We haven't given Joe any
    investments--such financial assets as stocks, bonds, or mutual funds--because people usually purchase these instruments to
    meet such long-term goals as buying a house or sending a child to college.)

Note that we've been careful to calculate Joe's assets in terms of their fair market value--the price he could get by selling them at
present, not the price he paid for them or the price that he could get at some future time.

Liabilities

Joe's net worth statement also divides his liabilities into two categories:

    Anything that Joe owes on such items as his furniture and computer are current liabilities--debts that must be paid within one
    year. Much of this indebtedness no doubt ends up on Joe's credit card balance, which is regarded as a current liability because
    he should pay it off within a year.

14.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4073
    By contrast, his car payments and student-loan payments are noncurrent liabilities--debt payments that extend for a period of
    more than one year. Joe is in no position to buy a house, but for most people, their mortgage is their most significant noncurrent
    liability.

Finally, note that Joe has positive net worth. At this point in the life of the average college student, positive net worth may be a little
unusual. If you happen to have negative net worth right now, you're technically insolvent, but remember that a major goal of
getting a college degree is to enter the workforce with the best possible opportunity for generating enough wealth to reverse that
situation.

Preparing Your Cash-Flow Statement

Now that you know something about your financial status on a given date, you need to know more about it over a period of time.
This is the function of a cash-flow or income statement, which shows where your money has come from and where it's slated to go.

Figure 14.7 is Joe College's cash-flow statement. As you can see, Joe's income (his cash inflows--money coming in) is derived
from two sources: student loans and income from a part-time job. His expenditures (cash outflows--money going out) fall into
several categories: housing, food, transportation, personal and health care, recreation/entertainment, education, insurance, savings,
and other expenses. To find out Joe's net cash flow, we subtract his expenditures from his income:

                                                               $25,700 - $25,300 = $400

14.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4073
                                                                    Figure 14.7 Cash-Flow Statement

Joe has been able to maintain a positive cash flow for the year ending August 31, 2012, but he's cutting it close. Moreover, he's in
the black only because of the inflow from student loans--income that, as you'll recall from his net worth statement, is also a
noncurrent liability. We are, however, willing to give Joe the benefit of the doubt: Though he's incurring the high costs of an
education, he's willing to commit himself to the debt (and, we'll assume, to careful spending) because he regards education as an
investment that will pay off in the future.

Remember that when constructing a cash-flow statement, you must record only income and expenditures that pertain to a given
period, whether it be a month, a semester, or (as in Joe's case) a year. Remember, too, that you must figure both inflows and
outflows on a cash basis: you record income only when you receive money, and you record expenditures only when you pay out
money. When, for example, Joe used his credit card to purchase his computer, he didn't actually pay out any money. Each monthly
payment on his credit card balance, however, is an outflow that must be recorded on his cash-flow statement (according to the type
of expense--say, recreation/entertainment, food, transportation, and so on).

Your cash-flow statement, then, provides another perspective on your solvency: if you're insolvent, it's because you're spending
more than you're earning. Ultimately, your net worth and cash-flow statements are most valuable when you use them together.

14.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4073
While your net worth statement lets you know what you're worth--how much wealth you have--your cash-flow statement lets you
know precisely what effect your spending and saving habits are having on your wealth.

This page titled 14.3: The Financial Planning Process is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

14.3.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4073
14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons from the Subprime Crisis

  Learning Objectives

       Discuss the trend in the U.S. savings rate.
       Define a subprime loan and explain the difference between a fixed-rate mortgage and an adjustable-rate mortgage.
       Discuss what can go wrong with a subprime loan at an adjustable rate. Discuss what can go wrong with hundreds of
       thousands of subprime loans at adjustable rates.
       Define risk and explain some of the risks entailed by personal financial transactions.

Joe isn't old enough to qualify, but if his grandfather had deposited $1,000 in an account paying 7 percent interest in 1945, it would
now be worth $64,000. That's because money invested at 7 percent compounded will double every ten years. Now, $64,000 may or
may not seem like a significant return over fifty years, but after all, the money did all the heavy lifting, and given the miracle of
compound interest, it's surprising that Americans don't take greater advantage of the opportunity to multiply their wealth by saving
more of it, even in modest, interest-bearing accounts. Ironically, with $790 billion in credit card debt, it's obvious that a lot of
American families are experiencing the effects of compound interest--but in reverse (Frank, 2005).

As a matter of fact, though Joe College appears to be on the right track when it comes to saving, many people aren't. A lot of
Americans, it seems, do indeed set savings goals, but in one recent survey, nearly 70 percent of the respondents reported that they
fell short of their monthly goals because their money was needed elsewhere. About one-third of Americans say that they're putting
away something but not enough, and another third aren't saving anything at all. Almost one-fifth of all Americans have net worth
of zero--or less (Taylor, 2007; Frank, 2005).

As we indicated in the opening section of this chapter, this shortage of savings goes hand in hand with a surplus in spending. "My
parents," says one otherwise gainfully employed American knowledge worker, "are appalled at the way I justify my spending. I
think, `Why work and make money unless you're going to enjoy it?' That's a fine theory," she adds, "until you're sixty, homeless,
and with no money in the bank" (Gardner, 2008). And indeed, if she doesn't intend to alter her personal-finances philosophy, she
has good reason to worry about her "older adult" years. Sixty percent of Americans over the age of sixty-five have less than
$100,000 in savings, and only 30 percent of this group have more than $25,000; 45 percent have less than $15,000. As for income,
75 percent of people over age sixty-five generate less than $35,000 annually, and 30 percent are in the "poverty to near-poverty"
range of $10,000 to $20,000 (as compared to 12 percent of the under-sixty-five population) (Rubin, et. al., 2000).

Disposing of Savings

Figure 14.11 shows the U.S. savings rate--which measures the percentage of disposable income devoted to savings for the period
1960 to 2010. As you can see, it suffered a steep decline from 1980 to 2005 and remained at this negligible savings rate until it
started moving up in 2008. The recent increase in the savings rate, however, is still below the long-term average of 7 percent
(Economic Research, 2008; Dickson, 2007).

Figure 14.11 U.S. Savings Rate  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4074
               14.4.1
Now, a widespread tendency on the part of Americans to spend rather than save doesn't account entirely for the downward shift in
the savings rate. In late 2005, the Federal Reserve cited at least two other (closely related) factors in the decline of savings (Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco, 2005):

    An increase in the ratio of stock-market wealth to disposable income
    An increase in the ratio of residential-property wealth to disposable income

Assume, for example, that, in addition to your personal savings, you own some stock and have a mortgage on a home. Both your
stock and your home are (supposedly) appreciable assets--their value used to go up over time. (In fact, if you had taken out your
mortgage in 2000, by the end of 2005 your home would have appreciated at double the rate of your disposable personal income.)
The decline in the personal savings rate during the mid-2000s, suggested the Fed, resulted in part from people's response to "long-
lived bull markets in stocks and housing"; in other words, a lot of people had come to rely on the appreciation of such assets as
stocks and residential property as "a substitute for the practice of saving out of wage income."

Subprime Rates and Adjustable Rate Mortgages

Let's assume that you weren't ready to take advantage of the boom in mortgage loans in 2000 but did set your sights on 2005. You
may not have been ready to buy a house in 2005 either, but there's a good chance that you got a loan anyway. In particular, some
lender might have offered you a so-called subprime mortgage loan. Subprime loans are made to borrowers who don't qualify for
market-set interest rates because of one or more risk factors--income level, employment status, credit history, ability to make only
a very low down payment. As of March 2007, U.S. lenders had written $1.3 trillion in mortgages like yours (Associated Press,
2007).

Granted, your terms might not have been very good. For one thing, interest rates on subprime loans may run from 8 percent to 10
percent and higher(consumeraffairs.com, 2005). In addition, you probably had to settle for an adjustable-rate mortgage (ARM)--
one that's pegged to the increase or decrease of certain interest rates that your lender has to pay. When you signed your mortgage
papers, you knew that if those rates went up, your mortgage rate--and your monthly payments--would go up, too. Fortunately,
however, you had a plan B: with the value of your new asset appreciating even as you enjoyed living in it, it wouldn't be long
before you could refinance it at a more manageable and more predictable rate.

This page titled 14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons from the Subprime Crisis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and
was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

14.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4074
14.5: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web (AACSB)

Go to https://www.quizzle.com and request a free copy of your credit report. Review the report. If you identify any errors, get them
fixed. Write a brief report explaining the value of good credit.

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Go online and read this article at Forbes.com: "Most Common Resume Lies," by Kate DuBose Tomassi at
www.forbes.com/workspecial/2006/05/20/resume-lies-work_cx_kdt_06work_0523lies.html. View the slide show of common
rsum lies. Answer these questions: What are the most common lies made in rsums? Why is it a bad idea to lie on such a
document? What are the potential consequences of misstating facts on your rsum?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

It's becoming more difficult for individuals to buy homes. This has meant that many people who would have bought a home have
remained in apartments. In big cities, such as New York, sharing an apartment with roommates is a good way to save money. Yet it
has some disadvantages. Get together as a team and identify the pros and cons of sharing housing. Pretend that each member of the
group has agreed to share one apartment. Create a document that details each member's rights and responsibilities. Decide as a
group whether the lease should be in one person's name or in all your names. Explain the pros and cons of both approaches.

The Global View (AACSB)

You're looking forward to taking a month-long vacation to Australia when you graduate from college in two years. Create a budget
for this trip after researching likely costs. Determine how much you'll need for the trip and calculate how much you'd have to save
each month to afford the trip.

This page titled 14.5: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

14.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4075
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

15: Managing Information and Technology

  15.1: Data versus Information
  15.2: Managing Data
  15.3: Types of Information Systems
  15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing
  15.5: Data Communications Networks
  15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication
  15.7: Careers in Information Management
  15.8: Cases and Problems
This page titled 15: Managing Information and Technology is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
15.1: Data versus Information

  Learning Objectives

    1. Distinguish between data and information.
    2. Define information system (IS) and identify the tasks of the information systems manager.

By the time the company took the plunge and committed $100 million to marketing-related information technology (IT), Caesars
had been collecting and storing data about customers for almost a decade. "While the company thought it important to collect
customer information," recalls a senior marketing executive, "the problem was we had millions of customers to collect information
on, but we had no systematic way of turning it into a marketing decision. We didn't know what to do with it." In other words,
Caesars was collecting a lot of data but not necessarily any information. So what's the difference?

As an example, suppose that you want to know how you're doing in a particular course. So far, you've taken two 20-question
multiple-choice tests. On the first, you got questions 8, 11, and 14 wrong; on the second, you did worse, missing items 7, 15, 16,
and 19. The items that you got wrong are merely data--unprocessed facts. What's important is your total score. You scored 85 on
the first exam and 80 on the second. These two numbers constitute information--data that have been processed, or turned into
some useful form. Knowing the questions that you missed simply supplied you with some data for calculating your scores.

Now let's fast-forward to the end of the semester. At this point, in addition to taking the two tests, you've written two papers and
taken a final. You got a 90 and 95 on the papers and a 90 on the final. You now have more processed data, but you still want to
organize them into more useful information. What you want to know is your average grade for the semester. To get the information
you want, you need yet more data--namely, the weight assigned to each graded item. Fortunately, you've known from day one that
each test counts 20 percent, each paper 10 percent, and the final exam 40 percent. A little math reveals an average grade of 87.

Though this is the information you're interested in, it may be mere data to your instructor, who may want different information: an
instructor who intends to scale grades, for example, will want to know the average grade for the entire class. You're hoping that the
class average is low enough to push your average of 87 up from a B+ to an A- (or maybe even an A--it doesn't hurt to hope for the
best). The moral of the story is that what constitutes information at one stage can easily become data at another: or, one person's
information can be another person's data.

As a rule, you want information; data are good only for generating the information. So, how do you convert data into information
that's useful in helping you make decisions and solve problems? That's the question we'll explore in the next section.

Information Systems

To gather and process data into information and distribute it to people who need it, organizations develop an information system
(IS)--the combination of technologies, procedures, and people who collect and distribute the information needed to make decisions
and coordinate and control company-wide activities. In most large organizations, the IS is operated by a senior management team
that includes a chief information officer (CIO) who oversees information and telecommunications systems. There may also be a
chief technology officer who reports to the CIO and oversees IT planning and implementation. As for information managers, their
tasks include the following:

    Determining the information needs of members of the organization
    Collecting the appropriate data
    Applying technology to convert data into information
    Directing the flow of information to the right people

Differences in Information Needs

The job is complicated by the fact that information needs vary according to different levels, operational units, and functional areas.
Consider, for instance, the information needs of managers at several levels:

    Top managers need information for planning, setting objectives, and making major strategic decisions.
    Middle managers need information that helps them allocate resources and oversee the activities under their control.

15.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4076
    First-line managers require information that helps them supervise employees, oversee daily operations, and coordinate
    activities.

Figure 15.1 illustrates a hypothetical hierarchy of information needs at Caesars. The president, for example, needs information to
determine whether profitability is up or down or if the organization is facing any new competitive threats. At the vice-presidential
level, executives need information that will help them in controlling and planning for specific areas of operations. The VP of casino
operations, for example, might need to know which operations are most profitable--slots, table games, or other gaming activities.
The VP of hotel operations might want to know whether room revenues are going up or down.

                                                               Figure 15.1 Information Needs and Flows

The information needs of middle-level and lower-level managers are different still. The slot-machine manager might want to know
whether the placement of machines on the casino floor affects profitability. The poker manager might want to know whether all
table games comply with state regulations. At a lower level, the pit manager (who's in charge of table games in a particular area)
needs to know whether there's a card-counter at his blackjack table or whether a dealer's activities are suspicious.

Even at a given level, information needs can vary. A manager on the hotel side of the business, for instance, doesn't care much
about profitability at the poker tables, while a pit manager doesn't have much use for hotel housekeeping reports. The reports that
an accountant needs would hardly be the same as those needed by a human resources manager.

The Need to Share Information

Having stressed the differences in information needs, we should pause to remind ourselves that the managerial levels, operations,
and functions of every organization are intertwined, to a greater or lesser degree. If you'll glance again at Figure 15.1, you'll be
reminded that organizations need to share information, that information must flow, and that it must flow in both directions, bottom-
up and top-down. At Caesars, for instance, both casino and hotel managers are concerned about security, which is also of interest to
managers in different functional areas. Information supplied by the security group is obviously vital to managers in the gaming
areas, but HR managers also need it to screen potential employees. Marketing information is clearly important to both casino and
hotel operations: to maximize overall profits, the company uses marketing data to fill hotel rooms with customers who spend big in
the casinos (Kilby, et. al., 2005).

Caesars's information needs entail more than allowing individuals in a given casino to share information; information has to be
shared among all of Caesars's thirty-nine casinos. Thus, Caesars relies on an integrated IT system that allows real-time

15.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4076
communication among all its properties. Installing the system (in the mid-1990s) was complicated, and not everyone in the
organization liked the idea. Some managers felt that information sharing threatened their independence. Others, including some in
the IT group, doubted that a large number of separate IT systems could be adequately integrated. To get everyone on board, John
Bushy, then senior VP of information technology, pledged that he wouldn't cut his hair until the system was up and running. By the
time it was operational in 1997, Bushy had hair down to his shoulders, but it was worth it: Caesars's ability to share real-time
information across all its properties has been a major factor in the company's success. Caesars's new system cut costs by $20
million a year, increased brand recognition, and increased the number of customers playing at more than one Caesars property by
72 percent (LeVinson, 2011; Global Supply Chain Management Forum, 2011).

Enterprise Systems

Many large and mid-size companies rely on a highly integrated system called an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system to
channel information to multiple users. To understand what an ERP system does, forget about the P for planning (it really doesn't
have much to do with planning) and the R for resource (it's an imprecise term) (Koch, 2011). Focus on the E for enterprise. An
ERP system integrates the computer needs of all activities across the enterprise into a single system that serves all users. Such
broad integration isn't a simple task, and you wouldn't be the first person to wonder whether it wouldn't be easier to give each
department its own computer system. Salespeople, for example, need a system that tracks sales and generates sales reports.
Meanwhile, manufacturing personnel don't need to track sales but do need to track inventory. What's the problem with stand-alone
computer systems? Quite simply, users in various departments can't share information or communicate with each other.

What If You Don't Have ERP?

Imagine that you're a sales manager for a fairly large manufacturing company that produces and sells treadmills. Like every other
department in the organization, you have your own computer system. A local sporting-goods store orders one hundred treadmills
through a regional sales representative. It's your job to process the order. It wouldn't be much of a problem for you to go into your
computer and place the order. But how would you know if the treadmills were actually in stock and when they could be delivered?
How would you know if the customer's credit was any good? You could call the warehouse and ask if the treadmills are in stock. If
they are, you'd tell the warehouse manager that you're placing an order and hope that the treadmills are still in stock by the time
your order gets there two days later. While you're at it, you'd better ask for an expected delivery date. As a final precaution, you
should probably call the finance department and ask about your customer's credit rating. So now you've done your job, and it can
hardly be your fault that because the cost of manufacturing treadmills has gone up, accounting has recommended an immediate
price increase that hasn't shown up in your computer system yet.

What If You Do Have ERP?

Wouldn't it be easier if you had an ERP system like the one illustrated in Figure 15.2 --one that lets you access the same
information as every other department? Then you could find out if there were one hundred treadmills in stock, the expected
delivery date, your customer's credit rating, and the current selling price--without spending most of the day exchanging phone
calls, e-mails, text messages, and faxes. You'd be in a better position to decide whether you can give your customer credit, and you
could promise delivery (at a correct price) on a specified date. Then, you'd enter the order into the system. The information that
you entered would be immediately available to everyone else. The warehouse would know what needs to be shipped, to whom, and
when. The accounting department would know that a sale had been made, the dollar amount, and where to send the bill. In short,
everyone would have up-to-date information, and no one would have to reinput any data.

15.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4076
                                                                         Figure 15.2 ERP System

Key Takeaways

    Data are unprocessed facts. Information is data that have been processed or turned into some useful form.
    To gather and process data into information and distribute it to people who need it, an organization develops an information
    system (IS)--the combination of technologies, procedures, and people who collect and distribute the information needed to
    make decisions and to coordinate and control company-wide activities.
    In most large organizations, the information system is operated by a senior management team that includes a chief information
    officer (CIO) who oversees information and telecommunications systems.
    There may also be a chief technology officer who reports to the CIO and oversees IT planning and implementation.
    The tasks of information managers include:

     1. Determining the information needs of people in the organization
     2. Collecting the appropriate data
     3. Applying technology to convert data into information
     4. Directing the flow of information to the right people

    The job is complicated by the fact that information needs vary according to different levels, operational units, and functional
    areas.
    In addition, information must be shared. To channel information to multiple users, large and mid-size companies often rely on a
    highly integrated system called an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system.
    An ERP system integrates the computer needs of all business activities across the enterprise into a single computer system that
    serves all users.

Exercises

 1. Using the college-application process as an example, explain the difference between data and information. Identify the
    categories of data that you supplied on your college application and the information generated from them by the admissions
    department.

 2. (AACSB) Analysis
 3. (AACSB) Analysis

This page titled 15.1: Data versus Information is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.1.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4076
15.1.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4076
15.2: Managing Data

  Learning Objective

       Explain how IS managers capture, store, and analyze data.

Did you ever think about how much data you yourself generate? Just remember what you went through to start college. First, you
had to fill out application forms asking you about test scores, high school grades, extracurricular activities, and finances, plus
demographic data about you and your family. Once you'd picked a college, you had to supply data on your housing preferences, the
curriculum you wanted to follow, and the party who'd be responsible for paying your tuition. When you registered for classes, you
gave more data to the registrar's office. When you arrived on campus, you gave out still more data to have your ID picture taken, to
get your computer and phone hooked up, to open a bookstore account, and to buy an on-campus food-charge card. Once you started
classes, data generation continued on a daily basis: your food card and bookstore account, for example, tracked your various
purchases, and your ID tracked your coming and going all over campus. And you generated grades.

And all these data apply to just one aspect of your life. You also generated data every time you used your credit card and your cell
phone. Who uses all these data? How are they collected, stored, analyzed, and distributed in organizations that have various reasons
for keeping track of you?

Data and Databases

To answer such questions, let's go back to our Caesars example. As we've seen, Caesars collects a vast amount of data. Its hotel
system generates data when customers make reservations, check in, buy food and beverages, purchase stuff at shops, attend
entertainment events, and even relax at the spa. In the casino, customers apply for rewards programs, convert cash to chips (and
occasionally chips back to cash), try their luck at the tables and slots, and get complimentary drinks. Then, there are the data
generated by the activities of the company itself: employees, for instance, generate payroll and benefits data, and retail operations
generate data every time they buy or sell something. Moreover, if we added up all these data, we'd have only a fraction of the
amount generated by the company's gaming operations.

How does Caesars handle all these data? First of all, it captures and stores them in several databases--electronic collections of
related data that can be accessed by various members of the organization. Think of databases as filing cabinets that can hold
massive amounts of organized information, such as revenues and costs from hotel activities, casino activities, and events
reservations at each of Caesars facilities.

Warehousing and Mining Data

What if Caesars wants to target customers who generate a lot of revenue, by using a program designed to entice return visits? How
would it identify and contact these people? Theoretically, it could search through the relevant databases--those that hold customer-
contact information (such as name and address) and information about customer activity in the company's hotels, casinos, and
entertainment venues. It would be a start, perhaps, but it wouldn't be very efficient. First of all, it would be time-consuming. Plus,
what if the same data weren't stored in a similar fashion in each database? In that case, it would be quite hard to combine the data
in a meaningful way. To address this problem, Caesars managers will rely on a system like the one illustrated in Figure 15.3, which
calls for moving all the relevant data into a data warehouse--a centralized database in which data from several databases are
consolidated and organized so that they can be easily analyzed.

15.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4077
                                                                  Figure 15.3 The Data Mining Process

Data Mining

With the data in one central location, management can find out everything it needs to about a particular group of customers. It can
also use the data to address some pretty interesting questions. Why do people come to our casinos? How can we keep customers
coming back? How can we increase the number of visits per customer? How can we increase the amount they spend on each visit?
What incentives (such as free dinners, hotel rooms, or show tickets) do our customers like most? To come up with answers to these
questions, they'll perform a technique called data mining--the process of searching and analyzing large amounts of data to reveal
patterns and trends that can be used to predict future behavior.

Data Mining and Customer Behavior

By data-mining its customer-based data warehouse, Caesars's management can discover previously unknown relationships between
the general behavior of its customers and that of a certain group of customers (namely, the most profitable ones). Then, it can
design incentives to appeal specifically to those people who will generate the most profit for the company.

To get a better idea of how data mining works, let's simplify a description of the process at Caesars. First, we need to know how the
casino gathered the data to conduct its preliminary analysis. Most customers who play the slots use a Caesars player's card that
offers incentives based on the amount of money that they wager on slot machines, video poker, and table games (Caesars, 2011). To
get the card, a customer must supply some personal information, such as name, address, and phone number. From Caesars's
standpoint, the card is extremely valuable because it can reveal a lot about the user's betting behavior: actual wins and losses,
length of time played, preferred machines and coin denominations, average amount per bet, and--most important--the speed with
which coins are deposited and buttons pushed (Shook, 2003). As you can see from Figure 15.3, Caesars's primary data source was
internal--generated by the company itself rather than provided by an outside source--and drew on a marketing database developed
for customer relationship management (CRM).

15.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4077
        Figure 15.4: Caesars collects data on its customers by using players' cards to gather information and to track betting behavior.
        zhouxuan12345678 - Caesar's Palace, Las Vegas - CC BY-SA 2.0.

What does the casino do with the data that it's mined? Caesars was most interested in "first trippers"--first-time casino customers.
In particular, it wanted to know which of these customers should be enticed to return. By analyzing the data collected from
player's-card applications and from customer's actual play at the casino (even if for no more than an hour), Caesars could develop
a profile of a profitable customer. Now, when a first-timer comes into any of its casinos and plays for a while, Caesars can instantly
tell whether he or she fits the profitable-customer profile. To lure these people back for return visits, it makes generous offers of
free or reduced-rate rooms, meals, entertainment, or free chips (the incentive of choice for Caesars's preferred customers). These
customers make up 26 percent of all Caesars's customers and generate 82 percent of its revenues. Surprisingly, they're not the
wealthy high rollers to whom Caesars had been catering for years. Most of them are regular working people or retirees with
available time and income and a fondness for slots. They generally stop at the casino on the way home from work or on a weekend
night and don't stay overnight. They enjoy the thrill of gambling, and you can recognize them because they're the ones who can't
push the button or pump tokens in fast enough (Loveman, 2003).

Key Takeaways

    Organizations capture and store data in databases--electronic collections of related data that can be accessed by various people
    in the organization.
    To facilitate data analysis, IS managers may move data from various databases into a data warehouse--a centralized database
    in which data are consolidated and organized for efficient analysis.
    To come up with answers to a huge range of questions, managers perform a technique called data mining--the process of
    searching and analyzing large amounts of data to reveal patterns and trends that can be used to predict future behavior.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Caesars uses data mining to identify its most profitable customers and predict their future behavior. It then designs incentives to
appeal specifically to these customers. Do you see any ethical problems with this process? Is it ethical to encourage people to
gamble? Explain your answer.

This page titled 15.2: Managing Data is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.2.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4077
15.3: Types of Information Systems

  Learning Objective

       Discuss ways in which an IS can be designed to meet the needs of individuals at various organizational levels.

As we saw earlier, different managers, operational units, and functional areas have different information needs. That's why
organizations often tailor information systems to meet particular needs. Caesars's IT group, for example, developed the Player
Contact System (Dunn, 2003; Dunn, 2003). to help its casino salespeople connect to top customers on a more personal basis.
Working from a prioritized list of customer names displayed on a computer screen, the salesperson clicks on a name to view
relevant information about the customer, such as background and preferred casino activities. There's even a printed script that can
be used to guide the conversation. Such a system isn't very helpful, however, to middle or top-level managers, who need systems to
help them carry out their oversight and planning responsibilities. To design marketing programs, for instance, marketing managers
rely on summary information gleaned from a dedicated customer-relationship management system. Let's look at some of the
widely available information systems designed to support people at the operational and upper-management levels.

Operations Support Systems

Operations support systems are generally used by managers at lower levels of the organization--those who run day-to-day business
operations and make fairly routine decisions. They may be transaction processing systems, process control systems, or design and
production systems.

Transaction Processing Systems

Most of an organization's daily activities are recorded and processed by its transaction processing system, which receives input
data and converts them into output--information--intended for various users. Input data are called transactions--events that affect
a business. A financial transaction is an economic event: it affects the firm's assets, is reflected in its accounting statements, and is
measured in monetary terms. Sales of goods to customers, purchases of inventory from suppliers, and salaries paid to employees
are all financial transactions. Everything else is a nonfinancial transaction. The marketing department, for example, might add
some demographic data to its customer database. The information would be processed by the firm's transaction processing system,
but it wouldn't be a financial transaction.

Figure 15.5 illustrates a transaction processing system in which the transaction is a customer's electronic payment of a bill. As you
can see, transaction processing system output can consist not only of documents sent to outside parties (in this case, notification of
payment received), but also of information circulated internally (in the form of reports), as well as of information entered into the
database for updating.

15.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4078
                                                              Figure 15.5 Transaction Processing System

Process Control Systems

Process control refers to the application of technology to monitor and control physical processes. It's useful, for example, in testing
the temperature of food as it's being prepared or gauging the moisture content of paper as it's being manufactured. Typically, it
depends on sensors to collect data periodically. The data are then analyzed by a computer programmed either to make adjustments
or to signal an operator.

Caesars uses process-control technology to keep customers happy. At any given point, some slot machines are down, whether
because a machine broke or ran out of money or somebody hit the jackpot. All these contingencies require immediate attention by a
service attendant. In the past, service personnel strolled around looking for machines in need of fixing. Now, however, a downed
slot machine sends out an "I need attention" signal, which is instantly picked up by a monitoring and paging system called
MessengerPlus and sent to a service attendant.

Design and Production Systems

As we saw in Chapter 11 "Operations Management in Manufacturing and Service Industries", modern companies rely heavily on
technology to design and make products. Computer-aided design (CAD) software, for instance, enables designers to test computer
models digitally before moving new products into the prototype stage. Many companies link CAD systems to the manufacturing
process through computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) systems that not only determine the steps needed to produce components
but also instruct machines to do the necessary work. A CAD/CAM system can be expanded by means of computer-integrated
manufacturing (CIM), which integrates various operations (from design through manufacturing) with functional activities ranging
from order taking to final shipment. The CIM system may also control industrial robots--computer-run machines that can perform
repetitive or dangerous tasks. A CIM system is a common element in a flexible manufacturing system, which makes it possible to
change equipment setups by reprogramming computer-controlled machines that can be adapted to produce a variety of goods. Such
flexibility is particularly valuable to makers of customized products.

This page titled 15.3: Types of Information Systems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4078
15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing

  Learning Objectives

    1. Describe the main systems for sharing information through networked computers.
    2. Define cloud computing and identify its advantages and disadvantages.

Once it's grown beyond just a handful of employees, an organization needs a way of sharing information. Imagine a flower shop
with twenty employees. The person who takes phone orders needs access to the store's customer list, as do the delivery person and
the bookkeeper. Now, the store may have one computer and everyone could share it. It's more likely, however, that there are a
number of computers (several for salespeople, one for delivery, and one for bookkeeping). In this case, everyone needs to be sure
that customer records have been updated on all computers every time that a change is required.

Networks

Likewise, many companies want their personal computers to run their own software and process data independently. But they also
want people to share databases, files, and printers, and they want them to share applications software that performs particular tasks,
including word processing, creating and managing spreadsheets, designing graphical presentations, and producing high-quality
printed documents (desktop publishing).

                                                                Figure 15.7 Local Area Network (LAN)

The solution in both cases is networking--linking computers to one another. The two major types of networks are distinguished
according to geographical coverage:

    A local area network (LAN) links computers that are in close proximity--in the same building or office complex. They can be
    connected by cables or by wireless technology. Your university might have a LAN system that gives you access to resources,
    such as registration information, software packages, and printers. Figure 15.7 illustrates a LAN that's connected to another
    network by means of a gateway--a processor that allows dissimilar networks to communicate with one another.

    Because a wide area network (WAN) covers a relatively large geographical area, its computers are connected by telephone
    lines, wireless technology, or even satellite.

Like the one in Figure 15.7, some networks are client-server systems, which include a number of client machines (the ones used by
employees for data input and retrieval) and a server (which stores the database and the programs used to process the data). Such a
setup saves time and money and circulates more-accurate information.

15.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4079
Cloud Computing

A cloud is a "visible mass of condensed water vapor floating in the atmosphere, typically high above the ground" (Dictionary.com,
2011). The term "cloud computing" means performing computer tasks using services provided over the Internet (Pinola, 2011). So
how do you connect the two definitions? When IT professionals diagrammed computer systems, they used a cloud symbol to
represent the Internet. So when you hear or read that an individual or company is using the "cloud" or technology firms, such as
IBM, Hewlett-Packard, and Salesforce.com, are offering cloud services, just substitute the word "Internet" for "cloud" and things
will make sense.

You might be surprised to learn that you're already using the cloud--that is if you use Facebook (which is very likely--in fact, just
mentioning Facebook here might prompt you to stop studying and check out your friends' pages). How do you know that Facebook
is a cloud application? Remember the trick: just substitute the word "Internet" for "cloud." The Facebook computer application lets
you store information about yourself and share it with others using the Internet.

Business Applications

Think about the functional areas of business you've explored in this text: accounting, finance, human resources, management,
marketing, operations, and product design. Now imagine you're Katrina Lane, senior vice president and chief technology officer
for Caesars Entertainment, who is responsible for the information technology needed to handle multiple tasks in all these functional
areas. You're sitting at your desk when Gary Loveman, chief executive officer of Caesars, walks in and gives you the news.
Caesars just purchased the Planet Hollywood Casino and Resort in Las Vegas and will open up two new casinos in Ohio in 2012.
This is good news for the company, but it means a lot of work for you and your staff.

You wonder whether this might be the time to outsource some of your computing tasks to a technology firm specializing in cloud
computing. You remember an example that really makes sense (Gil, 2011): Right now, whenever Microsoft comes out with a new
version of Word, Caesars has to pay $350 per PC for the latest version. Wouldn't it make more sense to rent the use of the
Microsoft Word program from a cloud vendor for say $5 a month (or $60 a year)? Given that the average time between new
releases of Word is two years, your total cost per PC would be $120 (2  $60)--a savings of about $230 per PC ($350 - $120).
Your employees wouldn't mind; instead of working offline, they would just login to the Internet and work with their online version
using the files that were saved for them. And the members of your IT staff would be pleased that they wouldn't need to install the
new version of Word on all your PCs.

The As-A-Service Group

Companies can contract for various cloud computing services. The Microsoft Word example discussed previously is classified as
software as a service (SaaS). This type of service gives companies access to a large assortment of software packages without
having to invest in hardware or install and maintain software on its own computers. The available software, which includes e-mail
and collaboration systems and customer relationship management programs, can be customized and used by an individual client or
shared among several clients. A second type of service is called infrastructure as a service (IaaS). Instead of providing users with
software, a technology firm offering infrastructure as a service provides hardware, including servers, central processing units,
network equipment, and disk space (Thrive Networks, 2009). The most successful IaaS provider is Amazon Web Services (Best
Price Computers, 2011). The company rents computer power and storage to users who access their data via the Internet. The last as-
a-service model is called platform as a service (PaaS). Those offering platform as a service provide services that enable users to
develop customized web applications. Because they don't have to start from scratch but rather build on existing platforms made
available by the service provider, the web applications can be developed quickly.

Advantages and Disadvantages of Cloud Computing

In making your final decision (as the pretend chief technology officer for Caesars) you should consider these advantages and
disadvantages of cloud computing:

Advantages

Shifting some of Caesars's IT functions to the cloud would produce a number of advantages:

15.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4079
 1. Cost Savings--By "renting" software rather than buying it, Caesars can reduce its costs. The monthly fee to "use" the software
    is generally less than the combined cost of buying, installing, and maintaining the software internally. On the hardware site,
    housing Caesars's data in a service provider's facilities, rather than in-house, reduces the large outlay of cash needed to build
    and maintain data centers.

 2. Speed of Delivery--Purchasing and installing software and data processing equipment can be time consuming. A cloud
    computing service provider could get Caesars's applications up and running in only a few weeks.

 3. Scalable--Caesars is constantly expanding both in the number of casinos it owns and geographically. In this ever-changing
    environment, it's difficult to gauge the level of our technology needs. If we overestimate our requirements, we end up paying
    for technology we don't need. If we underestimate, efficiency goes down, and the experience for our customers diminishes. By
    using cloud computing we are able to have exactly what we need at our disposal at any point in time.

 4. Employees Can Be Mobile--The use of cloud computing will free workers from their desks and allow them to work wherever
    they are. As applications move to the cloud, all that is needed for our employees to connect to their "offices" is the Internet.
    This mobility benefit also makes it easier for employees to collaborate on projects and connect with others in the company.

 5. Information Technology Staff--Although our current staff is extremely qualified and dedicated, finding experienced and
    knowledgeable staff is a continuing problem particularly in the casino industry which suffers from historically high turnover. By
    using cloud computing, we reduce our human resource needs by shifting some of our work to outside vendors who are able to
    hire and keep well qualified individuals (in part because IT professionals enjoy working for technology companies).

Disadvantages

Although the advantages of moving to a cloud environment outnumber the disadvantages, the following disadvantages are cause
for concern:

 1. Disruption in Internet Service--If Caesars moves some of its applications to the cloud, its employees can work on these
    applications on any device and in any location as long as they have an Internet connection. But what if the Internet is
    unavailable because of a disruption? Depending on the length of the disruption, this could create serious problems for Caesars.

 2. Security--Many companies are reluctant to trust cloud service providers with their data because they're afraid it might become
    available to unauthorized individuals or criminals. This is a particular problem for Caesars, which collects and stores sensitive
    client information and has to constantly be on the lookout for fraudulent activity of staff and customers (Eve, 2011).

 3. Service Provider System Crash--Organizations considering moving to the cloud are justifiably concerned about the possibility
    of a computer service crash at their service providers' facilities. It looks like this concern was warranted. In April of 2011,
    Amazon Web Service (a leading cloud services provider) experienced an outage in one of its large web-connected data centers.
    The outage crashed its system and brought down the Web sites of a number of companies, including the location-based social
    network, Foursquare (Lohr, 2011). It took more than thirty-six hours to get all seventy or so of the crashed sites up and running.

Go or No Go?

So, pretend chief technology officer for Caesars, what's your decision: will you get on the cloud or stay on the ground? If you are
curious about what the real chief technology officer did, she took the high road and transferred a number of applications to
Salesforce.com's Web-based Force.com's cloud applications service (Salesforce.com, 2011).

Key Takeaways

    Once an organization has grown to more than a few employees, it needs to network individual computers to allow them to share
    information and technologies.
    A client-server system links a number of client machines (for data input and retrieval) with a server (for storing the database
    and the programs that process data).
    Many companies want personal computers to run their own software and process data independently.
    But they also want individuals to share databases, files, printers, and applications software that perform particular types of
    work (word processing, creating and managing spreadsheets, and so forth).
    There are two systems that can satisfy both needs.

     1. A local area network (LAN) links computers in close proximity, connecting them by cables or by wireless technology.

15.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4079
     2. A wide area network (WAN) covers a relatively large geographical area and connects computers by telephone lines,
        wireless technology, or satellite.

    The term "cloud computing" means performing computer tasks using services provided over the Internet.
    The software as a service (SaaS) category of cloud computing gives companies access to a large assortment of software
    packages without having to invest in hardware or install and maintain software on its own computers.
    A technology firm offering infrastructure as a service provides users with hardware, including servers, central processing
    units, network equipment, and disk space.
    Those offering the platform as a service category of cloud computing provide services that enable users to develop customized
    web applications.
    Shifting IT functions to the cloud produces a number of advantages, including cost savings, speedy delivery of software,
    scalability (you pay for only what you need), employee mobility, and a reduction in information technology staff.
    The following disadvantages of cloud computing are cause for concern: disruption in internet service, security issues, and
    unreliability of service provider systems.

Exercises

 1. What's the difference between a LAN and a WAN? Give an example of the use to which each type of system can be put. Does
    your college maintain either type of computer network?

 2. In what ways could your college benefit from cloud computing? In responding, consider the three types of services offered by
    cloud service providers: software as a service, infrastructure as a service, and platform as a service. What type of security issues
    might your college administrators be concerned with?

This page titled 15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4079
15.5: Data Communications Networks

  Learning Objective

    1. Explain how four networking technologies--the Internet, the World Wide Web, intranets, and extranets--make data
       communication possible.

In addition to using networks for information sharing within the organization, companies use networks to communicate and share
information with those outside the organization. All this is made possible by data communication networks, which transmit digital
data (numeric data, text, graphics, photos, video, and voice) from one computer to another using a variety of wired and wireless
communication channels. Let's take a closer look at the networking technologies that make possible all this electronic
communication--in particular, the Internet (including the World Wide Web), intranets, and extranets.

The Internet and the World Wide Web

Though we often use the terms Internet and World Wide Web interchangeably, they're not the same thing (Webopedia, 2011). The
Internet is an immense global network comprising smaller interconnected networks linking millions of computers around the
world. Originally developed for the U.S. military and later adapted for use in academic and government research, the Internet
experienced rapid growth in the 1990s, when companies called Internet service providers were allowed to link into the Internet
infrastructure in order to connect paying subscribers. Today, Internet service providers, such as CompuServe, America Online
(AOL), MSN, and Comcast, enable us to use the Internet to communicate with others through e-mail, texting, instant messaging,
online conferencing, and so on. These services also connect us with third-party providers of information, including news stories,
stock quotes, and magazine articles.

The World Wide Web (or simply "the Web") is just a portion of the Internet--albeit a large portion. The Web is a subsystem of
computers that can be accessed on the Internet using a special protocol, or language, known as hypertext transfer protocol (HTTP).
What's the difference between the Internet and the Web? According to Tim Berners-Lee (one of the small team of scientists who
developed the concept for the Web in 1989), the Internet is a network of networks composed of cables and computers. You can use
it to send "packets" of information from one computer to another, much like sending a postcard. If the address on the packet is
accurate, it will arrive at the correct destination in much less than a second. Thus, the Internet is a packet-delivery service that
delivers such items as e-mail messages all over the globe. The Web, by contrast, is composed of information--documents, pictures,
sounds, streaming videos, and so on. It's connected not through cables, but rather through hypertext links that allow users to
navigate between resources on the Internet (Griffiths, 2011).

Because it's driven by programs that communicate between computers connected to the Internet, the Web couldn't exist without the
Internet. The Internet, on the other hand, could exist without the Web, but it wouldn't be nearly as useful. The Internet itself is
enormous, but it's difficult to navigate, and it has no pictures, sounds, or streamed videos. They exist on computers connected to
the Web, which also makes it much easier to retrieve information. The creation of Web browsers--software, such as Microsoft's
Internet Explorer and Netscape Navigator, that locates and displays Web pages--opened up the Internet to a vast range of users.
Almost 80 percent of individuals in the United States use the Internet regularly (Internet World Stats, 2011; Kessler, 2011). So,
who's in charge of the Web? No one owns it, but an organization called the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) oversees the
development and maintenance of standards governing the way information is stored, displayed, and retrieved on it (Wikipedia,
2011).

The Technology of the Web

Let's look a little more closely at some of the technologies that enable us to transmit and receive data over the Web. Documents on
the Web are called Web pages, and they're stored on Web sites. Each site is maintained by a Webmaster and opens with a home
page. Each Web page is accessed through a unique address called a uniform resource locator (URL). For example, if you want to
find statistics on basketball star LeBron James, you could type in the URL address www.nba.com/home/playerfile/lebron_james.
The prefix http:// is the protocol name, http://www.nba.com the domain name, playerfile the subdirectory name, and lebron_james
the document name (or Web page). A computer that retrieves Web pages is called a Web server. A search engine is a software

15.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4080
program that scans Web pages containing specified keywords and provides a list of documents containing them. The most popular
search engine is Google; others include Bing, Yahoo!, Ask, and AOL.

                                                                            Figure 15.8 Google
This page titled 15.5: Data Communications Networks is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4080
15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication

  Learning Objective

       Identify and discuss challenges faced by companies engaged in e-commerce.

E-commerce has presented businesses with opportunities undreamt of only a couple of decades ago. But it also has introduced
some unprecedented challenges. For one thing, companies must now earmark more than 5 percent of their annual IT budgets for
protecting themselves against disrupted operations and theft due to computer crime and sabotage (Alexander, 2011). The costs
resulting from cyber crimes--criminal activity done using computers or the Internet--are substantial and increasing at an alarming
rate. A 2010 study of forty-five large U.S. companies revealed that the median cost of cybercrime for the companies in the study
was $3.8 million a year (Ponemon, 2010). And some cybercrimes involve viruses that can spread rapidly from computer to
computer creating enormous damage. It's estimated, for example, that damage to 50,000 personal computers and corporate
networks from the so-called Blaster worm in August 2003 totaled $2 billion, including $1.2 billion paid by Microsoft to correct the
problem (Shukovsky, 2011). The battle against technology crime is near the top of the FBI's list of priorities, behind only the war
against terrorism and espionage (Alexander, 2011). In addition to protecting their own operations from computer crime, companies
engaged in e-commerce must clear another hurdle: they must convince consumers that it's safe to buy things over the Internet--that
credit-card numbers, passwords, and other personal information are protected from theft or misuse. In this section, we'll explore
some of these challenges and describe a number of the efforts being made to meet them.

Data Security

In some ways, life was simpler for businesspeople before computers. Records were produced by hand and stored on paper. As long
as you were careful to limit access to your records (and remembered to keep especially valuable documents in a safe), you faced
little risk of someone altering or destroying your records. In some ways, storing and transmitting data electronically is a little
riskier. Let's look at two data-security risks associated with electronic communication: malicious programs and spoofing.

Malicious Programs

Some people get a kick out of wreaking havoc with computer systems by spreading a variety of destructive programs. Once they're
discovered, they can be combated with antivirus programs that are installed on most computers and that can be updated daily. In the
meantime, unfortunately, they can do a lot of damage, bringing down computers or entire networks by corrupting operating systems
or databases.

Viruses, Worms, and Trojan Horses

The cyber vandal's repertory includes "viruses," "worms," and "Trojan horses." Viruses and worms are particularly dangerous
because they can copy themselves over and over again, eventually using up all available memory and closing down the system.
Trojan horses are viruses that enter your computer by posing as some type of application. Some sneak in by pretending to be virus-
scanning programs designed to rid your computer of viruses. Once inside, they do just the opposite.

Spoofing

It's also possible for unauthorized parties to gain access to restricted company Web sites--usually for the purpose of doing
something illegal. Using a technique called "spoofing," culprits disguise their identities by modifying the address of the computer
from which the scheme has been launched. Typically, the point is to make it look as if an incoming message has originated from an
authorized source. Then, once the site's been accessed, the perpetrator can commit fraud, spy, or destroy data. You could, for
example, spoof a manufacturing firm with a false sales order that seems to have come from a legitimate customer. If the spoof goes
undetected, the manufacturer will incur the costs of producing and delivering products that were never ordered (and will certainly
never be paid for).

Every day, technically savvy thieves (and dishonest employees) steal large sums of money from companies by means of spoofing
or some other computer scheme. It's difficult to estimate the dollar amount because many companies don't even know how much
they've lost.

15.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4081
This page titled 15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.6.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4081
15.7: Careers in Information Management

  Learning Objective

       Identify career opportunities in information management.

The number and variety of opportunities in the IS field have grown substantially as organizations have expanded their use of IT. In
most large organizations, the senior management team includes a chief information officer (CIO) who oversees information and
telecommunications systems. A large organization might also have a chief technology officer who reports to the CIO and oversees
IT planning and implementation.

Most entry-level IS jobs require a business degree with a major in information systems. Many people supplement their IS majors
with minors in computer science or some other business area, such as accounting, finance, marketing, or operations management.

If you're starting out with an IS degree, you may choose to follow either a management path or a technical path. At Kraft Foods,
for example, IS professionals can focus on one of two areas: applications development (a management focus) and information
technology (a technology focus). "Applications development," according to the company itself, "calls for an ability to analyze
[Kraft's] clients' needs and translate them into systems applications. Information technology calls for the ability to convert business
systems specifications into technical specifications and to provide guidance and technical counsel to other Kraft professionals"
(Kraft Foods, 2006). Despite the differences in focus, Kraft encourages IS specialists to develop expertise in both areas. After all,
it's the ability to apply technical knowledge to business situations that makes IS professionals particularly valuable to
organizations. (By the way, if you want a career in casinos, you can major in casino management at a number of business schools.)

Key Takeaways

    The number and variety of opportunities in the information systems (IS) field have grown substantially as companies have
    expanded their use of information technology.
    The senior management team in large organizations includes a chief information officer who oversees information and a chief
    technology officer who oversees IT planning and implementation.
    Most entry-level IS jobs require a business degree with a major in information systems.
    Many supplement their IS majors with computer science or some other business area, such as accounting, finance, marketing, or
    operations management.
    Those entering organizations with IS degrees may choose to follow either a management or a technology path.

Exercise

(AACSB) Reflective Skills
Why is studying IT important to you as a student? How will competency in this area help you get and keep a job in the future?

References

Kraft Foods, "Careers at Kraft: Information Systems," Kraft Foods, http://www.kraftfoods.com/careers/careers/systems.htm
(accessed June 2, 2006).

This page titled 15.7: Careers in Information Management is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.7.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4082
15.8: Cases and Problems

Learning on the Web

Taking Care of Your Cyber Health
It seems that some people have nothing better to do than wreak havoc by spreading computer viruses, and as a computer user, you
should know how to protect yourself from malicious tampering. One place to start is by reading the article "How Computer Viruses
Work," by Marshall Brain, which you can access by going to the How Stuff Works Web site
(http://computer.howstuffworks.com/virus.htm). After reading the article, answer the following questions:

 1. Why do people create viruses?
 2. What can you do to protect yourself against viruses?

Career Opportunities

Could You Manage a Job in IT or IS?

Do you have an aptitude for dealing with IT? Would you enjoy analyzing the information needs of an organization? Are you
interested in directing a company's Internet operations or overseeing network security? If you answered yes to any of these
questions, then a career in IT and IS might be for you. Go to the U.S. Department of Labor Web site
(www.bls.gov/oco/ocos258.htm) and learn more about the nature of the work, qualifications, and job outlook in IT and IS
management. Bearing in mind that many people who enter the IT field attain middle-management positions, look for answers to the
following questions:

 1. What kinds of jobs do IT managers perform?
 2. What educational background, work experience, and skills are needed for positions in IT management?
 3. What's the current job outlook for IS and IT managers? What factors drive employment opportunities?
 4. What's the median annual income of a mid-level IT manager?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

Campus Commando or Common Criminal?
Do you want to be popular (or at least more prominent) on campus? You could set up a Web site that lets fellow students share
music files over the campus network. All you have to do is seed the site with some of your own downloaded music and let the
swapping begin. That's exactly what Daniel Peng did when he was a sophomore at Princeton. It was a good idea, except for one
small hitch: it was illegal, and he got caught. Unimpressed with Peng's technological ingenuity, the Recording Industry Association
of America (RIAA) sued him, and he was forced to settle for $15,000. Instead of delivering music, Peng's Web site now asks
visitors to send money to help defray the $15,000 and another $8,000 in legal costs.

To learn more about the case, read these articles from the Daily Princetonian: "Peng, RIAA Settle Infringement Case"
(www.dailyprincetonian.com/2003/05/02/8154/), and "Peng '05 Sued by Recording Industry for `Wake' Site"
(www.dailyprincetonian.com/2003/04/04/7791).

After researching the topic, answer the following questions:

 1. The practice of sharing commercial music files is illegal. Do you think that it's also unethical? Why, or why not?
 2. What steps to curb the practice are being taken by the music industry? By college administrators? By the government? Do you

    approve of these steps? Have they been effective?
 3. What, ultimately, do you see as the solution to the problem?

Source: Josh Brodie, "Peng, RIAA Settle Infringement Case," The Daily Princetonian,
www.dailyprincetonian.com/2003/05/02/8154/ (accessed November 14, 2011); Zachary Goldfarb and Josh Brodie, "Peng '05 Sued
by Recording Industry for `Wake' Site," The Daily Princetonianwww.dailyprincetonian.com/2003/04/04/7791/ (accessed
November 14, 2011).

15.8.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4083
Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

CampusCupid.com

It's no secret that college can be fun. For one thing, you get to hang around with a bunch of people your own age. Occasionally,
you want to spend time with just one special someone, but finding that special person on a busy campus can take some of the fun
out of matriculating. Fortunately, you're in the same love boat with a lot of other people, so one possible solution--one that meshes
nicely with your desire to go into business--is to start an online dating service that caters to your school. Inasmuch as online dating
is nothing new, you can do some preliminary research. For example, go to the Internetnews Web site
(http://www.internetnews.com/ec-news/article.php/2228891/Online+Personals+Big+Profits+Intense+Competition.htm) and read
the article "Online Personals: Big Profits, Intense Competition."

Next, you and several of your classmates should work as a team to create a business model for an online dating service at your
school. After working out the details, submit a group report that covers the following issues:

 1. Services. How will you earn revenues? What services will you offer? How will you price these services? What forms of
    payment will you accept? Will you sell ads? If so, what kinds?

 2. Appearance. What will your site look like? Will it have graphics? Sound? Video? What will your domain name be? What
    information will you collect from customers? What information will you provide to visitors?

 3. Operations. What criteria will you use to match customers? How will your customers interface with the Web site? How will
    they connect with each other? Will you design your own software or buy or lease it from vendors? Before you answer, go to
    these vendors' Web sites and check out their dating software:

    WebDate (www.webscribble.com/products/...te/index.shtml)

PG Dating (http://www.datingpro.com/dating)

4. Attracting Customers. How will you attract customers to the site? How will you monitor and analyze site activity?
5. Security. How will you guarantee confidentiality? How will you ensure that your site is secure? How will you limit access to
students at your school?
6. Opportunities and Challenges. What opportunities do e-businesses offer? What challenges do they create? How would your
business model change if you decided to run it as a traditional business rather than as an e-business?

The Global View (AACSB)

"Hong Kong--Traditional Chinese"

Hewlett-Packard (HP) provides technology solutions to individuals, businesses, and institutions around the world. It generates
annual revenues of $80 billion from the sale of IT products, including computers, printers, copiers, digital photography, and
software. Anyone in the United States who wants to buy an HP product, get technical support, download software, learn about the
company, or apply for a job can simply go to the HP Web site. But what if you live in Hong Kong? How would you get answers to
your questions? You'd do the same thing as people in this country do--go to HP's Web site.

Try to imagine, however, the complex process of developing and maintaining a Web site that serves the needs of customers in more
than seventy countries. To get a better idea, go to the HP Web site (http://www.hp.com). Start by looking at HP's line of notebooks
and checking its prices. Then, review the company information (click on "About HP" in the bottom right) that's posted on the site,
and, finally, look for a job--it's good practice (click on "Jobs" in the bottom right).

Now pretend that you live in Hong Kong and repeat the process. Start by going to the same HP Web site (http://www.hp.com).
Click on the United States (next to U.S. flag in the bottom left) and then Asia and Oceania. If you can read Chinese, click on "Hong
Kong--Traditional Chinese." Otherwise, click on "Hong Kong--English." Then, answer the following questions:

 1. How easy was it to navigate the site and to switch back and forth between the U.S. and Hong Kong sections of the site?
 2. Identify at least five differences between the two sections.
 3. Does HP's Web site meet the needs of customers in both the United States and Hong Kong? Why, or why not? How could it be

    improved?

15.8.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4083
This page titled 15.8: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

15.8.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4083
CHAPTER OVERVIEW

16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business

  16.1: Law and the Legal System
  16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
  16.3: Negligence Torts
  16.4: Product Liability
  16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
  16.6: Cases and Problems
This page titled 16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

                                                                                              1
16.1: Law and the Legal System

  Learning Objectives

       Define law and explain how it differs from a legal system.
       Explain the concept of the rule of law and discuss the role of flexibility and fairness in a legal system governed by the rule
       of law.
       Discuss the primary functions of law in the United States.

In the eighteenth century, when the legal and regulatory environment of everything was a lot simpler than it is today, the great Irish
satirist Jonathan Swift likened laws to cobwebs because they seem to stretch in every direction to catch innocent flies while failing
utterly to stop wasps and other creatures responsible for much greater crimes against human comfort. Like George McGovern,
many people no doubt find this comparison at least as true today as it was in Swift's time. After all, in order to be law-abiding
innkeepers (or just plain citizens), we must negotiate a vast web of constitutional law, federal law, regulatory law, and state and
local law; criminal law, civil law, and common law; substantive law and procedural law; public law and private law; and business
law, which includes contract law, product-liability law, patent law, consumer-protection law, environmental law, employment and
labor law, insurance law, cyberlaw, agency law, and a host of other forms of law. In fact, being a truly law-abiding citizen is
virtually out of the question. According to one estimate, the average American driver deserves ten speeding tickets a day. Other
underpenalized violations range from stealing cable TV and scalping tickets to exhibitionism and illegal fishing and hunting
(Sexton, 2008).

A System of Rules and Principles

Perhaps, however, we should examine the issue of the laws in our lives from a more positive perspective. As a veteran lawmaker,
for example, George McGovern certainly appreciates the value of law, which is basically a body of enforceable rules and principles
of conduct. Clearly, his criticisms are directed not at the existence of laws, but rather at certain facets of administrative and
statutory law--in particular, the way specific statutes can be applied to the activities of a small business owner in the state of
Connecticut. What he calls for, in effect, is a little more flexibility in the enforcement of certain rules and principles.

In a very basic--and very important--sense, McGovern's point about legal obstacles to daily business-related activities is well
taken. In the United States, as in all complex societies, we've entrusted the responsibility for adopting and enforcing legal rules and
principles to government. In so doing, we've approved the formation of a legal system--the institutions and processes that actually
enforce our rules and principles (Roszkowski, 2002). That system, like any other, works because its key elements are stable and
interact in reliable ways. When it's applied systematically, in other words, law isn't always as flexible as it should be in doing what
it's supposed to do--namely, preserving peace and stability so that members of society can pursue their various social and
economic activities.

Flexibility

At the same time, however, we should point out that, on a certain level, flexibility is a hallmark of law in the United States. Why do
we say "on a certain level"? For one thing, it apparently isn't sufficiently flexible on the level on which George McGovern was
obliged to deal with it. In all probability, a small hotel like the Stratford Inn doesn't need to meet the same fire regulations as a
hotel with 1,500 guest rooms, 100,000 square feet of meeting space, three four-star restaurants, and a five-story parking garage.
Laws, however, can't be written to take care of each and every contingency that arises during the course of life in the real world--
the one in which millions of people and organizations are constantly pursuing different social and economic activities. When it
comes to law, therefore, we settle for general "rules and principles," and the key to flexibility in a legal system is flexibility on the
level at which rules and principles are applied. In the United States, the legal system evolves to respond to changes in social norms
and commercial activities, and through the court system, it's prepared to address each issue or dispute on its own terms (Cheesman,
2006).

16.1.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4084
Fairness

There are, of course, abuses and mistakes by judges and juries, and procedural mishaps occasionally tip the scales of justice in the
wrong direction. Sometimes--as in George McGovern's case--innocent parties are forced to bear the cost of defending themselves
in court. On the whole, however, the U.S. legal system is remarkably fair.

The Rule of Law: Predictability and Fairness. How do we know what's legally "fair" and what isn't? (Price & Krug, 2000)
Granted, depending on who's enforcing the rules of the game, just about anything can be "fair" and just about anything can be
"foul." Legal tradition in the United States, however, rests on the principle of the rule of law--the principle by which government
legitimately exercises its authority only in accordance with publicly declared laws that are adopted and enforced according to
established procedure. All members of society know what the laws are and the conditions under which they should be applied.
Under the rule of law, then, the legal system establishes the rules of the game, adopting and enforcing them in a reasonably
predictable manner.

Unfortunately, the principle of predictability doesn't in itself guarantee that a legal system is committed to fairness. If, for example,
the law allows only certain people to vote--say, property owners--it extends a guarantee of fairness in the electoral process only to
property owners. People who don't own property would have a good reason to complain of social injustice in electoral matters, but
only property owners could claim a right to fairness in the courts. Even under the rule of law, therefore, a legal system can achieve
a reasonable degree of fairness in any given social or economic activity only if it also guarantees equal treatment of all members of
society. Admittedly, the U.S. legal system hasn't always been successful in guaranteeing equal treatment under the law--the
original thirteen states, for example, granted the vote only to white male property owners, and women couldn't vote in every state
until 1920. Since 1868, however, U.S. courts have used the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution to check a range of potentially discriminatory and unfair actions by governments at every level.

Functions of Law

Laws such as the Equal Protection Clause are designed to serve a general function--namely, the promotion of social justice. This is
just one of several primary functions served by law in the United States (Cheesman, 2006):

    Keeping the peace (e.g., designating some activities as crimes--violations of statutes for which the law imposes punishment)
    Shaping moral standards (e.g., laws discouraging such activities as drug or alcohol abuse)
    Promoting social justice (e.g., laws prohibiting discrimination in such areas as voting and employment)
    Maintaining the status quo (e.g., laws preventing the forcible overthrow of the government)
    Facilitating orderly change (e.g., laws and practices requiring public scrutiny of proposed statutes)
    Facilitating planning (e.g., laws that enable businesses to evaluate the risks that they may be taking in a commercial venture)
    Providing a basis for compromise (e.g., laws and practices making it possible to resolve disputes without taking them to trial)
    Maximizing individual freedom (e.g., laws ensuring such rights as freedom of speech and religion)

Key Takeaways

    Law is a body of enforceable rules and principles of conduct. When we entrust the responsibility for adopting and enforcing
    legal rules and principles to government, we approve the formation of a legal system--the institutions and processes that
    actually enforce our laws. That system works because its key elements are stable and interact in reliable ways.
    U.S. legal tradition rests on the principle of the rule of law--the principle by which government legitimately exercises its
    authority only in accordance with publicly declared laws that are adopted and enforced according to established procedure.
    Under the rule of law, the legal system adopts and enforces laws in a reasonably predictable manner. The principle of
    predictability, however, doesn't in itself guarantee that a legal system is fair. A legal system can achieve a reasonable degree of
    fairness only if it also guarantees equal treatment of all members of society.
    When it's applied systematically, law isn't always as flexible as it should be in preserving the peace and stability that members
    of society need to pursue their various social and economic activities. But because laws can't be written to cover each and every
    contingency, we settle for general "rules and principles." The key to flexibility in a legal system is flexibility in applying legal
    rules and principles.

U.S. law serves several primary functions:

    Keeping the peace

16.1.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4084
    Shaping moral standards
    Promoting social justice
    Maintaining the status quo
    Facilitating orderly change
    Facilitating planning
    Providing a basis for compromise
    Maximizing individual freedom

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
Individuals in the United States are guaranteed equal treatment under the law. Do you believe that all individuals do in fact receive
equal treatment? Support your answer with examples.

This page titled 16.1: Law and the Legal System is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.1.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4084
16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law

  Learning Objectives

       Distinguish between criminal law and civil law, and understand the roles of plaintiffs and defendants in both criminal and
       civil cases.
       Define a tort, explain tort law, and discuss an intentional tort.

In the case of George McGovern and his Stratford Inn, we saw what sort of legal entanglements could discourage even a veteran
lawmaker from pursuing a modest dream of business ownership. What about you? How easily discouraged would you be? Put
yourself in the following scenario, which could happen to anybody:

       When you were in high school, you worked part time and over the summers for your father, a house painter. Now that you're
       in college, you've decided to take advantage of that experience to earn some money during your summer vacation. You set
       yourself up as a house-painting business and hire your college roommate to help you out. One fine summer day, the two of
       you are putting a coat of Misty Meadow acrylic latex on the exterior of a two-story Colonial. You're working on the ground
       floor around the door of the house while your roommate is working from scaffolding over the garage. Looking up, you notice
       that, despite several warnings, your roommate has placed his can of paint at his feet rather than fixed it to the ladder bracing
       the platform. You're about to say something yet one more time, but it's too late: He accidentally kicks the bucket (so to
       speak), which bounces off the homeowner's red sports car, denting the hood and splattering it with Misty Meadow. As luck
       would have it, the whole episode is witnessed by the homeowner's neighbor, who approaches the scene of the disaster just as
       your roommate has climbed down from the scaffold. "Man, you must be dumber than a bag of hammers," says the neighbor
       to your roommate, who's in no mood for unsolicited opinions, and before you know what's happening, he breaks the
       neighbor's nose with a single well-placed punch.

       The homeowner sues you and your roommate for negligence, and the neighbor sues you and your roommate for assault and
       battery(Moran, 2008).

Clearly, being an employer--even of just one person--isn't nearly as simple as you thought it would be. What should you have
known about the basics of employment law in the state where you intended to paint houses? What should you have known about
tort law? What about tax law? If you have to pay damages as a result of the homeowner's negligence claim, can you at least deduct
them as business expenses?

Welcome to the legal environment of business--the place where business interacts with the legal system. Besides the fact that these
interactions are usually quite complicated, what valuable lessons should you learn from your experience once your case has been
adjudicated (resolved in court)? You probably won't be surprised to learn that your roommate is liable for negligence in kicking
over the paint bucket, but you may be dismayed to learn that you are, too. When it comes to the claim of assault and battery, your
roommate is also liable for that, but you may be protected from liability. As for the damages that you'll probably have to pay in
order to settle the homeowner's negligence suit, you'll be pleased to learn that you can indeed write them off as "ordinary"
business expenses (unless they're paid by your insurance company).

As we work our way through this chapter, we'll look a little more closely at the types of law involved in your case, but we'll start
by observing that, in at least one respect, your roommate's predicament can be more instructive than yours. That's because assault
and battery violates statutes established by two different types of law--criminal and civil.

Criminal Law

It's a crime to make unauthorized and harmful physical contact with another person (battery). In fact, it's a crime even to threaten
such contact (assault). Criminal law prohibits and punishes wrongful conduct, such as assault and battery, murder, robbery,
extortion, and fraud. In criminal cases, the plaintiff--the party filing the complaint--is usually a government body acting as a
representative of society. The defendant--the party charged in the complaint--may be an individual (such as your roommate) or an
organization (such as a business). Criminal punishment includes fines, imprisonment, or both.

16.2.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4085
Civil Law

Assault and battery may also be a matter of civil law--law governing disputes between private parties (again, individuals or
organizations). In civil cases, the plaintiff sues the defendant to obtain compensation for some wrong that the defendant has
allegedly done the plaintiff. Thus your roommate may be sued for monetary damages by the homeowner's neighbor, with whom he
made unauthorized and harmful physical contact.

Tort Law

Complaints of assault and battery fall under a specific type of civil law called tort law. A tort is a civil wrong--an injury done to
someone's person or property. The punishment in tort cases is the monetary compensation that the court orders the defendant to pay
the plaintiff.

Intentional Torts

In categorizing the offense for which your roommate may be sued, we can get even more specific: assault and battery is usually an
intentional tort--an intentional act that poses harm to the plaintiff. Note that intent here refers to the act (directing a blow at
another person), not to the harm caused (the broken nose suffered as a result of the blow).

Intentional torts may also pose harm to a party's property or economic interests (Kubasek, et. al., 2009):

    Intentional torts against property may take three forms: (1) entering another person's land or placing an object on another
    person's land without the owner's permission; (2) interfering with another person's use or enjoyment of personal property; or
    (3) permanently removing property from the rightful owner's possession.
    Intentional torts against economic interests are the most common torts when it comes to disputes in business. The three most
    important forms are (1) making a false statement of material fact about a business product; (2) enticing someone to breach a
    valid contract; and (3) going into business for the sole purpose of taking business from another concern (i.e., not for the purpose
    of making a profit).

On a more personal note, you may want to avoid defamation--communicating to a third party information that's harmful to
someone's reputation. If you put the information in some permanent form (e.g., write it or present it on TV or on the Internet), it's
called libel; if you deliver it orally, it's called slander. You can also be held liable for intentional infliction of emotional distress if
you direct outrageous conduct at someone who's likely to suffer extreme emotional pain as a result (Kubasek, et. al., 2009).

Table 16.1 "Categories of Intentional Torts" provides a more complete list of intentional torts, along with the types of
compensatory damages normally awarded in each type of case. As we'll see in the following sections of this chapter, intentional
torts comprise just one category of torts. The others are negligence torts and strict liability torts.

                                                               Table 1:.1 Categories of Intentional Torts

16.2.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4085
Category                    Type                             Definition                        Compensatory Damages
Against persons             Assault                                                            Usually Awarded
Against property            Battery
Against economic interests  Defamation                       Threatening immediate harm or     For medical bills, lost wages,
                                                             offensive contact                 and pain and suffering
                            Invasion of privacy
                                                             Making unauthorized harmful
                            False imprisonment               or offensive contact with
                                                             another person
                            Intentional infliction of
                            emotional distress               Communicating to a third party    For measurable financial losses
                                                             information that's harmful to
                            Trespass to realty               someone's reputation

                            Trespass to personalty           Violating someone's right to      For resulting economic loss or
                            Conversion                       live his or her life without      pain and suffering
                            Disparagement                    unwarranted or undesired
                            Intentional interference with a  publicity
                            contract
                            Unfair competition               Restraining or confining a        For treatment of physical
                                                             person against his or her will    injuries and lost time at work
                            Misappropriation                 and without justification

                                                             Engaging in outrageous            For treatment of physical illness
                                                             conduct that's likely to cause    resulting from emotional stress
                                                             extreme emotional distress to
                                                             the party toward whom the
                                                             conduct is directed

                                                             Entering another person's land    For harm caused to property and
                                                             or placing an object on another   losses suffered by rightful
                                                             person's land without the         owner
                                                             owner's permission

                                                             Interfering with another          For harm to property
                                                             person's use or enjoyment of
                                                             personal property

                                                             Permanently removing property     For full value of converted item
                                                             from the rightful owner's
                                                             possession

                                                             Making a false statement of       For actual economic loss
                                                             material fact about a business
                                                             product

                                                             Enticing someone to breach a      For loss of expected benefits
                                                             valid contract                    from contract

                                                             Going into business for the sole  For lost profits
                                                             purpose of taking business from
                                                             another concern

                                                             Using an unsolicited idea for a   For economic losses
                                                             product or marketing method
                                                             without compensating the
                                                             originator of the idea

                            16.2.3                                                             https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4085
Source: Adapted from Nancy A. Kubasek, Bartley A. Brennan, and M. Neil Browne, The Legal Environment of Business: A Critical
Thinking Approach, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2009), 348.

As we indicated, your roommate may have committed assault and battery in violation of both criminal and civil statutes.
Consequently, he may be in double trouble: not only may he be sued for a civil offense by the homeowner's neighbor, but he may
also be prosecuted for a criminal offense by the proper authority in the state where the incident took place. It's also conceivable that
he may be sued but not prosecuted, or vice versa. Everything is up to the discretion of the complaining parties--the homeowner's
neighbor in the civil case and the prosecutor's office in the criminal case.

Why might one party decide to pursue a case while the other decides not to? A key factor might be the difference in the burden of
proof placed on each potential plaintiff. Liability in civil cases may be established by a preponderance of the evidence--the weight
of evidence necessary for a judge or jury to decide in favor of the plaintiff (or the defendant). Guilt in criminal cases, however,
must be established by proof beyond a reasonable doubt--doubt based on reason and common sense after careful, deliberate
consideration of all the pertinent evidence. Criminal guilt thus carries a tougher standard of proof than civil liability, and it's
conceivable that even though the plaintiff in the civil case believes that he can win by a preponderance of the evidence, the
prosecutor may feel that she can't prove criminal guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.

Finally, note that your roommate would be more likely to face criminal prosecution if he had committed assault and battery with
criminal intent--with the intent, say, to kill or rob the homeowner's neighbor or to intimidate him from testifying about the
accident with the paint bucket. In that case, in most jurisdictions, his action would be not only a crime but a felony--a serious or
"inherently evil" crime punishable by imprisonment. Otherwise, if he's charged with criminal wrongdoing at all, it will probably be
for a misdemeanor--a crime that's not "inherently evil" but that is nevertheless prohibited by society (Cheesman, 2006).

Table 16.2 "Civil versus Criminal Law" summarizes some of the key differences in the application of criminal and civil law.

                         Table 1:.2 Civil versus Criminal Law

                         Civil Law                                 Criminal Law

Parties                  Individual or corporate plaintiff vs.     Local, state, or federal prosecutor vs.
                         individual or corporate defendant         individual or corporate defendant

Purpose                  Compensation or deterrence                Punishment/deterrence/rehabilitation

Burden of proof          Preponderance of the evidence             Beyond a reasonable doubt

Trial by jury/jury vote  Yes (in most cases)/specific number of    Yes/unanimous vote for conviction of
                         votes for judgment in favor of plaintiff  defendant

Sanctions/penalties      Monetary damages/equitable remedies       Probation/fine/imprisonment/capital
                         (e.g., injunction, specific performance)  punishment

Source: Adapted from Henry R. Cheesman, Contemporary Business and Online Commerce Law: Legal, Internet, Ethical, and
Global Environments, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2006), 127.

Key Takeaways

    The legal environment of business is the area in which business interacts with the legal system.
    Criminal law prohibits and punishes wrongful conduct. The plaintiff--the party filing the complaint--is usually a government
    body acting as a representative of society. The defendant--the party charged in the complaint--may be an individual or an
    organization. Criminal punishment includes fines, imprisonment, or both. Civil law refers to law governing disputes between
    private parties. In civil cases, the plaintiff sues the defendant to obtain compensation for some wrong that the defendant has
    allegedly done the plaintiff.
    Tort law covers torts, or civil wrongs--injuries done to someone's person or property. The punishment in tort cases is the
    monetary compensation that the court orders the defendant to pay the plaintiff.
    An intentional tort is an intentional act that poses harm to the plaintiff. Intentional torts may be committed against a person, a
    person's property, or a person's economic interests. In addition to intentional torts, the law recognizes negligence torts and strict

                                    16.2.4                                       https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4085
    liability torts.
    Liability in civil cases may be established by a preponderance of the evidence--the weight of evidence necessary for a judge or
    jury to decide in favor of the plaintiff (or the defendant). Guilt in criminal cases must be established by proof beyond a
    reasonable doubt--doubt based on reason and common sense after careful, deliberate consideration of all the pertinent
    evidence.
    A crime may be a felony--a serious or "inherently evil" crime punishable by imprisonment--or a misdemeanor--a crime
    that's not "inherently evil" but that is nevertheless prohibited by society.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis
You own a moving company. One of your workers let go of a chair he was carrying up a staircase. Unfortunately, a tenant of the
building was walking up the stairs at the time and was seriously hurt in the incident. Can your company be sued? Would the case
fall under criminal or civil law?

Now, let's say that your worker was going up the stairs with a chair when the tenant yelled at him for blocking her way. In anger,
your worker threw the chair at her and cases serious harm. What actions can be taken against your employee?

This page titled 16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.2.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4085
16.3: Negligence Torts

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define a negligence tort and discuss the elements of a negligence claim.
    2. Explain a contract and discuss the requirements of an enforceable contract.
    3. Explain the concepts of respondeat superior and scope of employment and discuss their roles in an employment contract.

We can now get back to your role in this case, though doing so means first taking a closer look at further aspects of your
roommate's role. You and your roommate are being sued by the homeowner for a different type of tort--a negligence tort, which
results not from intentional wrongdoing, but from carelessness. When he placed that can of paint at his feet, where he might easily
dislodge it as he moved around the platform, your roommate allowed his conduct to fall below a certain standard of care--namely,
the degree of care necessary to protect others from an unreasonable likelihood of harm.

Elements of a Negligence Claim

To prove that the act in question was negligent, the homeowner must demonstrate the four elements of a negligence claim
(Cheesman, 2006):

 1. That the defendant (your roommate and, ultimately, you) owed a duty of care to the plaintiff (the homeowner). Duty of care
    refers simply to the basic obligation that one person owes another--the duty not to cause harm or an unreasonable risk of harm.

 2. That the defendant breached his duty of care. Once it has been determined that the defendant owed a duty of care, the court will
    ask whether he did indeed fail to perform that duty. Did he, in other words, fail to act as a reasonable person would act? (In your
    roommate's case, by the way, it's a question of acting as a reasonable professional would act.)

 3. That the defendant's breach of duty of care caused injury to the plaintiff or the plaintiff's property. If the bucket of paint had
    fallen on his own car, your roommate's carelessness wouldn't have been actionable--wouldn't have provided cause for legal
    action--because the plaintiff (the homeowner) would have suffered no injury to person or property. What if the paint bucket had
    hit and shattered the homeowner's big toe, thus putting an end to his career as a professional soccer player? In that case, you
    and your roommate would be looking at much higher damages. As it stands, the homeowner can seek compensation only to
    cover the damage to his car.

 4. That the defendant's action did in fact cause the injury in question. There must be a direct cause-and-effect relationship between
    the defendant's action and the plaintiff's injury. In law, this relationship is called a cause in fact or actual cause. For example,
    what if the homeowner had taken one look at his dented, paint-spattered car and collapsed from a heart attack? Would your
    roommate be liable for this injury to the plaintiff's person? Possibly, though probably not. Most actions of any kind set in
    motion a series of consequent actions, and the court must decide the point beyond which a defendant is no longer liable for
    these actions. The last point at which the defendant is liable for negligence is called a proximate cause or legal cause. The
    standard for determining proximate cause is generally foreseeability. Your roommate couldn't reasonably foresee the possibility
    that the owner of the car beneath his platform might have a heart attack as a result of some mishap with his paint bucket. Thus
    he probably wouldn't be held liable for this particular injury to the plaintiff's person.

Negligence and Employer Liability

At this point, you yourself may still want to ask an important question: "Why me?" Why should you be held liable for negligence?
Undoubtedly you owed your client (the homeowner) a duty of care, but you personally did nothing to breach that duty. And if you
didn't breach any duty of care, how could you have been the cause, either actual or proximate, of any injury suffered by your
client? Where does he get off suing you for negligence?

The Law of Contracts

To answer these questions, we must enter an extremely important area of civil law--the law of contracts. A contract is an exchange
of promises or an exchange of a promise for an act, and because it involves an exchange, it obviously involves at least two parties.
As you can see in Figure 16.1, an offeror makes an offer to enter into a contract with an offeree. The offeror offers to do something

16.3.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4086
in particular (or to refrain from doing something in particular), and if the offeree accepts this offer, a contract is created. As you can
also see, both offer and acceptance must meet certain conditions.

                                                                     Figure 16.1 Parties to a Contract

A contract is legally enforceable: if one party fails to do what he or she has promised to do, the other can ask the courts to enforce
the agreement or award damages for injury sustained because the contract has been breached--because a promise made under the
contract hasn't been kept or an act hasn't been performed. A contract, however, can be enforced only if it meets four requirements
(Cheesman, 2006):

    Agreement. The parties must have reached a mutual agreement. The offeror must have made an offer, and the offeree must have
    replied with an acceptance.
    Consideration. Each promise must be made in return for the performance of a legally sufficient act or promise. If one party isn't
    required to exchange something of legal value (e.g., money, property, a service), an agreement lacks sufficient consideration.
    Contractual capacity. Both parties must possess the full legal capacity to assume contractual duties. Limitations to full capacity
    include mental illness and such diminished states as intoxication (Roszkowski, 2002).
    Lawful object. The purpose of the contract must be legal. A contract to commit an unlawful act or to violate public policy is void
    (without legal force).

Employment Contracts

Here's where you come in: an employment relationship like the one that you had with your roommate is a contract. Under this
contract, both parties have certain duties (you're obligated to compensate your roommate, for instance, and he's obligated to
perform his assigned tasks in good faith). The law assumes that, when performing his employment duties, your employee is under
your control--that you control the time, place, and method of the work (Moran, 2008). This is a key concept in your case.

Respondeat Superior

U.S. law governing employer-employee contracts derives, in part, from English common law of the seventeenth century, which
established the doctrine known as respondeat superior--"Let the master answer [for the servant's actions]." This principle held that
when a servant was performing a task for a master, the master was liable for any damage that the servant might do (a practical
consideration, given that servants were rarely in any position to make financial restitution for even minor damages) (Kubasek et.
al., 2009; Law Library, 2008). Much the same principle exists in contemporary U.S. employment law, which extends it to include
the "servant's" violations of tort law. Your client--the homeowner--has thus filed a respondeat superior claim of negligence
against you as your roommate's employer.

Scope of Employment

In judging your responsibility for the damages done to the homeowner's car by your employee, the court will apply a standard
known as scope of employment: an employee's actions fall within the scope of his employment under two conditions: (1) if they are
performed in order to fulfill contractual duties owed to his employer and (2) if the employer is (or could be) in some control,
directly or indirectly, over the employee's actions (Law Library, 2008).

If you don't find much support in these principles for the idea that your roommate was negligent but you weren't, that's because
there isn't much. Your roommate was in fact your employee; he was clearly performing contractual duties when he caused the
accident, and as his employer, you were, directly or indirectly, in control of his activities. You may argue that the contract with your
roommate isn't binding because it was never put in writing, but that's irrelevant because employment contracts don't have to be in

16.3.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4086
writing (Moran, 2008). You could remind the court that you repeatedly told your employee to put his paint bucket in a safer place,
but this argument won't carry much weight: in general, courts consider an employee's forbidden acts to be within the scope of his
employment (Law Library, 2008).

On the other hand, the same principle protects you from liability in the assault-and-battery case against your roommate. The court
will probably find that his aggressive response to the neighbor's comment wasn't related to the business at hand or committed
within the scope of his employment; in responding to the neighbor's insult to his intelligence, he was acting independently of his
employment contract with you.

Finally, now that we've taken a fairly detailed look at some of the ways in which the law works to make business relationships as
predictable as possible, let's sum up this section by reminding ourselves that the U.S. legal system is also flexible. In its efforts to
resolve your case, let's say that the court assesses the issues as follows:

       The damage to the homeowner's car amounts to $3,000. He can't recover anything from your roommate, who owns virtually
       nothing but his personal library of books on medieval theology. Nor can he recover anything from your business-liability
       insurer because you never thought your business would need any insurance (and couldn't afford it anyway). So that leaves
       you: can the homeowner recover damages from you personally? Legally, yes: although you didn't go through the simple
       formalities of creating a sole proprietorship (see Chapter 4 "Selecting a Form of Business Ownership"), you are nevertheless
       liable for the contracts and torts of your business. On the other hand, you're not worth much more than your roommate, at
       least when it comes to financial assets. You have a six-year-old stereo system, a seven-year-old panel truck, and about $200
       in a savings account--what's left after you purchased the two ladders and the platform that you used as scaffolding. The
       court could order you to pay the $3,000 out of future earnings but it doesn't have to. After all, the homeowner knew that you
       had no business-liability insurance but hired you anyway because he was trying to save money on the cost of painting his
       house. Moreover, he doesn't have to pay the $3,000 out of his own pocket because his personal-property insurance will cover
       the damage to his car.

You should probably consider yourself lucky. Had your case gone to court, it would have been subject to the rules of civil
procedure outlined in Figure 16.2 . As you might suspect, civil suits are time-consuming. Research shows that litigation takes an
average of 24.2 months from the time a complaint is filed until a judgment is rendered (25.6 months if you're involved in a tort
lawsuit).

16.3.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4086
                                                                  Figure 16.2 Stages in a Civil Lawsuit

And of course it's expensive. Let's say that you have a $40,000-a-year job and decide to file a civil suit. Your lawyer will charge
you between $200 and $350 an hour. At that rate, he or she will consume your monthly net income of about $1,800 in nine hours'
worth of work. But what about your jury award? Won't that more than compensate you for your legal fees? It depends, but bear in
mind that, according to one study, the median award in civil cases is $33,000 (Judicial Council of California, 2008) (Cohen &
Smith, 2004). And you could lose.

Key Takeaways

A negligence tort results from carelessness. In order to prove a negligence claim, a plaintiff must demonstrate four elements:

16.3.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4086
 1. That the defendant owed a duty of care to the plaintiff. Duty of care refers to the basic obligation not to cause harm or an
    unreasonable risk of harm.

 2. That the defendant breached his duty of care. Did the defendant fail to act as a reasonable person would act?
 3. That the defendant's breach of duty of care caused injury to the plaintiff or the plaintiff's property.
 4. That the defendant's action did in fact cause the injury in question. The direct cause-and-effect relationship between the

    defendant's action and the plaintiff's injury is called a cause in fact or actual cause. The point beyond which a defendant is no
    longer liable for the actions set in motion by his or her carelessness is called a proximate cause or legal cause. The standard for
    determining proximate cause is generally foreseeability: could the defendant reasonably foresee the possibility of the injury
    suffered by the plaintiff?

    A contract is an exchange of promises or an exchange of a promise for an act. An offeror makes an offer to enter into a contract
    with an offeree--that is, to do something in particular (or to refrain from doing something in particular). If the offeree accepts
    this offer, a contract is created.
    A contract is legally enforceable: if one party fails to do what he or she has promised to do, the other can ask the courts to
    enforce the agreement or award damages for injury sustained because the contract has been breached. An enforceable contract
    must meet four requirements:

     1. Agreement. The parties must have reached a mutual agreement.
     2. Consideration. Each promise must be made in return for the performance of a legally sufficient act or promise.
     3. Contractual capacity. Both parties must possess the full legal capacity to assume contractual duties.
     4. Lawful object. The purpose of the contract must be legal.

    The law assumes that, in an employer-employee contract, the employer controls the time, place, and method of the employee's
    work. The doctrine of respondeat superior--"Let the master answer [for the servant's actions]"--applies to employer-
    employee contracts. In judging an employer's responsibility for the damages caused by an employee's negligence, the court will
    apply the standard of scope of employment: an employee's actions fall within the scope of his employment under two
    conditions: (1) if they are performed in order to fulfill contractual duties owed to his employer and (2) if the employer is (or
    could be) in some control, directly or indirectly, over the employee's actions.

Exercise

(AACSB) Analysis

Let's say you own a used car business and offer to sell a customer a used car for $5,000. What is needed to create a binding
contract for the sale of the car?

If, when the customer wants to go for a test drive, the salesperson drives into a tree and is injured, is your company liable? Why, or
why not?

This page titled 16.3: Negligence Torts is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.3.5  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4086
16.4: Product Liability

  Learning Objectives

    1. Define product liability and discuss the three grounds, or "theories of recovery," for a claim of product liability.
    2. Discuss the three forms of manufacturer's negligence that may be claimed in a product-liability case.
    3. Define strict liability and explain the doctrine of strict liability in tort.
    4. Define a warranty and distinguish between express warranties and implied warranties.
    5. Identify the primary goal of tort law and distinguish between compensatory damages and punitive damages.

In addition to intentional and negligence torts, U.S. law recognizes a third category of torts: strict liability torts involve actions that
are inherently dangerous and for which a party may be liable no matter how carefully he or she (or it) performs them. To better
appreciate the issues involved in cases of strict liability, let's take up the story of your legal adventures in the world of business
where we left off:

       Having escaped the house-painting business relatively unscathed, you head back home to rethink your options for gainful
       employment over your summer vacation. You've stored your only remaining capital assets--the two ladders and the platform
       that you'd used for scaffolding--in your father's garage, where one afternoon, your uncle notices them. Examining one of
       the ladders, he asks you how much weight it's designed to hold, and you tell him what the department manager at Ladders
       'N' Things told you--three hundred pounds per rung. He nods as if this is a good number, and, sensing that he might want to
       buy them, you hasten to add that though you got them at a cut-rate price because of a little rust, they're virtually brand-new.
       As it turns out, he doesn't want to buy them, but he does offer to pay you $35 an hour to take them to his house and help him
       put up new roofing. He's easygoing, he's family, and he probably won't sue you for anything, so you jump at the opportunity.

Everything goes smoothly until day two, when you're working on the scaffolding two stories off the ground. As you're in the
process of unwrapping a bundle of shingles, one of the ladders buckles, bringing down the platform and depositing you on your
uncle's stone patio with a cervical fracture.

Fortunately, there's no damage to your spinal cord, but you're in pain and you need surgery. Now it's your turn to sue somebody.
But whom? And for what?

Pursuing a Claim of Product Liability

It comes as no surprise when your lawyer advises an action for product liability--a claim of injury suffered because of a defective
product (in your case, of course, the ladder). The legal concept of product liability, he explains, developed out of the principles of
tort law. He goes on to say that in cases of product liability, there are three grounds for pursuing a claim and seeking damages--
what lawyers call three "theories of recovery":

    Negligence
    Strict liability
    Breach of warranty

As the plaintiff, he emphasizes, you'll want to use as many of these three grounds as possible (Kubasek, et. al., 2009).

Grounds of Negligence

In selecting defendants in your case, you'll start with the manufacturer of the ladder. Manufacturer's negligence--carelessness--
can take three different forms (Kubasek, et. al., 2009):

    Negligent failure to warn. The manufacturer may be liable if the company knew (or should have known) that, without a
    warning, the ladder would be dangerous in ordinary use or in any reasonably foreseeable use. It's possible, for example, that
    you made the ladder's collapse more likely by placing it at a less than optimal angle from the wall of the house. That mistake,
    however, is a reasonably foreseeable use of the product, and if the manufacturer failed to warn you of this possibility, the
    company is liable for failure to warn. Negligent failure to warn. The manufacturer may be liable if the company knew (or
    should have known) that, without a warning, the ladder would be dangerous in ordinary use or in any reasonably foreseeable

16.4.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
use. It's possible, for example, that you made the ladder's collapse more likely by placing it at a less than optimal angle from
the wall of the house. That mistake, however, is a reasonably foreseeable use of the product, and if the manufacturer failed to
warn you of this possibility, the company is liable for failure to warn (Baldwin, et. al., 1998).
Negligent design. As the term suggests, this principle applies to defectively designed products. In law, a product is defective if,
despite any warnings, the risk of harm outweighs its usefulness in doing what it's designed to do. If, for example, your ladder
left the manufacturer's facility with rivets that were likely to break when weight was placed on it, the ladder may be judged
defective in its design.

Negligent design. As the term suggests, this principle applies to defectively designed products. In law, a product is defective if,
despite any warnings, the risk of harm outweighs its usefulness in doing what it's designed to do. If, for example, your ladder
left the manufacturer's facility with rivets that were likely to break when weight was placed on it, the ladder may be judged
defective in its design.

        Figure 16.3: The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission has overseen the recall of thousands of baby cribs that it determined
        to have defective designs. (Valentina Powers - Crib - CC BY 2.0.)
    Negligence per se. The manufacturer may be liable if the ladder fails to meet legal standards. According to standards set by the
    Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), for example, the rungs on your ladder should be corrugated or covered
    with skid-resistant material to minimize slipping. If you're injured because they're not, the manufacturer may be liable on
    grounds of negligence per se (Occupational Safety and Health Administration, 2003).

If you decide to apply the concept of negligence in suing the manufacturer of the ladder, you must prove the four elements of a
negligence case that we detailed above--namely, the following:

 1. That the defendant (the manufacturer) owed you a duty of care
 2. That the defendant breached this duty of care
 3. That the defendant's breach of duty of care caused injury to you or your property
 4. That the defendant's action did in fact cause the injury in question

Grounds of Strict Liability

For the sake of argument, let's say that your lawyer isn't very confident about pursuing a claim of negligence against the
manufacturer of your ladder. The company doesn't appear to have been careless in any of the three forms prescribed by law, and it
will in any case be difficult to demonstrate all four elements required in negligence cases. He suggests instead that you proceed on
grounds of strict liability, pointing out that the principle of strict liability often makes the plaintiff's legal task less exacting. But
(you ask) if the company wasn't negligent, how can it be liable, either "strictly" or in any other sense? Under the doctrine of strict
liability in tort, he replies, you don't have to prove negligence on the manufacturer's part. He goes on to explain that under this
doctrine, your right to compensation for injury is based on two legal suppositions:

 1. Certain products put people at risk of injury no matter how much care is taken to prevent injury.
 2. Consumers should have some means of seeking compensation if they're injured while using these products (Cheesman, 2006).

16.4.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
Day in and day out, of course, people use ladders quite successfully. According to the Consumer Product Safety Commission
(CPSC), however, every year accidents involving ladders cause three hundred deaths and one hundred thirty thousand injuries
requiring emergency medical treatment (American Ladder Institute, 2011; ConsumerAffairs.com, 2007). In a certain number of
these instances, the ladder is defective, and in cases of strict liability, it doesn't matter how much care was taken by the
manufacturer to prevent defects. This seems a little harsh to you, but your lawyer explains that, in establishing the doctrine of strict
liability in tort, the court cited two reasons for making the grounds of liability so strict (Greenman v. Yuba Power Products, 2011):

    The manufacturer can protect itself by taking steps to anticipate and prevent hazardous product features, but the public can't.
    The manufacturer can protect itself by purchasing insurance and passing the cost on to the public in the form of higher product
    prices. Again, the public enjoys no such protection.

Under these conditions, the manufacturer is willing to take a risk--namely, the risk of making available a product that's potentially
dangerous, especially if defective. The manufacturer thus takes the first step in a process whereby this product reaches a consumer
who may suffer "overwhelming misfortune" by using it, especially if it has become defective during the process that takes it from
the manufacturer to the user. "Even if he is not negligent in the manufacture of the product," declared the court, the manufacturer
"is responsible for its reaching the market" (italics added). There's no way of telling when or how a product will become defective
or of predicting how or how many people will be injured by it. Defects and injuries, however, are "constant" dangers when people
use such products, and users must therefore have some form of "constant protection" under law. That protection is established by
the doctrine of strict liability in tort. Why should the manufacturer be held responsible for such defects and injuries? Because,
reasoned the court, "the manufacturer is best situated to afford...protection."

And this, explains your lawyer, is why you're going to sue the manufacturer of your ladder on grounds of strict liability.

Strict Liability in the Distribution Chain

You're excited about the prospect of recovering monetary damages from the manufacturer of your ladder, but you continue to
wonder (on completely hypothetical grounds, of course) whether the doctrine of strict liability is as fair as it should be. What about
all the other businesses involved in the process of getting the product from the manufacturer to the user--especially the one that did
in fact introduce the defect that caused all the trouble? Does the doctrine of strict liability relieve them of all liability in the case?
Indeed not, your lawyer assures you. The concept of strict liability not only provides more practical grounds for suing the
manufacturer but also supports your right to pursue claims against members of the manufacturer's distribution chain (see Chapter 9
"Marketing: Providing Value to Customers") (Cheesman, 2006). That's one reason, he points out, why product-liability lawsuits
against businesses that sell such "unreasonably dangerous" products as ladders (or even deliver them to worksites) went up a
hundredfold between 1950 and 2001, to a total of $205 billion (Shawn, 2006).

Now, let's say that your lawyer has given your defective ladder to a forensic laboratory in order to find out exactly what caused it to
buckle and you to fall. As it turns out, the clue to the problem is the small patch of rust that brought down the price you paid for the
ladder when you bought it. The ladder, concludes the lab, had for some time been in close proximity to liquid nitrogen, which can
corrode various metals, including aluminum (Baker & Lee, 1993). Sure enough, further investigation reveals that the entire
shipment of ladders had been stored for nearly two years in a Ladders 'N' Things warehouse next to an inventory of liquid-
nitrogen-based fertilizer. Your lawyer advises you that, in addition to your strict-liability case against the manufacturer of the
ladder, you have a strong negligence case against the retailer from which you purchased it.

Figure 16.4 provides a simplified overview of the difference between negligence and strict liability as grounds for a product-
liability claim.

16.4.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
                                                             Figure 16.4 Negligence versus Strict Liability

Grounds of Breach of Warranty

Moreover, adds your lawyer, there's one more matter to be considered in determining liability for your injury. Had not the
department manager at Ladders 'N' Things assured you that the ladder would support a weight of three hundred pounds per rung?
Your uncle had asked you about the weight capacity of the ladder because he knew that the roofing job meant putting heavy
bundles of shingles on the scaffold. A ladder that holds three hundred pounds per rung is a Type IA extra-heavy-duty ladder
suitable for such jobs as roofing and construction. According to the lab, however, the construction of your ladder is that of a Type II
medium-duty-commercial ladder made for lighter-weight tasks (Guide4Home, 2008). The manager at Ladders 'N' Things, explains
your lawyer, may have been guilty of breach of warranty--yet further grounds for holding the retailer liable in your product-
liability case.

Types of Warranties

A warranty is a guarantee that a product meets certain standards of performance. In the United States, warranties are established by
the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC), a system of statutes designed to make commercial transactions consistent in all fifty states.
Under the UCC, a warranty is based on contract law and, as such, constitutes a binding promise. If this promise--the promise that a
product meets certain standards of performance--isn't fulfilled, the buyer may bring a claim of product liability against the seller
or maker of the promise.

Express Warranties

An express warranty is created when a seller affirms that a product meets certain standards of quality, description, performance, or
condition. The seller can make an express warranty in any of three ways:

    By describing the product

16.4.4  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
    By making a promise of fact about the product
    By providing a model or sample of the product

Sellers aren't obligated to make express warranties. When they do make them, it's usually made through advertisements, catalogs,
and so forth, but they needn't be made in writing; they can be oral or even inferred from the seller's behavior. They're valid even if
they're made by mistake.

Implied Warranties

There are two types of implied warranties--that is, warranties that arise automatically out of transactions:

In making an implied warranty of merchantability, the seller states that the product is reasonably fit for ordinary use. In selling
you a ladder, for example, Ladders 'N' Things affirms that it satisfies any promises made on its packaging, meets average
standards of quality, and should be acceptable to other users.
An implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose affirms that the product is fit for some specific use. Let's say, for
example, that you had asked the manager at Ladders 'N' Things whether the ladder you had in mind was fit for holding a
scaffolding platform for painting a house; if the manager had assured you that it was, he would have created an implied
warranty of fitness for a particular purpose.

Table 16.3 "What Warranties Promise" provides a more complete overview of the different types of warranties, including more-
detailed descriptions of the promises that may be entailed by each.

                  Table 1:.3 What Warranties Promise

Type of Warranty  Means by Which the Warranty May Be        Promises Entailed by the Warranty
                  Created

Express warranty  Seller confirms that product conforms to
                  the following:
                  All statements of fact or promise made
                  about it

    Any description of it
    Any model or sample of it
    Product meets certain standards of quality, description, performance, or condition Implied warranty of merchantability Law
    implies certain promises

    Product:

    Is fit for ordinary purposes for which it's used
    Is adequately contained, packaged, and labeled
    Is of an even kind, quality, and quantity within each unit
    Conforms to any promise or statement of fact made on container or label
    Passes without objection in the trade
    Meets a fair, average, or middle range of quality
    Implied warranty of fitness for a particular purpose Law implies certain promises

    Product is fit for the purpose for which the buyer acquires it if

    Seller has reason to know the particular purpose for which it will be used
    Seller makes a statement that it will serve that purpose
    Buyer relies on seller's statement and purchases it

Source: Adapted from Henry R. Cheesman, Contemporary Business and Online Commerce Law: Legal, Internet, Ethical, and
Global Environments, 5th ed. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 2006), 366.

What kinds of warranties did you receive when you bought your ladder? Naturally, you received implied warranties of
merchantability, which arose out of your transaction with Ladders 'N' Things. You also received an implied warranty of fitness for

                  16.4.5                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
a particular purpose (that the ladder would hold a scaffolding platform) and an express warranty (that it would a bear a weight of
three hundred pounds per rung).

Do you have a case for product liability on grounds of breach of warranty? Arguably, says your lawyer, Ladders 'N' Things
breached an implied warranty of merchantability because it sold you a ladder with a defect (corrosion damage) that made it unfit
for ordinary use. It's also possible that the retailer breached an express warranty--the manager's assurance that the ladder would
bear a weight of three hundred pounds per rung. First, the court will want to know whether that express warranty was a contributing
factor--not necessarily the sole factor--in your decision to buy the ladder. If not, you probably can't recover for breach of the
express warranty.

Second, there's the complex issue of whether that express warranty was tantamount to an assurance that the ladder could be used
for such a job as roofing. Apparently your uncle thought it was, but that will be a matter for your lawyer to argue and the court to
decide. It will all depend, in other words, on the flexibility and fairness of the legal system.

Product Liability and Agency Law

When your lawyer has wrapped up his explanation of warranties and ways of breaching them, you feel compelled to ask one last
question: Why is Ladders 'N' Things, an entire corporate chain of retail stores, liable for breach of warranty committed by one
department manager at one local outlet? Your lawyer replies that it's a matter of agency, which he defines for you as a legal
relationship between two parties in which one party acts on behalf of, and under the control of, another. In a principal-agent
relationship like the one diagrammed in Figure 16.5 the agent is acting on behalf of the principal.

                                                                    Figure 16.5 Agency Relationship

A lawyer acting on behalf of a client is an agent, as is a real estate broker acting on behalf of a homeowner or a partner acting on
behalf of a partnership. Perhaps the most common type of agency relationship is the one that applies to your case--the salesperson
who's acting on behalf of a retailer. If this sort of legal arrangement sounds familiar, that's probably because employer-employee
relationships are also agency relationships.

16.4.6  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
Agency law is actually a mixture of contract law and tort law (Cheesman, 2006). In order to appoint an agent, for example, a person
must possess the capacity--the legal ability--to make a contract, and agency agreements must in general meet the four elements of
a valid contract that we discussed in an earlier section of this chapter. As we've also seen, an agent (such as the department
manager at your local Ladders 'N' Things outlet) can make the principal for whom he or she is acting liable for such torts as breach
of warranty. The same thing is true of the warehouse manager who stored your ladder next to a shipment of liquid-nitrogen-based
fertilizer; acting on behalf of Ladders 'N' Things, he or she exposed the company to liability for negligence.

This page titled 16.4: Product Liability is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous via
source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.4.7  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4087
16.5: Some Principles of Public Law

  Learning Objectives

    1. Explain the difference between private law and public law.
    2. Define statutory law and give examples of statutory laws at various governmental levels.
    3. Explain externalities and show why taxation is used as a means of addressing them.
    4. Discuss the idea of market failure and the principle of efficiency as a foundation of law.
    5. Define administrative law and discuss the role of federal administrative agencies in making and enforcing administrative

       laws.
    6. Define case law and explain the concepts of precedent and judicial review.

Both tort law and contract law fall into the larger domain of private law, which deals with private relationships among individuals
and organizations. In addition, of course, there are numerous types of law that deal with the relationship of government to private
individuals and other private entities, including businesses. This is the area of public law, which falls into three general categories
(Kubasek, 2009):

    Criminal law, which we've already introduced, prohibits and punishes wrongful conduct.
    Constitutional law concerns the laws and basic legal principles set forth by the U.S. Constitution.
    Administrative law refers to statutes and regulations related to the activities of certain legal bodies known as administrative
    agencies. We'll have more to say about administrative agencies and administrative law later in the chapter.

Public law obviously has a major impact on the activities of both individuals and businesses in the United States, and in the
following section, we'll discuss the nature of this impact and the reasons why so many private activities are subject to the rules and
principles of public law. Like most areas of the law, public law is an extremely complex field of study, and to keep things
manageable we're going to explore this field by focusing on three less-than-glamorous legal issues: why cigarette littering is
against the law, why cigarettes cost so much, and why businesses ban smoking in the workplace.

Why Cigarette Littering Is against the Law

Having sold the Stratford Inn in 1991, former senator George McGovern didn't have to worry about the Connecticut Clean Indoor
Air Act of 2004, which banned smoking in such places as the bar of his hotel (Spigel, 2011). Like similar statutes in many states,
the Connecticut law was enacted in response to the health hazards of secondary smoke in closed environments (an estimated three
thousand nonsmokers die from smoke-related lung cancer every year).

Interestingly, shortly after the new statewide antismoking law went into effect, officials in Connecticut noticed a curious
phenomenon: cigarette litter--packaging, lighting materials, and, especially, butts--had begun to accumulate at an unprecedented
rate in outdoor areas surrounding drinking establishments, exacerbating an already serious environmental problem. Unless you've
lived your entire life indoors, you have undoubtedly noticed that cigarette butts are a fixture of the great American outdoors:
Americans smoke about 360 billion cigarettes a year and discard 135 million pounds of butts, much of which ends up as litter
(Cigarette Butt Litter, 2008). In fact, cigarettes account for 20 percent of all the litter in the United States, 18 percent of which ends
up in local streams and other waterways.

16.5.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4088
                          Figure 16.7: Cigarettes account for 20 percent of all litter. (waferboard - field of dreams - CC BY 2.0.)

In 2006, U.S. Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut introduced the Cigarette Litter Prevention Act, a federal statute that would
require cigarette producers to attach environmental warnings to their packaging (Liebermann Lands Legislation..., 2006). In
Connecticut itself, however, statewide antilittering law covers only state property, land, and waters (Frisman, 2008). When it comes
to private property, such as most areas adjacent to restaurants and bars, it's left to local communities to police littering violations.
The town council of Wallingford, for example, recently took action on a proposed ordinance to fine business owners who fail to
clean up the litter on their doorsteps and in their parking lots. The law also targets proprietors who continue to sweep cigarette and
other litter into storm drains--a major source of waterway pollution. "I'm not a big fan of making laws to do stuff like this,"
admitted one town councilor, "but if people don't do it, then they have to be told to do it" (The Record-Journal, 2008).

The Wallingford ordinance calls for a written warning followed by a fine of $90 for each day that the offending litter isn't removed.
Connecticut state law carries a maximum fine of $199 plus a surcharge of half the fine. As for litter "thrown, blown, scattered, or
spilled" from a motor vehicle, Connecticut law regards it as evidence that the driver has in fact littered, but the statute applies only
to state land and waters. The issue of litterbug drivers, however, is a much bigger concern to lawmakers in certain other states. In
California, for example, Vehicle Code Section 23111 states that "no person in any vehicle and no pedestrian shall throw or
discharge from or upon any road or highway or adjoining area, public or private, any lighted or nonlighted cigarette, cigar, match,
or any flaming or glowing substance." The statute carries a fine of $380 but could run as high as $1,000. In addition, you may
spend eight hours picking up roadside trash, and because the violation goes on your driving record, your insurance premiums may
increase (California Department of Motor Vehicles, 2007). Despite such vigorous preventive measures, the state of California
spends $62 million a year of the taxpayers' money to clean up roadside litter (Green Eco Services, 2008).

Besides the cleanup cost, there's another reason why California law regarding motor vehicles and cigarette litter is so stiff: at
certain times of the year and under certain conditions, much of the state is a tinderbox. In January 2001, for example, a cigarette
tossed from a car onto a grassy highway median near San Diego sparked a brush fire that soon spread across eleven thousand acres
of rural forestland. As columns of acrid, ash-filled smoked billowed some thirty thousand feet into the air, officials closed down a
twelve-mile stretch of Interstate highway and evacuated 350 homes. Suffering from eye, nose, and lung irritation, hundreds of
residents rushed to safety with no time to rescue personal possessions, and before an army of two thousand federal, state, and local
emergency workers had contained the blaze a week later, the firefighting effort had cost California taxpayers $10 million
(10News.com, 2001; CNN.com, 2001; USAToday.com, 2001).

Statutory Responses to Littering

Clearly the problem of cigarette litter has attracted the attention of lawmakers at every level. All the laws that we mentioned in this
section are current or proposed statutory laws--laws made by legislative bodies. Enacted by the Connecticut General Assembly,
the Clean Indoor Air Act of 2004 and Littering Law (amended 2005) are state statutes, as is California's Vehicle Code, which was
enacted by the California State Legislature. The antilittering law in Wallingford is a local law, or municipal ordinance, passed by
the Town Council, whose authority derives from the state General Assembly. If Senator's Lieberman's proposed Cigarette Litter
Prevention Act is passed by the U.S. Congress, it will become a federal statute. Note, by the way, that each of these laws is a
criminal statute designed to prohibit and punish wrongful conduct (usually by fine).

16.5.2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4088
This page titled 16.5: Some Principles of Public Law is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
Anonymous via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.5.3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4088
16.6: Cases and Problems

Career Opportunities

Would You Like to Be a Lawyer?
Are you interested in a career in law? To learn what lawyers do, read the article on About.com, "Lawyer" by Sally Kane,
http://legalcareers.about.com/od/car...s/p/Lawyer.htm

As a follow-up (and because getting a job is a good thing), read a second article on About.com, "Who Hires Lawyers?" by Tara
Kuther, http://gradschool.about.com/od/lawsc.../f/lawjobs.htm. Then, answer the following questions, being sure to provide an
explanation for each of your answers:

    What about being a lawyer interests you?
    What might discourage you from pursuing a career in law?
    Overall, does a career in law appeal to you? Why, or why not?

Ethics Angle (AACSB)

The Product Liability Debate
The article "Who Should Pay? The Product Liability Debate," by Claire Andre and Manuel Velasquez, provides the pros and cons
of the current product liability legal environment. Read the article, which can be found at
www.scu.edu/ethics/publicatio.../v4n1/pay.html, and answer these questions:

 1. Should consumers bear more responsibility for product injuries?
 2. Should drug manufacturers bear more responsibility?
 3. Is the current product-liability legal system broken? Why, or why not? If you believe it is broken, how would you fix it?

Team-Building Skills (AACSB)

Get together as a team and debate these two related issues: "How much should a pack of cigarettes cost?" and "Should businesses
ban smoking the workplace?" Write a "position" paper explaining your group's opinion. If the group doesn't reach an agreement on
the issues, include a "minority report"--the opinion of a minority of the group.

The Global View (AACSB)

What issues would you encounter as a businessperson negotiating a sales contract with a company in China? How would you
overcome these issues?

This page titled 16.6: Cases and Problems is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by Anonymous
via source content that was edited to the style and standards of the LibreTexts platform.

16.6.1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/4089
Index                                                auditing                                           business

A                                                       12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities     1: The Foundations of Business
                                                                                                           1.1: Introduction
Abraham Lincoln                                      authority                                             1.2: Getting Down to Business
                                                                                                           3: Business in a Global Environment
   13.1: The Functions of Money                         8.1: The Team and the Organization                 3.1: The Globalization of Business
                                                                                                           4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership
absoluteadvantage                                    B                                                     4.4: Corporation
                                                                                                           5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
   3.1: The Globalization of Business                balance sheet                                         5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
                                                                                                        Ownership
accessible                                              12.2: Understanding Financial Statements           5.5: Starting a Business
                                                                                                           5.8: Cases and Problems
   InfoPage                                          banking                                               8: Teamwork and Communications
                                                                                                           8.6: Forms of Communication
account payable                                         13.3: The Federal Reserve System                   8.7: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                           9.1: 0 Cases and Problems
   12.3: Accrual Accounting                          barriers                                              9.5: Placing a Product
                                                                                                           10: Product Design and Development
account receivable                                      3: Business in a Global Environment                10.4: Understand Your Industry
                                                                                                           10.5: Forecasting Demand
   12.3: Accrual Accounting                          barriers to communication                             10.6: Breakeven Analysis
                                                                                                           10.9: Cases and Problems
accountability                                          8.5: Communication Channels                        12.6: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                           13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
   2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics        benchmarking                                          13.8: Cases and Problems
   8.1: The Team and the Organization                                                                      16.6: Cases and Problems
                                                        11.7: Producing for Quality
accounting                                                                                              business communication
                                                     Bic underwear
   12: The Role of Accounting in Business                                                                  8.5: Communication Channels
   12.1: The Role of Accounting                         10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
   12.2: Understanding Financial Statements                                                             business cycle
   12.3: Accrual Accounting                          BMW
   12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities                                                          1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
                                                        11.8: Cases and Problems
accrual accounting                                                                                      business degree
                                                     board of directors
   12: The Role of Accounting in Business                                                                  15.7: Careers in Information Management
   12.3: Accrual Accounting                             4.7: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                        business ethics
acquisitions                                         brand management
                                                                                                           2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
   4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership            9.10: Careers in Marketing                         2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
   4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions                                                                           2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics
                                                     BrandEquity                                           2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
activities                                                                                                 12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
                                                        9.3: The Marketing Mix
   11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts                                                         business etiquette
                                                     Branding
adjustable_rate_mortgage                                                                                   3.3: The Global Business Environment
                                                        9.3: The Marketing Mix
   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons                                                     business expansion
from the Subprime Crisis                             BrandingStrategies
                                                                                                           3.7: Cases and Problems
administrative law                                      9.3: The Marketing Mix                             4.3: Partnership
                                                                                                           4.7: Cases and Problems
   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law               brandreinvention
                                                                                                        business growth
advantages                                              9.8: The Product Life Cycle
                                                                                                           4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
   4.2: Sole Proprietorship                          breach of duty                                        13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
   4.3: Partnership
   4.4: Corporation                                     16.3: Negligence Torts                          business law
   5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
   5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business     breakeven                                             16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
Ownership
   9.7: Interacting with Your Customers                 10: Product Design and Development              business management
                                                        10.6: Breakeven Analysis
advertising                                                                                                5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
                                                     breakeven analysis
   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                                                                            business opportunity
   9.6: Promoting a Product                             10.9: Cases and Problems
   9.9: The Marketing Environment                                                                          10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                        brokerage firms
                                                                                                        business organization
analysis                                                13.2: Financial Institutions
                                                                                                           6.3: Organizing
   6.5: Controlling                                  budget
   10: Product Design and Development                                                                   business ownership
   10.6: Breakeven Analysis                             12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
                                                        14.1: Financial Planning                           4.1: Factors to Consider
application                                             14.5: Cases and Problems                           4.2: Sole Proprietorship
                                                                                                           4.3: Partnership
   10.8: Protecting Your Idea                        budget deficit                                        4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
                                                                                                           5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
applications development                                1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy     5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.
                                                                                                        Economy
   15.7: Careers in Information Management           budgeting

arbitration                                             13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
                                                        14.3: The Financial Planning Process
   7.6: Labor Unions

assembly line

   11.2: Facility Layouts

assets

   14.3: The Financial Planning Process

audience

   8.6: Forms of Communication

                                                     1                                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
Business Plan                                             careers in finance                                 common law

   5: The Challenges of Starting a Business                  13: Managing Financial Resources                   16.1: Law and the Legal System
   5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
   5.5: Starting a Business                               careers in marketing                               common stock
   5.6: The Business Plan
   5.8: Cases and Problems                                   9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers         13.6: Financing the Going Concern

business planning                                         Cases                                              communication

   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business                3: Business in a Global Environment                8: Teamwork and Communications
                                                             4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership          8.4: The Business of Communication
business risks                                               8: Teamwork and Communications                     8.6: Forms of Communication
                                                             12: The Role of Accounting in Business             8.7: Cases and Problems
   5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?                             13: Managing Financial Resources                   15.1: Data versus Information
                                                             16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
business strategy                                         Business                                           communication effectiveness

   5.6: The Business Plan                                 CasesAndProblems                                      8.5: Communication Channels
   10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
                                                             2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility    communication flows
business success                                             7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality
                                                          Employees                                             8.5: Communication Channels
   10.7: Product Development
                                                          cash flow                                          communication skills
businessanalysis
                                                             13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager            6.6: Managerial Skills
   12.4: Financial Statement Analysis                        14.2: Time Is Money
                                                             14.3: The Financial Planning Process            communication styles
businessethics
                                                          cellular layout                                       3.3: The Global Business Environment
   2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
   2.8: Cases and Problems                                   11.2: Facility Layouts                          community

businessideas                                             centralized database                                  InfoPage

   10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?                   15.2: Managing Data                             communitysupport

businessstrategy                                          certification                                         2.8: Cases and Problems

   6.2: Planning                                             13.7: Careers in Finance                        companies

buying a business                                         chain                                                 9.5: Placing a Product

   5.5: Starting a Business                                  9.5: Placing a Product                          company management

C                                                         channels                                              13.5: Understanding Securities Markets

CAD                                                          8: Teamwork and Communications                  comparative advantage

   11.5: The Technology of Goods Production               characteristics                                       Glossary

CAM                                                          8.1: The Team and the Organization              comparativeadvantage

   11.5: The Technology of Goods Production               charitable organization                               3.1: The Globalization of Business

capacity planning                                            4.7: Cases and Problems                         compensation

   11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing           chief information officer                             16.3: Negligence Torts

capital                                                      15.7: Careers in Information Management         compensatory damages

   1.3: What Is Economics?                                chief technology officer                              16.4: Product Liability

career                                                       15.7: Careers in Information Management         competition

   3: Business in a Global Environment                    civil law                                             1: The Foundations of Business
   3.1: The Globalization of Business                                                                           1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                                 16.1: Law and the Legal System                     9.4: Pricing a Product
   16.6: Cases and Problems                                  16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law                    10.4: Understand Your Industry
                                                             16.3: Negligence Torts
career advancement                                                                                           competition types
                                                          CivilLaw
   7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?                                                                       1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and
                                                             16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of     Monopoly
career choices                                            Business
                                                                                                             competitive advantage
   14.1: Financial Planning                               climate change
                                                                                                                5.6: The Business Plan
career development                                           2.6: Environmentalism                              10.9: Cases and Problems

   6.6: Managerial Skills                                 cloud computing                                    competitive advantages

career in economics                                          15: Managing Information and Technology            4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
                                                             15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing
   1.8: Cases and Problems                                                                                   competitive environment
                                                          collaboration
career opportunities                                                                                            9.9: The Marketing Environment
                                                             InfoPage
   3.7: Cases and Problems                                   8.3: The Team and Its Members                   completion
   5.8: Cases and Problems
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                             collectivebargaining                                  11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts
   11.8: Cases and Problems
   12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities            7.6: Labor Unions                               compliance
   13.7: Careers in Finance
   15.7: Careers in Information Management                college education                                     2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics

careeropportunities                                          14.1: Financial Planning                        compound interest

   7.7: Cases and Problems                                commercial banking                                    14.2: Time Is Money

careerplanning                                               13.7: Careers in Finance                        compound_interest

   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business  commercial banks                                      14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons
                                                                                                             from the Subprime Crisis
careers                                                      13.2: Financial Institutions
                                                                                                             computer networks
   15: Managing Information and Technology                commercial potential
                                                                                                                15: Managing Information and Technology
                                                             10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
                                                                                                             computer science

                                                                                                                15.7: Careers in Information Management

                                                          2                                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
computerviruses                                       corporate culture                                    culturaldifferences

   15.8: Cases and Problems                              2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics           7.7: Cases and Problems

conflict resolution                                   corporate finance                                    cultures

   8.3: The Team and Its Members                         13.6: Financing the Going Concern                    3.1: The Globalization of Business
   8.5: Communication Channels                           13.7: Careers in Finance
                                                         13.8: Cases and Problems                          currency
conflicts of interest
                                                      corporate governance                                    3.7: Cases and Problems
   2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
                                                         2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility              customer analysis
conservation                                             12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
                                                                                                              10.4: Understand Your Industry
   2.6: Environmentalism                              corporate responsibility
                                                                                                           customer behavior
constitutional law                                       2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
                                                         2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues                      15.2: Managing Data
   16.1: Law and the Legal System                        2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
                                                                                                           customer focus
construction                                          corporate social responsibility
                                                                                                              5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
   5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?         2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
                                                         2.6: Environmentalism                             customer information
consumer behavior                                        Glossary
                                                                                                              15.1: Data versus Information
   9.2: What Is Marketing?                            corporate strategy
   9.9: The Marketing Environment                                                                          customer interaction
   10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities              4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
   Glossary                                                                                                   9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
                                                      corporateaccountability
consumer needs                                                                                             customer needs
                                                         2.8: Cases and Problems
   8.4: The Business of Communication                                                                         10.7: Product Development
   10.7: Product Development                          corporatebankruptcy
                                                                                                           customer relationship management
consumer perception                                      2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
                                                                                                              15.2: Managing Data
   9.6: Promoting a Product                           corporatecitizenship                                    15.3: Types of Information Systems

consumer protection                                      1.1: Introduction                                 customer satisfaction
                                                         2.8: Cases and Problems
   10.9: Cases and Problems                                                                                   2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
                                                      corporatecorruption                                     5.5: Starting a Business
consumer safety                                                                                               9.2: What Is Marketing?
                                                         2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
   16.4: Product Liability                                                                                 customer service
                                                      corporateethics
consumer trust                                                                                                15.3: Types of Information Systems
                                                         2.8: Cases and Problems
   15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication                                                       customerfocus
                                                      CorporateSocialResponsibility
ConsumerBehavior                                                                                              6.2: Planning
                                                         2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility         11.7: Producing for Quality
   9.3: The Marketing Mix
                                                      corporation                                          customerneeds
consumerconfidence
                                                         4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership            10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?
   1.1: Introduction                                     4.1: Factors to Consider
                                                                                                           customerrelationshipmanagement
consumerpreferences                                   corporations
                                                                                                              9.7: Interacting with Your Customers
   9.8: The Product Life Cycle                           4.4: Corporation
                                                                                                           customers
consumption                                           corrective action
                                                                                                              1.2: Getting Down to Business
   1.3: What Is Economics?                               6.5: Controlling                                     10.5: Forecasting Demand

continuousimprovement                                 cost of goods sold                                   customerservice

   11.7: Producing for Quality                           12.3: Accrual Accounting                             11.7: Producing for Quality

contract law                                          cost savings                                         cybercrime

   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law                   15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing          15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication

contract manufacturing                                courtroom                                            cyberhealth

   3.2: Opportunities in International Business          16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law                      15.8: Cases and Problems

contracts                                             creativity                                           D

   4.4: Corporation                                      10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?           damages

contribution margin                                   credit                                                  16.3: Negligence Torts

   10.6: Breakeven Analysis                              14.5: Cases and Problems                          data

control                                               credit unions                                           10.5: Forecasting Demand
                                                                                                              15: Managing Information and Technology
   4.1: Factors to Consider                              13.2: Financial Institutions                         15.2: Managing Data
   4.2: Sole Proprietorship
                                                      credit_card_debt                                     data analysis
controlling
                                                         14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons     15.2: Managing Data
   6.1: What Do Managers Do?                          from the Subprime Crisis
   6.5: Controlling                                                                                        data capture
                                                      criminal law
cooperatives                                                                                                  15.2: Managing Data
                                                         16.1: Law and the Legal System
   4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership                16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law                   data communication
                                                         16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
corevalues                                                                                                    15.5: Data Communications Networks
                                                      CriminalLaw
   6.2: Planning                                                                                           data communications
                                                         16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
corporate                                             Business                                                15: Managing Information and Technology

   6.7: Cases and Problems                            cultural differences                                 data mining

corporate citizenship                                    3.3: The Global Business Environment                 15.2: Managing Data

   2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility

                                                      3                                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
data processing                                       distribution                                              effective communication

   15.1: Data versus Information                         1.3: What Is Economics?                                   8.3: The Team and Its Members
                                                         9.2: What Is Marketing?                                   8.4: The Business of Communication
data security                                                                                                      8.6: Forms of Communication
                                                      diversity
   15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication                                                            effective teams
                                                         2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
data storage                                                                                                       8.2: Why Teamwork Works
                                                      dividends
   15.2: Managing Data                                                                                          efficiency
                                                         13.6: Financing the Going Concern
Data Warehouse                                                                                                     11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
                                                      double taxation                                              11.2: Facility Layouts
   15.2: Managing Data                                                                                             11.5: The Technology of Goods Production
                                                         4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
databases                                                                                                       emails
                                                      duty of care
   15.2: Managing Data                                                                                             8.6: Forms of Communication
                                                         16.3: Negligence Torts
debt financing                                                                                                  embargoes
                                                      E
   13.6: Financing the Going Concern                                                                               3.4: Trade Controls
                                                      ecological footprint
debt management                                                                                                 emissions reduction
                                                         2.6: Environmentalism
   14.1: Financial Planning                                                                                        2.6: Environmentalism
                                                      ecommerce
decision making                                                                                                 emotionalintelligence
                                                         9.5: Placing a Product
   2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics                15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication         7.7: Cases and Problems
   2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
   6.4: Directing                                     economic concepts                                         employee communication
   6.6: Managerial Skills
   8.5: Communication Channels                           1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and             8.5: Communication Channels
   12.1: The Role of Accounting                       Monopoly
   15.1: Data versus Information                                                                                employee development
                                                      economic development
decisionmaking                                                                                                     7.2: Developing Employees
                                                         5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.
   12.4: Financial Statement Analysis                 Economy                                                   employee engagement

declinestage                                          economic differences                                         6.4: Directing
                                                                                                                   7.2: Developing Employees
   9.8: The Product Life Cycle                           3.3: The Global Business Environment                      7.5: Performance Appraisal

defective products                                    economic goals                                            employee feedback

   16.4: Product Liability                               1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy                  7.5: Performance Appraisal

defendants                                            economic growth                                           employee motivation

   16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law                       1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy                  7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                                                                                   7.3: Motivating Employees
demand                                                economic health
                                                                                                                employee performance
   1: The Foundations of Business                        1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
   10: Product Design and Development                                                                              7.5: Performance Appraisal
                                                      economic impact
demand curve                                                                                                    employee retention
                                                         5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.
   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand     Economy                                                      7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                                                                                   7.2: Developing Employees
demographics                                          economic indicators                                          7.5: Performance Appraisal

   9.9: The Marketing Environment                        1.8: Cases and Problems                                employee rights

depository institutions                               economic_trends                                              2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility

   13.2: Financial Institutions                          14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons       employee satisfaction
                                                      from the Subprime Crisis
design                                                                                                             7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
                                                      EconomicEducation                                            7.5: Performance Appraisal
   8.4: The Business of Communication
   11.5: The Technology of Goods Production              14: Personal Finances                                  employee training

DevelopingEmployees                                   economicGoals                                                7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                                                                                   7.2: Developing Employees
   7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality        13.3: The Federal Reserve System
Employees                                                                                                       employeeorientation
                                                      economicPolicy
development                                                                                                        7.7: Cases and Problems
                                                         13.3: The Federal Reserve System
   10: Product Design and Development                                                                           employees
                                                      economics
digital data                                                                                                       1.2: Getting Down to Business
                                                         1: The Foundations of Business
   15.5: Data Communications Networks                    1.3: What Is Economics?                                employeesatisfaction
                                                         3.1: The Globalization of Business
digital transformation                                   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                                 11.7: Producing for Quality

   15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing        economies of scale                                        employeewellbeing

directing                                                4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions                             7.6: Labor Unions

   6.1: What Do Managers Do?                          economy                                                   enforceable contract

disadvantages                                            1: The Foundations of Business                            16.3: Negligence Torts
                                                         1.1: Introduction
   4.2: Sole Proprietorship                              1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy               enterprise systems
   4.3: Partnership                                      1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
   4.4: Corporation                                      1.8: Cases and Problems                                   15.1: Data versus Information
   5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
   9.7: Interacting with Your Customers               education                                                 entrepreneur

discount                                                 InfoPage                                                  5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
                                                         3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business     5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
   12.6: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                entrepreneurial ideas
disposable_income
                                                                                                                   10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons
from the Subprime Crisis

                                                      4                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
entrepreneurship                                      ethics in business                                 financial institutions

   1.3: What Is Economics?                               2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility            13: Managing Financial Resources
   5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?                                                                            13.2: Financial Institutions
   5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.  evaluation
Economy                                                                                                  financial literacy
   5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?         8.7: Cases and Problems
   5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business                                                            14.2: Time Is Money
Ownership                                             examples
   5.5: Starting a Business                                                                              financial management
   5.6: The Business Plan                                6.7: Cases and Problems
   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business                                                               13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
   5.8: Cases and Problems                            expenses
   10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?                                                               financial manager
   10.9: Cases and Problems                              12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
   13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager                                                                  13: Managing Financial Resources
   13.8: Cases and Problems                           exporting
                                                                                                         financial performance
environment                                              3.2: Opportunities in International Business
                                                                                                            12.1: The Role of Accounting
   3: Business in a Global Environment                extension of product line
                                                                                                         financial plan
environmental law                                        10.1: What Is a Product?
                                                                                                            5.6: The Business Plan
   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law                external forces
                                                                                                         financial planning
environmental responsibility                             1.2: Getting Down to Business
                                                                                                            10.6: Breakeven Analysis
   2.6: Environmentalism                              F                                                     13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
                                                                                                            13.7: Careers in Finance
Environmentalism                                      facility layouts                                      13.8: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                            14.1: Financial Planning
   2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility          11.2: Facility Layouts                             14.2: Time Is Money
                                                                                                            14.3: The Financial Planning Process
equal opportunity                                     facilitylayouts                                       Glossary

   2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility                  11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and  financial reporting
                                                      Service Industries
equilibrium price                                                                                           12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
                                                      factors of production                                 12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
                                                         1.3: What Is Economics?                         financial risk
equity financing
                                                      fairness                                              5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
   13.6: Financing the Going Concern                                                                     Ownership
                                                         16.1: Law and the Legal System
ERP system                                                                                               financial statements
                                                      fast food
   15.1: Data versus Information                                                                            12: The Role of Accounting in Business
                                                         2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility            12.1: The Role of Accounting
esteem needs                                                                                                12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
                                                      federal law                                           12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities
   7.3: Motivating Employees                                                                                12.6: Cases and Problems
                                                         16.1: Law and the Legal System
ethical                                                                                                  financial strategies
                                                      Federal Reserve
   6.7: Cases and Problems                                                                                  13.6: Financing the Going Concern
                                                         1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
ethical decision                                                                                         financialcrimes
                                                      federal reserve system
   2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics                                                                   2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
                                                         13: Managing Financial Resources
ethical decision making                                                                                  financialhealth
                                                      FederalReserve
   2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility                                                                     12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
                                                         13.3: The Federal Reserve System
ethical dilemma                                                                                          FinancialLessons
                                                      FedEx
   2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics                                                                   14: Personal Finances
                                                         6.7: Cases and Problems
ethical dilemmas                                                                                         FinancialPlanning
                                                      finance
   2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues                                                                          14: Personal Finances
                                                         1.1: Introduction
ethical leadership                                       13.1: The Functions of Money                    FinancialPlanningProcess
                                                         13.3: The Federal Reserve System
   2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics            13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager            14: Personal Finances
   2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility                  13.7: Careers in Finance
                                                         13.8: Cases and Problems                        financialstatements
ethical practices
                                                      finance companies                                     12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
   2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics
   11.8: Cases and Problems                              13.2: Financial Institutions                    financialstrength

ethicalbehavior                                       financial accounting                                  12.4: Financial Statement Analysis

   2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview           12.1: The Role of Accounting                    financing

ethicalconduct                                        financial analysis                                    4.2: Sole Proprietorship
                                                                                                            4.7: Cases and Problems
   2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview           12: The Role of Accounting in Business             5.5: Starting a Business
                                                                                                            13: Managing Financial Resources
ethicaldilemmas                                       financial analysts
                                                                                                         financing needs
   2.8: Cases and Problems                               13.7: Careers in Finance
                                                                                                            4.1: Factors to Consider
ethics                                                financial education
                                                                                                         fiscal policy
   2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues                       13.7: Careers in Finance
   2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics            14.3: The Financial Planning Process               1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
   3.7: Cases and Problems
   4.7: Cases and Problems                            financial goals                                    fixed costs
   8.7: Cases and Problems
   12: The Role of Accounting in Business                14.1: Financial Planning                           10.6: Breakeven Analysis
   14.5: Cases and Problems                              14.3: The Financial Planning Process
   15.8: Cases and Problems                                                                              fixed position layout
   16.6: Cases and Problems                           financial independence
                                                                                                            11.2: Facility Layouts
                                                         5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?

                                                      5                                                  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
fixed_rate_mortgage                                       globalization                                             HRmanagement

   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons          3: Business in a Global Environment                       7.7: Cases and Problems
from the Subprime Crisis                                     3.1: The Globalization of Business
                                                             3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business  I
FocusGroups                                                  3.7: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                    idea
   9.3: The Marketing Mix                                 goals
                                                                                                                       10: Product Design and Development
foreign competition                                          6.1: What Do Managers Do?                                 10.8: Protecting Your Idea
                                                             8.1: The Team and the Organization
   3.4: Trade Controls                                                                                              IdentifyingEthicalIssues
                                                          goalsetting
foreign direct investment                                                                                              2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility
                                                             6.2: Planning
   3.2: Opportunities in International Business                                                                     IFRS
                                                          goods
foreignlanguages                                                                                                       12.1: The Role of Accounting
                                                             1.2: Getting Down to Business
   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business     1.3: What Is Economics?                                importing

Franchise                                                 goods producer                                               3.2: Opportunities in International Business

   5.5: Starting a Business                                  11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers      improvement of existing product
   5.8: Cases and Problems
                                                          goodsproducingsector                                         10.1: What Is a Product?
franchising
                                                             5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?          income statement
   3.2: Opportunities in International Business
                                                          google                                                       12.2: Understanding Financial Statements
fraud prevention                                                                                                       12.3: Accrual Accounting
                                                             6.7: Cases and Problems                                   14.3: The Financial Planning Process
   15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication         13.8: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                    income taxes
free trade                                                government
                                                                                                                       4.1: Factors to Consider
   3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers                1: The Foundations of Business
                                                             1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy         incorporating
full employment
                                                          government measures                                          4.7: Cases and Problems
   1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
                                                             13.1: The Functions of Money                           independence
functions of money
                                                          government regulation                                        5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
   13: Managing Financial Resources                                                                                 Ownership
   13.1: The Functions of Money                              3.4: Trade Controls
                                                                                                                    IndividualApproachToEthics
funding                                                   GreatPlaceToWork
                                                                                                                       2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility
   5.6: The Business Plan                                    7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality
   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business             Employees                                                 industrial design

funding options                                           grievances                                                   8.4: The Business of Communication

   13.6: Financing the Going Concern                         7.6: Labor Unions                                      industries

G                                                         group communication                                          5: The Challenges of Starting a Business

GAAP                                                         8.5: Communication Channels                            industry

   12.1: The Role of Accounting                           group success                                                10: Product Design and Development
                                                                                                                       10.4: Understand Your Industry
Gantt                                                        8.2: Why Teamwork Works                                   10.5: Forecasting Demand

   11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts           groups                                                    Industry Analysis

Ganttcharts                                                  8.1: The Team and the Organization                        4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
                                                                                                                       5.8: Cases and Problems
   11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and         growthstage
Service Industries                                                                                                  industry growth
                                                             9.8: The Product Life Cycle
GDP                                                                                                                    13.5: Understanding Securities Markets
                                                          H
   1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy                                                                         inflation
                                                          health awareness
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade                                                                                 1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
                                                             2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility                   1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
   3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
                                                          health care costs                                         information
global business
                                                             10.9: Cases and Problems                                  15: Managing Information and Technology
   3.2: Opportunities in International Business
                                                          hierarchy of needs                                        information management
global commerce
                                                             7.3: Motivating Employees                                 15: Managing Information and Technology
   3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers                                                                          15.7: Careers in Information Management
                                                          highereducation
global issues                                                                                                       information system
                                                             InfoPage
   16.6: Cases and Problems                                                                                            15.1: Data versus Information
                                                          hiringdecisions
global marketplace                                                                                                  information systems
                                                             7.7: Cases and Problems
   3.3: The Global Business Environment                                                                                15: Managing Information and Technology
                                                          homeownership                                                15.3: Types of Information Systems
global talent                                                                                                          15.7: Careers in Information Management
                                                             14: Personal Finances
   4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions                                                                                    information systems manager
                                                          honesty
global trade                                                                                                           15.1: Data versus Information
                                                             2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
   3.4: Trade Controls                                       2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues                        information technology

globalbusiness                                            hospitality industry                                         15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing

   3.1: The Globalization of Business                        9.6: Promoting a Product                               infrastructure as a service

globalcareer                                              HR management                                                15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing

   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business     7.2: Developing Employees

                                                          6                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
innovation                                                inventory control                                     laborunions

   5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?                             11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing          7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality
   5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.         11.3: Managing the Production Process in a         Employees
Economy                                                   Manufacturing Company
   10.1: What Is a Product?                                                                                        7.6: Labor Unions
   10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?                inventory management
   10.7: Product Development                                                                                    language barriers
   10.8: Protecting Your Idea                                11.2: Facility Layouts
                                                                                                                   3.3: The Global Business Environment
insurance companies                                       investing
                                                                                                                largest employer
   13.2: Financial Institutions                              13.8: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                   11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
integrity                                                 investment
                                                                                                                law
   2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview               13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager
   2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues                           13.6: Financing the Going Concern                     16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
   2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics                14.2: Time Is Money                                Business
   2.8: Cases and Problems
                                                          investment banking                                       16.1: Law and the Legal System
intentional tort                                                                                                   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
                                                             13.5: Understanding Securities Markets                16.6: Cases and Problems
   16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
                                                          investment industry                                   lawyer
intercultural communication
                                                             13.7: Careers in Finance                              16.6: Cases and Problems
   3.3: The Global Business Environment
                                                          investors evaluation                                  Leadership
interculturalexchange
                                                             13.5: Understanding Securities Markets                2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics
   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business                                                           2.8: Cases and Problems
                                                          ipo                                                      6.1: What Do Managers Do?
interdependence                                                                                                    6.4: Directing
                                                             13.8: Cases and Problems                              6.6: Managerial Skills
   8.1: The Team and the Organization                                                                              8.2: Why Teamwork Works
                                                          ISmanagement                                             8.3: The Team and Its Members
interest rates                                                                                                     13.8: Cases and Problems
                                                             15.8: Cases and Problems
   1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy                                                               leadership styles
   14.2: Time Is Money                                    IT planning
                                                                                                                   6.4: Directing
interest_rates                                               15.7: Careers in Information Management
                                                                                                                learning
   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons       ITcareers
from the Subprime Crisis                                                                                           3.7: Cases and Problems
                                                             15.8: Cases and Problems                              5.8: Cases and Problems
interestRates                                                                                                      7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
                                                          J                                                        8.7: Cases and Problems
   13.3: The Federal Reserve System                                                                                9.1: 0 Cases and Problems
                                                          James Burke                                              9.5: Placing a Product
international                                                                                                      10.4: Understand Your Industry
                                                             2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics                11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts
   3: Business in a Global Environment                                                                             14.5: Cases and Problems
                                                          job                                                      15.3: Types of Information Systems
international bodies
                                                             16.6: Cases and Problems                           learning objectives
   3.4: Trade Controls
                                                          job analysis                                             15.1: Data versus Information
international business
                                                             7.1: Human Resource Management                     learningObjective
   3.3: The Global Business Environment
   3.7: Cases and Problems                                job creation                                             13.3: The Federal Reserve System

international trade                                          5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.  legal differences
                                                          Economy
   3.2: Opportunities in International Business                                                                    3.3: The Global Business Environment
   3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers             job description
                                                                                                                legal entity
internationalbusiness                                        7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                                                                                   4.4: Corporation
   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business  job growth
                                                                                                                legal environment
internationaltrade                                           1.8: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                   16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
   3.1: The Globalization of Business                     job offers
                                                                                                                legal form
internet                                                     14.1: Financial Planning
                                                                                                                   4.1: Factors to Consider
   15.5: Data Communications Networks                     job opportunities
                                                                                                                legal monopoly
internetsecurity                                             4.7: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                   1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and
   15.8: Cases and Problems                               job prospects                                         Monopoly

internship                                                   14.1: Financial Planning                           legal responsibilities

   8.7: Cases and Problems                                job security                                             4.3: Partnership

internships                                                  1.8: Cases and Problems                            legal standards

   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business  jobsecurity                                              12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities

interpersonal skills                                         7.6: Labor Unions                                  legal system

   8.3: The Team and Its Members                          K                                                        16.1: Law and the Legal System
                                                                                                                   16.3: Negligence Torts
interviewskills                                           Kmart
                                                                                                                LegalSystem
   7.7: Cases and Problems                                   12.6: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                                   16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
intrinsic value                                           L                                                     Business

   13.1: The Functions of Money                           labor market                                          liabilities

invention                                                    1.8: Cases and Problems                               14.3: The Financial Planning Process

   10.8: Protecting Your Idea

inventory

   12.3: Accrual Accounting

                                                          7                                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
liability                                             market                                            marketstrategy

   4.2: Sole Proprietorship                              10.4: Understand Your Industry                    9.8: The Product Life Cycle
   16.3: Negligence Torts                                10.5: Forecasting Demand
                                                                                                        Maslow
liability exposure                                    market analysis
                                                                                                           7.3: Motivating Employees
   4.1: Factors to Consider                              5.6: The Business Plan
                                                         5.8: Cases and Problems                        mass customization
licensing                                                10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
                                                                                                           11.8: Cases and Problems
   3.2: Opportunities in International Business       market expansion
                                                                                                        mass production
lifestyle                                                4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
                                                                                                           11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
   5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business      market introduction
Ownership                                                                                               materials management
                                                         10.1: What Is a Product?
limited liability                                                                                          11.3: Managing the Production Process in a
                                                      market performance                                Manufacturing Company
   4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
                                                         13.5: Understanding Securities Markets         measure of value
limited partnerships
                                                      market regulation                                    13.1: The Functions of Money
   4.3: Partnership
                                                         13.5: Understanding Securities Markets         mediation
loans
                                                      market research                                      7.6: Labor Unions
   13.2: Financial Institutions
                                                         5.5: Starting a Business                       medium of exchange
logistics management                                     10.9: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                           13.1: The Functions of Money
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                         market share
                                                                                                        members
loss                                                     4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
                                                         13.5: Understanding Securities Markets            8: Teamwork and Communications
   10.6: Breakeven Analysis
                                                      market structure                                  mentorship
M
                                                         1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and     6.4: Directing
management                                            Monopoly
                                                                                                        menu changes
   1.1: Introduction                                  marketing
   5.6: The Business Plan                                                                                  2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
   6.1: What Do Managers Do?                             1.1: Introduction
   6.2: Planning                                         8.4: The Business of Communication             mergers
   6.4: Directing                                        8.7: Cases and Problems
   6.5: Controlling                                      9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers        4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership
   6.6: Managerial Skills                                9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                         4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions
   7.3: Motivating Employees                             9.2: What Is Marketing?
   7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?                9.4: Pricing a Product                         Microsoft
   9.5: Placing a Product                                9.5: Placing a Product
   11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts          9.9: The Marketing Environment                    6.7: Cases and Problems
   15.3: Types of Information Systems                    9.10: Careers in Marketing
                                                         10.1: What Is a Product?                       middle managers
management accounting                                    10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?
                                                         10.4: Understand Your Industry                    6.3: Organizing
   12.1: The Role of Accounting                          10.5: Forecasting Demand
                                                                                                        MisgoverningCorporations
management communication                              marketing environment
                                                                                                           2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility
   8.5: Communication Channels                           9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
                                                                                                        mission
management hierarchy                                  marketing liability
                                                                                                           6.7: Cases and Problems
   6.3: Organizing                                       10.9: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                        mission statement
management levels                                     marketing mix
                                                                                                           4.7: Cases and Problems
   6.3: Organizing                                       9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
                                                         9.2: What Is Marketing?                        missionstatement
managerial accounting                                    9.9: The Marketing Environment
                                                                                                           6.2: Planning
   12.1: The Role of Accounting                       marketing research
                                                                                                        monetary policy
managerial skills                                        9.10: Careers in Marketing
                                                                                                           1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy
   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business         marketing strategies
                                                                                                        monetaryPolicy
managing a business                                      5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
                                                         9.9: The Marketing Environment                    13.3: The Federal Reserve System
   5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
                                                      marketing strategy                                money
managing data
                                                         9.2: What Is Marketing?                           13.1: The Functions of Money
   15: Managing Information and Technology               9.6: Promoting a Product
                                                         10.7: Product Development                      money supply
manufacturer responsibility                              Glossary
                                                                                                           13.1: The Functions of Money
   16.4: Product Liability                            marketing technology
                                                                                                        moneySupply
manufacturing                                            15.1: Data versus Information
                                                                                                           13.3: The Federal Reserve System
   5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?      marketingmix
   11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and                                                       monitoring
Service Industries                                       9.3: The Marketing Mix
   11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing          9.8: The Product Life Cycle                       6.5: Controlling
   11.2: Facility Layouts
   11.5: The Technology of Goods Production           marketingobjectives                               monopolistic
   11.8: Cases and Problems
   15.3: Types of Information Systems                    9.7: Interacting with Your Customers              1: The Foundations of Business

manufacturing operations                              MarketingStrategy                                 monopolistic competition

   11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers     9.3: The Marketing Mix                            1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
                                                                                                           1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and
                                                                                                        Monopoly

                                                                                                        monopoly

                                                                                                           1: The Foundations of Business
                                                                                                           1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
                                                                                                           1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and
                                                                                                        Monopoly

                                                      8                                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
moral courage                                             onlinebusiness                                        ownership

   2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics                    5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?         4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership
                                                             15.8: Cases and Problems                              4.4: Corporation
mortgage_loans                                                                                                     5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
                                                          onlineprivacy                                         Ownership
   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons
from the Subprime Crisis                                     15.8: Cases and Problems                           P

MotivatingEmployees                                       openeducation                                         Packaging

   7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality            InfoPage                                              9.3: The Marketing Mix
Employees
                                                          operational framework                                 partnership
motivation
                                                             5.6: The Business Plan                                4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership
   6.1: What Do Managers Do?                                                                                       4.1: Factors to Consider
   6.4: Directing                                         operationalexcellence                                    4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
   7.3: Motivating Employees
   7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?                    11.7: Producing for Quality                        partnership agreement

multinational corporations                                operationalperformance                                   4.3: Partnership

   3.2: Opportunities in International Business              12.4: Financial Statement Analysis                 partnerships

N                                                         operations                                               4.3: Partnership

natural monopoly                                             1.1: Introduction                                  patent
                                                             6.5: Controlling
   1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and                                                                   10.8: Protecting Your Idea
Monopoly                                                  operations management
                                                                                                                penetration pricing
negligence                                                   11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
                                                             11.3: Managing the Production Process in a            9.4: Pricing a Product
   16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law                        Manufacturing Company
   16.3: Negligence Torts                                    11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers  pension funds
   16.4: Product Liability                                   11.8: Cases and Problems
                                                             Glossary                                              13.2: Financial Institutions
NegligenceTorts
                                                          operations support systems                            perfect competition
   16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
Business                                                     15.3: Types of Information Systems                    1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand

negotiation                                               operationsmanagement                                  performance

   7.6: Labor Unions                                         11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and        6.1: What Do Managers Do?
   16.6: Cases and Problems                               Service Industries                                       6.5: Controlling

net worth                                                 opportunities                                         performance appraisal

   14.3: The Financial Planning Process                      3: Business in a Global Environment                   7.5: Performance Appraisal
                                                             9.1: 0 Cases and Problems
networking                                                   10: Product Design and Development                 performance evaluation
                                                             12: The Role of Accounting in Business
   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business                                                           7.5: Performance Appraisal
   15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing            organization
   15.5: Data Communications Networks                                                                           performance targets
                                                             4.2: Sole Proprietorship
new product pricing                                          6.7: Cases and Problems                               6.3: Organizing
                                                             7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
   9.4: Pricing a Product                                    8: Teamwork and Communications                     PerformanceAppraisal

new to the market                                         organization chart                                       7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality
                                                                                                                Employees
   10.1: What Is a Product?                                  6.3: Organizing
                                                                                                                performanceevaluation
newproducts                                               organizational communication
                                                                                                                   12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
   10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?                   8.5: Communication Channels
                                                                                                                performanceobjectives
nonprofit                                                 organizational goals
                                                                                                                   6.2: Planning
   1.2: Getting Down to Business                             6.4: Directing
   4.7: Cases and Problems                                                                                      personal finance
                                                          organizational objectives
O                                                                                                                  14.2: Time Is Money
                                                             6.5: Controlling                                      14.3: The Financial Planning Process
obesity epidemic
                                                          organizational skills                                 personal finances
   2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
                                                             6.6: Managerial Skills                                14.1: Financial Planning
objective                                                    8.4: The Business of Communication
                                                                                                                personal selling
   7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?                 OrganizationalApproachToEthics
                                                                                                                   9.6: Promoting a Product
OER                                                          2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility
                                                                                                                personal_financial_transactions
   InfoPage                                               organizationalbehavior
                                                                                                                   14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons
oligopoly                                                    6.2: Planning                                      from the Subprime Crisis

   1: The Foundations of Business                         organizations                                         PersonalFinance
   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand
   1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and             1.2: Getting Down to Business                         14: Personal Finances
Monopoly                                                     8.1: The Team and the Organization
                                                                                                                PERT
online                                                    organizing
                                                                                                                   11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and
   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                                 6.1: What Do Managers Do?                          Service Industries

Online Business                                           outsourcing                                              11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts

   5.8: Cases and Problems                                   3.2: Opportunities in International Business       plaintiffs
                                                             11.8: Cases and Problems
online conferencing                                                                                                16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
                                                          owners
   15.5: Data Communications Networks                                                                           planning
                                                             1.2: Getting Down to Business
                                                                                                                   6.1: What Do Managers Do?

                                                                                                                planningprocess

                                                                                                                   6.2: Planning

                                                          9                                                     https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
platform as a service                                 product launch                                     proprietorship

   15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing           9.4: Pricing a Product                             4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership

political differences                                 product layout                                     protect

   3.3: The Global Business Environment                  11.2: Facility Layouts                             10: Product Design and Development

pollution prevention                                  product liability                                  protecting operations

   2.6: Environmentalism                                 16.4: Product Liability                            15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication
                                                         16.6: Cases and Problems
portfolio managers                                                                                       protectionism
                                                      product life cycle
   13.7: Careers in Finance                                                                                 3.4: Trade Controls
                                                         9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
positive work environment                                                                                public criticism
                                                      product management
   7.5: Performance Appraisal                                                                               2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
                                                         9.10: Careers in Marketing
preferred stock                                                                                          public law
                                                      product placement
   13.6: Financing the Going Concern                                                                        16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
                                                         9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
presentations                                                                                            public relations
                                                      product utility
   8.6: Forms of Communication                                                                              9.6: Promoting a Product
                                                         10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities
price competition                                                                                        public safety
                                                      productdevelopment
   1.8: Cases and Problems                                                                                  2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
                                                         9.8: The Product Life Cycle
pricing                                                  10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?         publicity

   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand     productideas                                          9.6: Promoting a Product
   9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers
   9.2: What Is Marketing?                               10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?         PublicLaw
   9.4: Pricing a Product
                                                      production                                            16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of
pricing control                                                                                          Business
                                                         1.3: What Is Economics?
   1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and         11.5: The Technology of Goods Production        publicly traded company
Monopoly                                                 11.8: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                            13.5: Understanding Securities Markets
private law                                           production control
                                                                                                         punitive damages
   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law                   11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
                                                                                                            16.4: Product Liability
problem solving                                       production planning
                                                                                                         purchasing
   6.6: Managerial Skills                                11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
   8.4: The Business of Communication                    11.2: Facility Layouts                             11.3: Managing the Production Process in a
                                                                                                         Manufacturing Company
Problems                                              production process
                                                                                                         purpose
   3: Business in a Global Environment                   11.3: Managing the Production Process in a
   4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership          Manufacturing Company                                 6.7: Cases and Problems
   8: Teamwork and Communications
   12: The Role of Accounting in Business             productionprocess                                  Q
   13: Managing Financial Resources
   16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of           11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and  quality
Business                                              Service Industries
                                                                                                            11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and
process control systems                               ProductLiability                                   Service Industries

   15.3: Types of Information Systems                    16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of        Glossary
                                                      Business
process layout                                                                                           quality control
                                                      productlife
   11.2: Facility Layouts                                                                                   11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing
                                                         9.8: The Product Life Cycle                        11.5: The Technology of Goods Production
product
                                                      products                                           quality products
   10: Product Design and Development
   10.1: What Is a Product?                              9.4: Pricing a Product                             10.7: Product Development
   10.5: Forecasting Demand
   10.8: Protecting Your Idea                         professional                                       qualityassurance

product delivery process                                 6.7: Cases and Problems                            11.7: Producing for Quality

   11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers  professional standards                             qualitymanagement

product design                                           12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities     11.7: Producing for Quality

   10.7: Product Development                          profit                                             quotas
   10.9: Cases and Problems
                                                         1.2: Getting Down to Business                      3.4: Trade Controls
product development                                      10.6: Breakeven Analysis
                                                                                                         R
   8.4: The Business of Communication                 profit sharing
   9.2: What Is Marketing?                                                                               ratio analysis
   10.1: What Is a Product?                              4.1: Factors to Consider
   10.4: Understand Your Industry                                                                           12.6: Cases and Problems
   10.7: Product Development                          profitability
                                                                                                         ratioanalysis
product differentiation                                  9.4: Pricing a Product
                                                         12.4: Financial Statement Analysis                 12.4: Financial Statement Analysis
   1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and
Monopoly                                              profits                                            recession

product flops                                            4.2: Sole Proprietorship                           1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy

   10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities           project                                            recessions

product innovation                                       11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts       1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy

   10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities           promotion                                          recruitment
   13.5: Understanding Securities Markets
                                                         9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers         7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                         9.2: What Is Marketing?                            7.7: Cases and Problems

                                                      promotion mix                                      recycling

                                                         9.6: Promoting a Product                           2.6: Environmentalism

                                                      10                                                 https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
regulations                                       savings_rate                                          smallbusiness

   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law               14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons      5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?
                                                  from the Subprime Crisis                                 10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From?
relationship building
                                                  scalability                                           social context
   8.3: The Team and Its Members
                                                     15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing           8.1: The Team and the Organization
renewable energy
                                                  scheduling                                            social environment
   2.6: Environmentalism
                                                     11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts          9.9: The Marketing Environment
report
                                                  search engine                                         social justice
   14.5: Cases and Problems
                                                     15.5: Data Communications Networks                    16.1: Law and the Legal System
research
                                                  Sears Holdings                                        social needs
   10.1: What Is a Product?
   10.4: Understand Your Industry                    12.6: Cases and Problems                              7.3: Motivating Employees
   10.5: Forecasting Demand
                                                  securities market                                     social responsibility
research and development
                                                     13.5: Understanding Securities Markets                2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility
   10.7: Product Development
                                                  securities markets                                    socialmediamarketing
responsibilities
                                                     13: Managing Financial Resources                      9.7: Interacting with Your Customers
   5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
Ownership                                         security concerns                                     socialresponsibility

restaurant industry                                  15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing           2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
                                                                                                           2.8: Cases and Problems
   10.9: Cases and Problems                       security issues
                                                                                                        software as a service
resume                                               15: Managing Information and Technology
                                                                                                           15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing
   14.5: Cases and Problems                       service company
                                                                                                        sole
retail                                               11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
                                                                                                           4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership
   5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?  service operations
   12.6: Cases and Problems                                                                             sole proprietorship
                                                     11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
retailing                                                                                                  4.1: Factors to Consider
                                                  service provider                                         4.2: Sole Proprietorship
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                                                                              4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
                                                     11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
retirement                                                                                              StagesOfCorporateResponsibility
                                                  service sector
   14.2: Time Is Money                                                                                     2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility
                                                     11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers
revenue                                                                                                 stakeholderrelationships
                                                  serviceproducingsector
   4.4: Corporation                                                                                        2.8: Cases and Problems
   12.2: Understanding Financial Statements          5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?
                                                                                                        stakeholders
rights                                            serviceproviders
                                                                                                           2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
   10.8: Protecting Your Idea                        11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and        2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
                                                  Service Industries                                       12.1: The Role of Accounting
risk management
                                                  services                                              standards
   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
                                                     1.2: Getting Down to Business                         6.5: Controlling
risk taking                                          1.3: What Is Economics?
                                                                                                        starting a business
   5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?                  shared decision making
                                                                                                           5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
RiskManagement                                       4.3: Partnership                                      5.5: Starting a Business

   14: Personal Finances                          skills                                                startup

robotics                                             6.6: Managerial Skills                                5.6: The Business Plan
                                                     8.6: Forms of Communication
   11.5: The Technology of Goods Production          8.7: Cases and Problems                            startups
                                                     14.5: Cases and Problems
Rule of Law                                                                                                5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?
                                                  skills development
   16.1: Law and the Legal System                                                                       statement of cash flows
                                                     7.2: Developing Employees
S                                                    7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?                12.3: Accrual Accounting

safety needs                                      skimming pricing                                      statement of owner's equity

   7.3: Motivating Employees                         9.4: Pricing a Product                                12.2: Understanding Financial Statements

sales                                             small business                                        statisticalprocesscontrol

   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                         5: The Challenges of Starting a Business              11.7: Producing for Quality
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                        5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur?
   10.5: Forecasting Demand                          5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.  stock market
   10.6: Breakeven Analysis                       Economy
   12.4: Financial Statement Analysis                5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business         13.8: Cases and Problems
                                                  Ownership
sales promotion                                      5.5: Starting a Business                           stockholders equity
                                                     5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business
   9.6: Promoting a Product                          12.2: Understanding Financial Statements              13.6: Financing the Going Concern

salesgrowth                                       small business administration                         store of value

   9.8: The Product Life Cycle                       5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.     13.1: The Functions of Money
                                                  Economy
savings                                                                                                 strategic HR planning
                                                  small companies
   14.2: Time Is Money                                                                                     7.1: Human Resource Management
   14.5: Cases and Problems                          4.7: Cases and Problems
                                                                                                        strategic planning
savings banks
                                                                                                           6.3: Organizing
   13.2: Financial Institutions                                                                            Glossary

                                                                                                        strategicplanning

                                                                                                           6.2: Planning

                                                  11                                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
strategies                                                team                                                  totalqualitymanagement

   9.4: Pricing a Product                                    8: Teamwork and Communications                        11.7: Producing for Quality
   9.5: Placing a Product                                    8.1: The Team and the Organization
                                                                                                                toyindustry
strategy                                                  Team Building
                                                                                                                   9.8: The Product Life Cycle
   6.5: Controlling                                          5.8: Cases and Problems
   9.1: 0 Cases and Problems                                                                                    trade
   10.4: Understand Your Industry                         team cohesion
   10.5: Forecasting Demand                                                                                        3: Business in a Global Environment
                                                             8.2: Why Teamwork Works                               3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
strict liability
                                                          team dynamics                                         trade agreements
   16.4: Product Liability
                                                             6.4: Directing                                        3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
study abroad                                                 8.2: Why Teamwork Works
                                                             8.3: The Team and Its Members                      trade barriers
   3.7: Cases and Problems
                                                          team effectiveness                                       3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
studyabroad
                                                             8.2: Why Teamwork Works                            Trade Controls
   3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business
                                                          team management                                          3.4: Trade Controls
SubprimeCrisis
                                                             6.6: Managerial Skills                             trade disputes
   14: Personal Finances
                                                          team productivity                                        3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
subsidies
                                                             8.2: Why Teamwork Works                            training
   3.4: Trade Controls
                                                          team project                                             7.7: Cases and Problems
success
                                                             8.7: Cases and Problems                            training programs
   8.7: Cases and Problems
                                                          team size                                                7.2: Developing Employees
supplier selection
                                                             8.2: Why Teamwork Works                            transaction processing systems
   11.3: Managing the Production Process in a
Manufacturing Company                                     teamwork                                                 15.3: Types of Information Systems

supply                                                       7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?             travel
                                                             8: Teamwork and Communications
   1: The Foundations of Business                            8.1: The Team and the Organization                    3.7: Cases and Problems
   9.5: Placing a Product                                    8.2: Why Teamwork Works
                                                             8.3: The Team and Its Members                      trends
supply and demand                                            8.4: The Business of Communication
                                                                                                                   9.9: The Marketing Environment
   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand         technological environment
   1.8: Cases and Problems                                                                                      trojan horses
                                                             9.9: The Marketing Environment
supply chain                                                                                                       15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication
                                                          technology
   11.3: Managing the Production Process in a                                                                   trust
Manufacturing Company                                        InfoPage
                                                             1.1: Introduction                                     2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview
supply chain management                                      10.8: Protecting Your Idea
                                                             11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and     trust in teams
   9.10: Careers in Marketing                             Service Industries
                                                             11.5: The Technology of Goods Production              8.2: Why Teamwork Works
supply curve                                                 11.8: Cases and Problems
                                                             15.3: Types of Information Systems                 turnover reduction
   1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand            15.5: Data Communications Networks
                                                             15.8: Cases and Problems                              7.5: Performance Appraisal
Surveys
                                                          technology crime                                      Tylenol crisis
   9.3: The Marketing Mix
                                                             15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication     2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics
sustainability
                                                          textbooks                                             U
   2.6: Environmentalism
                                                             InfoPage                                           U.S. businesses
T
                                                          theories of motivation                                   4.4: Corporation
talent acquisition
                                                             7.3: Motivating Employees                          U.S. economy
   7.1: Human Resource Management
                                                          time management                                          5: The Challenges of Starting a Business
Target                                                                                                             5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.
                                                             5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business         Economy
   12.6: Cases and Problems                                  6.6: Managerial Skills                                11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers

target market                                             time value of money                                   U.S. Patent and Trademark Office

   9.2: What Is Marketing?                                   14.2: Time Is Money                                   10.8: Protecting Your Idea
   9.6: Promoting a Product
                                                          TimeIsMoney                                           U.S. sales
TargetMarket
                                                             14: Personal Finances                                 12.6: Cases and Problems
   9.3: The Marketing Mix
                                                          tips                                                  unemployment
tariffs
                                                             8.6: Forms of Communication                           1.1: Introduction
   3.4: Trade Controls                                                                                             1.8: Cases and Problems
   3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers             top managers
                                                                                                                unemployment rate
tasks                                                        6.3: Organizing
                                                                                                                   1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy
   11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts           tort
                                                                                                                unethical behavior
tax burden                                                   16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law
                                                             16.3: Negligence Torts                                2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues
   4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership
                                                          tort law                                              unionization
taxation
                                                             16.4: Product Liability                               7.6: Labor Unions
   1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy            16.5: Some Principles of Public Law
   4.2: Sole Proprietorship                                                                                     utility
   4.4: Corporation
   16.5: Some Principles of Public Law                                                                             10.8: Protecting Your Idea

                                                          12                                                    https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
V                                                     web server                                        workplace ethics

value                                                    15.5: Data Communications Networks                2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues

   9.5: Placing a Product                             wholesale                                         workplace relationships

variable costs                                           5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In?     6.4: Directing

   10.6: Breakeven Analysis                           work scheduling                                   workplace safety

viruses                                                  11.3: Managing the Production Process in a        2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility
                                                      Manufacturing Company
   15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication                                                    world wide web
                                                      workforce planning
W                                                                                                          15.5: Data Communications Networks
                                                         7.1: Human Resource Management
warranty                                                                                                worldcommerce
                                                      workingconditions
   16.4: Product Liability                                                                                 3.1: The Globalization of Business
                                                         7.6: Labor Unions
WashingtonDC                                                                                            worms
                                                      worklifebalance
   13.3: The Federal Reserve System                                                                        15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication
                                                         7.7: Cases and Problems
wealth accumulation                                                                                     writing
                                                      workplace
   14.1: Financial Planning                                                                                8.6: Forms of Communication
                                                         7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work?
web                                                      8.6: Forms of Communication                    WTO

   3.7: Cases and Problems                            workplace culture                                    3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers
   14.5: Cases and Problems
                                                         2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics     Y
web pages
                                                      workplace diversity                               youth unemployment
   15.5: Data Communications Networks
                                                         7.2: Developing Employees                         1.8: Cases and Problems

                                                      13                                                https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/62465
Glossary                                                 balance sheet | Report on a company's assets,            cellular layout | Layout in which teams of workers

absolute advantage | Condition whereby a                 liabilities, and owner's equity at a specific point in   perform all the tasks involved in building a
                                                         time.                                                    component, group of related components, or finished
country is the only source of a product or is able to                                                             product.
make more of a product using the same or fewer           bear market | Period of declining or sluggish stock
resources than other countries.                                                                                   certificate authority | Third-party (such as
                                                         prices.
account payable | Record of cash owed to sellers                                                                  VeriSign) that verifies the identify of a computer site.
                                                         behavioral segmentation | Process of dividing
from whom a business has purchased products on                                                                    chain of command | Authority and reporting
credit.                                                  consumers by behavioral variables, such as attitude
                                                         toward the product, user status, or usage rate.          relationships among people working at different levels
account receivable | Record of cash that will be                                                                  of an organization.
                                                         benchmarking | Practice of comparing a
received from a customer to whom a business has sold                                                              civil law | Body of law governing disputes between
products on credit.                                      company's own performance with that of a company
                                                         that excels in the same activity.                        private parties.
Accountants | Financial advisor responsible for
                                                         benefits | Compensation other than salaries, hourly      classified balance sheet | Balance sheet that totals
measuring, summarizing, and communicating financial
and managerial information.                              wages, or financial incentives.                          assets and liabilities in separate categories.

accounting | System for measuring and                    blocking roles | Behavior that inhibits either team      client-server systems | System connecting client

summarizing business activities, interpreting financial  performance or that of individual members.               machines (which are used by employees for data input
information, and communicating the results to                                                                     and retrieval) and a server (that stores shared databases
management and other decision makers.                    bonds | Debt securities that require annual interest     and programs).

accounting equation | Accounting tool showing            payments to bondholders.                                 cloud computing | Cloud computing means

the resources of a business (assets) and the claims on   bonuses | Annual income given to employees (in           performing computer tasks using services provided
those resources (liabilities and owner's equity).                                                                 over the Internet.
                                                         addition to salary) based on company-wide
accrual accounting | Accounting system that              performance.                                             code of conduct | Statement that defines the

records transactions when they occur, regardless of      boycotting | Method used by union members to             principles and guidelines that employees must follow
when cash is paid or received.                                                                                    in the course of all job-related activities.
                                                         voice displeasure with certain organizations by
acquisition | The purchase of one company by             refusing to buy the company's products and               collective bargaining | Process by which
                                                         encouraging others to follow suit.
another with no new company being formed.                                                                         management and union-represented workers settle
                                                         brand loyalty | Consumer preference for a                differences.
adjustable-rate mortgage | Mortgage that's
                                                         particular brand that develops over time based on        Commercial banks | Financial institution that
pegged to the increase or decrease of certain interest   satisfaction with a company's products.
rates that your lender has to pay.                                                                                generates profits by lending funds and providing
                                                         breakeven analysis | Method of determining the           customers with services, such as check processing.
administrative law | Body of law dealing with
                                                         level of sales at which the company will break even      commission | Compensation paid to employees
statutes and regulations related to the activities of    (have no profit or loss).
administrative agencies.                                                                                          based on the dollar amount of sales that they make.
                                                         breakeven point in units | Number of sales units
Advertising | Paid, nonpersonal communication                                                                     common stock | Stock whose owners bear the
                                                         at which net income is zero.
designed to create an awareness of a product or                                                                   ultimate rewards and risks of ownership.
company.                                                 browsers | Software (such as Internet Explorer) that
                                                                                                                  communication | Process of                transferring
advertising agency | Marketing consulting firm           locates and displays Web pages.
                                                                                                                  information from a sender to a receiver.
that develops and executes promotional campaigns for     budget | A document that itemizes the sources of
clients.                                                                                                          communism | Economic system featuring the
                                                         income and expenditures for a future period (often a
agency | Legal relationship in which one party acts      year).                                                   highest level of government control over allocation
                                                                                                                  and distribution.
on behalf of, and under the control of, another.         business cycle | Pattern of expansion and
                                                                                                                  comparative advantage | Condition whereby one
American Stock Exchange | Stock market where             contraction in an economy.
                                                                                                                  nation is able to produce a product at a lower
shares of smaller companies are traded.                  business ethics | Application of ethical behavior in     opportunity cost compared to another nation.

amortization | Schedule by which you'll reduce the       a business context.                                      comparative income statement | Financial

balance of your debt.                                    business plan | Formal document describing a             statement showing income for more than one year.

application | Document completed by a job                proposed business concept, description of the proposed   compensatory damages | Monetary awards
                                                         business, industry analysis, mission statement and core
applicant that provides factual information on the       values, a management plan, a description of goods or     intended to restore tort victims to the conditions that
person's education and work background.                  services, a description of production processes, and     they would have been in had their injuries never taken
                                                         marketing and financial plans.                           place.
applications software | Software that performs a
                                                         capacity | Maximum number of products that a             compound interest | Interest earned on your
specific task, such as word processing or spreadsheet
creation.                                                facility can produce over a given period under normal    savings is added to the money in your savings account,
                                                         working conditions.                                      and the new total (principle plus interest) earns more
arbitration | Process of resolving a labor-contract                                                               interest.
                                                         capital budget | Budget that shows anticipated
dispute by having a third party study the situation and                                                           computer-aided design | System using computer
arrive at a binding agreement.                           expenditures for major equipment.
                                                                                                                  technology to create models representing the design of
Artificial intelligence | Science of developing          capital structure | Relationship between a               a product.

computer systems that can mimic human behavior.          company's debt (funds acquired from creditors) and its   computer-aided manufacturing | System using
                                                         equity (funds invested by owners).
assets | Resource from which a business expects to                                                                computer technology to control production processes
                                                         capitalism | Economic system featuring the lowest        and equipment.
gain some future benefit.
                                                         level of government control over allocation and          conceptual skills | Skills used to reason abstractly
audits | Accountant's examination of and report on a     distribution.
                                                                                                                  and analyze complex situations.
company's financial statements.                          Cash-flow management | Process of monitoring
                                                                                                                  Conflicts of interest | Situation in which an
balance of payments | Difference between the             cash inflows and outflows to ensure that the company
                                                         has the right amount of funds on hand.                   individual must choose between the promotion of
total flow of money coming into a country and the                                                                 personal interests and the interests of others.
total flow of money going out.                           cash-flow or income statement | Shows where

                                                         your money has come from and where it's slated to go.

                                                         1                                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
consumer behavior | Decision process that                 customer division | Organizational structure that       Distribution | All activities involved in getting the

individuals go through when purchasing or using           groups employees into customer-based business           right quantity of a product to the right customer at the
products.                                                 segments.                                               right time and at a reasonable cost.

consumer confidence index | Measure of                    customer value triad | Three factors that               distribution center | Location where products are

optimism that consumers express about the economy         customers consider in determining the value of a        received from multiple suppliers, stored temporarily,
as they go about their everyday lives.                    product: quality, service, and price.                   and then shipped to their final destinations.

consumer market | Buyers who want a product for           customer-relationship management | Strategy             dividends | Earnings distributed to stockholders.
                                                                                                                  divisional organizations | Form of organization
personal use.                                             for retaining customers by gathering information about
                                                          them, understanding them, and treating them well.       that groups people into several smaller, self-contained
consumer price index | Index that measures                                                                        units, or divisions, which are accountable for their own
                                                          data communication networks | Large network             performance.
inflation by measuring the prices of goods purchased
by a typical consumer.                                    used to transmit digital data from one computer to      Dow Jones Industrial Average | Market index
                                                          another using a variety of wired and wireless
contingency planning | Process of identifying             communication channels.                                 that reflects the total value of a "market basket" of
                                                                                                                  thirty large U.S. companies.
courses of action to be taken in the event that a         data mining | Technique used to search and analyze
business is adversely affected by a change.                                                                       downsizing | Practice of eliminating jobs to cut
                                                          data to reveal patterns and trends that can be used to
contingent workers | Temporary or part-time               predict future behavior.                                costs.

worker hired to supplement a company's permanent          data warehouse | Centralized database that stores       downward communication | Communication
workforce.
                                                          data from several databases so they can be easily       flow from higher to lower organizational levels.
continuous improvement | Company's                        analyzed.
                                                                                                                  dumping | Practice of selling exported goods below
commitment to making constant improvements in the         databases | Electronic collection of related data
design, production, and delivery of its products.                                                                 the price that producers would normally charge home
                                                          accessible to various users.                            markets.
contract | Exchange of promises or exchange of a
                                                          debit card | Pulls money out of your checking           e-commerce | Business conducted over the Internet.
promise for an act.                                                                                               economic indicator | Statistic that provides
                                                          account whenever you use the card to buy something
contribution margin per unit | Excess of                  or get cash from an ATM.                                information about trends in the economy.

revenue per unit over variable cost per unit.             decentralization | Decision-making process in           economic system | Means by which a society

controlling | Management process of comparing             which most decision making is spread throughout the     makes decisions about allocating resources to produce
                                                          organization.                                           and distribute products.
actual to planned performance and taking corrective
actions when necessary.                                   decision support system | Interactive system that       electronic data interchange | Computerized

convertible preferred stock | Preferred stock             extracts, integrates, and displays data from multiple   exchange of business transaction documents.
                                                          sources to help managers make nonroutine decisions.
that gives its owner the option of exchanging it for                                                              electronic data interchange | Computerized
common stock.                                             decision-making skills | Skills used in defining a
                                                                                                                  exchange of business transaction documents.
cooperative | A business owned and controlled by          problem, analyzing possible solutions, and selecting
                                                          the best outcome.                                       embargo | Extreme form of quota that bans the
those who use its services.
                                                          defendant | Party charged in a legal complaint; in      import or export of certain goods to a country for
Core values | Statement of fundamental beliefs                                                                    economic or political reasons.
                                                          criminal law, party against whom a criminal charge is
describing what's appropriate and important in            brought; in civil law, party being sued for             employment-at-will | Legal doctrine that allows
conducting organizational activities and providing a      compensation for wrong allegedly done to plaintiff.
guide for the behavior of organization members.                                                                   an employer to fire an employee at will.
                                                          defined contribution retirement plan | A form
Corporate social responsibility | Approach that                                                                   encryption | Process of encoding data so that only
                                                          of retirement savings plan in which both the employee
an organization takes in balancing its responsibilities   and the employer may contribute.                        individuals or computers armed with a secret code (or
toward different stakeholders when making legal,                                                                  key) can decode it.
economic, ethical, and social decisions.                  deflation | Decrease in overall price level.
                                                          delegation | Process of entrusting work to              enterprise resource planning (ERP) system |
corporation | Legal entity that is entirely separate
                                                          subordinates.                                           Integrated computer system used to channel
from the parties who own it and that is responsible for                                                           information to multiple users.
its own debts.                                            Demand | Quantity of a product that buyers are
                                                                                                                  entrepreneur | Individual who identifies a business
cost-based pricing | Pricing strategy that bases the      willing to purchase at various prices.
                                                                                                                  opportunity and assumes the risk of creating and
selling price of a product on its cost plus a reasonable  demand curve | Graph showing the quantity of a          running a business to take advantage of it.
profit.
                                                          product that will be bought at certain prices.          Equal            Employment  Opportunity
cover letter | A document accompanying your                                                                       Commission (EEOC) | Federal agency in charge
                                                          demand deposits | Checking accounts that pay            of enforcing federal laws on employment
rsum that explains why you're sending your rsum                                                               discrimination.
and highlights your qualifications.                       given sums to "payees" when they demand them.
                                                                                                                  equilibrium price | Price at which buyers are
credit union | Financial institution that provides        demand-based pricing | Pricing strategy that
                                                                                                                  willing to buy exactly the amount that sellers are
services to only its members (who are associated with     bases the price of a product on how much people are     willing to sell.
a particular organization).                               willing to pay for it.
                                                                                                                  equity theory | Theory of motivation that focuses
crisis management | Action plans that outline             Demographic segmentation | Process of
                                                                                                                  on our perceptions of how fairly we're treated relative
steps to be taken by a company in case of a crisis.       dividing the market into groups based on such           to others.
                                                          variables as age and income.
cross-functional teams | Team designed to take                                                                    ethical dilemma | Morally problematic situation.
                                                          departmentalization | Process of grouping
advantage of the special expertise of members drawn                                                               ethical lapse | Situation in which an individual
from different functional areas of the organization.      specialized jobs into meaningful units.
                                                                                                                  makes a decision that's unmistakably unethical or
Cultural barriers | Barriers that result from             depreciation expense | Costs of a long-term or          illegal.

differences among people of different cultures.           fixed asset spread over its useful life.                European Union | Association of European

culture | System of shared beliefs, values, customs,      depression | Severe, long-lasting recession.            countries that joined together to eliminate trade
                                                          directing | Management process that provides focus      barriers among themselves.
and behaviors that govern the interactions of members
of a society.                                             and direction to others and motivates them to achieve   exchange rate | Value of one currency relative to
                                                          organizational goals.
current ratio | Financial ratio showing the                                                                       another.
                                                          discount rate | Rate of interest the Fed charges
relationship between a company's current assets and
current liabilities.                                      member banks when they borrow reserve funds.

                                                          2                                                                        https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
executive information system | System that                 First-line managers | Those at the bottom of the          gross profit or gross margin | Positive

provides senior managers with strategic information        management hierarchy who supervise employees and          difference between revenues and cost of goods sold.
customized to meet their needs and presented in a          coordinate their activities.
convenient format.                                                                                                   group cohesiveness | Principle that groups are
                                                           fiscal policy | Governmental use of taxation and
executive summary | Overview emphasizing the                                                                         most effective when members like being members.
                                                           spending to influence economic conditions.
key points of a business plan to get the reader excited                                                              groupthink | Tendency to conform to group
about the business's prospects.                            fiscal year | Company's designated business year.
                                                           fixed costs | Costs that don't change when the            pressure in making decisions while failing to think
expectancy theory | Theory of motivation that                                                                        critically or to consider outside influences.
                                                           amount of goods sold changes.
proposes that employees will work hard to earn                                                                       hierarchy-of-needs theory | Theory of
rewards they value and consider obtainable.                fixed-position layout | Layout in which workers
                                                                                                                     motivation that holds that people are motivated by a
expenses | Costs incurred by selling products to           are moved to the product, which stays in one place.       hierarchical series of unmet needs.

customers.                                                 fixed-rate mortgage | A mortgage on which the             high-context cultures | Cultures in which

Expert systems | Program that mimics the                   interest rate remains the same regardless of changes in   personal and family connections have an effect on
                                                           market interest rates.                                    most interactions, including those in business.
judgment of experts.
                                                           flexible manufacturing system | System in                 human resource management (HRM) | All
exporting | Practice of selling domestic products to
                                                           which computer-controlled equipment is programmed         actions that an organization takes to attract, develop,
foreign customers.                                         to handle materials used in manufacturing.                and retain quality employees.

express warranty | Warranty created when a seller          flexible manufacturing systems (FMS) |                    implied warranties | Warranty        arising

affirms that a product meets certain standards of          System in which computer-controlled equipment is          automatically out of a transaction.
quality, description, performance, or condition.           programmed to handle materials used in
                                                           manufacturing.                                            incentive programs | Program designed to
External communication | Channel through
                                                           flexible spending account | Allows a specified            financially reward employees for good performance.
which communication occurs between parties inside a
company and parties outside it.                            amount of pretax dollars to be used to pay for qualified  individual retirement account (IRA) |
                                                           expenses, including health care and child care.
external marketing environment | Factors                                                                             Personal retirement account set up by an individual to
                                                           flextime | Alternative work arrangement that allows       save money tax free until retirement.
external to the firm that present threats and
opportunities and that require shifts in marketing         employees to designate starting and quitting times.       industrial market | Buyers who want a product for
plans.
                                                           foreign subsidiary | Independent company owned            use in making other products.
externalities | Cost that doesn't show up as part of
                                                           by a foreign firm (called its parent).                    industrial robots | Computer-controlled machine
the market price for a product.
                                                           formal communication network | Network                    used to perform repetitive tasks that are also hard or
extranet | Intranet that's partially available to certain                                                            dangerous for human workers.
                                                           consisting of all communications that flow along an
parties outside the organization.                          organization's official lines of authority.               industry | Group of businesses that compete with

factors of production | Resources consisting of            franchise | Form of business ownership in which a         one another to market products that are the same or
                                                                                                                     similar.
land, labor, capital (money, buildings, equipment), and    franchiser (a seller) grants a franchisee (a buyer) the
entrepreneurial skills combined to produce goods and       right to use a brand name and to sell its products or     informal communication network (or
services.                                                  services.                                                 grapevine) | Network that carries information

fair market value | The price you could get by             full employment | Condition under which about 95          whenever two or more employees get together and
                                                                                                                     start talking about the company and their jobs.
selling assets at their present price.                     percent of those who want to work are employed.
                                                                                                                     information | Data that have been processed or
Federal Depository Insurance Corporation                   functional organization | Form of business
(FDIC) | Government agency that regulates banks                                                                      turned into some useful form.
                                                           organization that groups together people who have
and insures deposits in its member banks up to             comparable skills and perform similar tasks.              information managers | Manager with
$250,000.
                                                           Gantt chart | Graphical tool for determining the          responsibility for determining the information needs of
federal funds rate | The interest rate that a Federal                                                                members of the organization and meeting those needs.
                                                           status of projects.
Reserve member bank pays when it borrows from                                                                        insider trading | Practice of buying or selling of
other member banks to meet reserve requirements.           General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade
                                                           (GATT) | International trade agreement that               securities using important information about the
Federal Reserve System | U.S. central banking                                                                        company before it's made public.
                                                           encourages free trade by regulating and reducing
system, which has three goals: price stability,            tariffs and provides a forum for resolving trade          insider trading | Practice of buying or selling of
sustainable economic growth, and full employment.          disputes.
                                                                                                                     securities using important information about the
fiduciary responsibility | Duty of management to           generally accepted accounting principles                  company before it's made public.
                                                           (GAAP) | Uniform set of rules for financial reporting
safeguard a company's assets and handle its funds in a                                                               Insurance companies | Nondeposit institution that
trustworthy manner.                                        issued by an independent agency called the Financial
                                                           Accounting Standards Board (FASB).                        collects premiums from policyholders for protection
Finance | Activities involved in planning for,                                                                       against losses and invests these funds.
                                                           generic branding | Product with no branding
obtaining, and managing a company's funds.                                                                           intentional tort | Intentional act that poses harm to
                                                           information attached to it except a description of its
Finance companies | Nondeposit financial                   contents.                                                 another person or another person's property.

institution that makes loans from funds acquired by        Geographic segmentation | Process of dividing a           Interest | Cost charged to use someone else's money.
selling securities or borrowing from commercial                                                                      interest coverage ratio | Financial ratio showing
banks.                                                     market according to such variables as climate, region,
                                                           and population density.                                   a company's ability to pay interest on its debts from its
financial plan | Planning document that shows the                                                                    operating income.
                                                           Geographical division | Organizational structure
amount of funds a company needs and details a                                                                        intermediary | Wholesaler or retailer who helps
strategy for getting those funds.                          that groups people into divisions based on location.
                                                                                                                     move products from their original source to the end
financial planning | The process of managing your          goods-producing sector | All businesses whose             user.

personal finances to meet goals that you've set for        primary purpose is to produce tangible goods.             International Financial Reporting
yourself or your family.                                                                                             Standards (IFRS) | A set of worldwide accounting
                                                           grievances | Union worker complaints on contract-
financing activities | Activity that creates cash                                                                    rules and guidelines used by companies to prepare
                                                           related matters.                                          financial statements that can be compared with those
inflows or outflows through the obtaining or repaying                                                                of other countries.
of borrowed or invested funds.                             gross domestic product (GDP) | Measure of the

firewall | Software program that controls access to a      market value of all goods and services produced by a
                                                           nation's economy in a given year.
company's intranet.

                                                           3                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
international franchise | Agreement in which a            just-in-time (JIT) production | System for                 manager | Individual in an organization who is

domestic company (franchiser) gives a foreign             reducing inventories and costs by requiring suppliers      responsible for making a group of people more
company (franchisee) the right to use its brand and sell  to deliver materials just in time to go into the           effective and efficient.
its products.                                             production process.
                                                                                                                     manager-led team | Team on which a manager
international licensing agreement | Agreement             just-in-time production | System for reducing
                                                                                                                     defines goals and methods and is solely responsible for
that allows a foreign company to sell a domestic          inventories and costs by requiring suppliers to deliver    interactions with higher-level management.
company's products or use its intellectual property in    materials just in time to go into the production process.
exchange for royalty fees.                                                                                           manufacturer branding | Branding strategy in
                                                          Labeling | Information on the package of a product
International Monetary Fund (IMF) |                                                                                  which a manufacturer sells one or more products under
                                                          that identifies the product and provides details of the    its own brand names.
International organization set up to lend money to        package contents.
countries with troubled economies.                                                                                   manufacturing resource planning (MRP II)
                                                          labor union | Organized group of workers that              | System for coordinating a firm's material
Internet service providers | Company, such as
                                                          bargains with employers to improve its members' pay,       requirements planning activities with the activities of
America Online, that links into the Internet              job security, and working conditions.                      its other functional areas.
infrastructure to connect paying subscribers.
                                                          law | Body of enforceable rules and principles of          market indexes | Measure for tracking stock
interpersonal skills | Skills used to get along with
                                                          conduct.                                                   prices.
and motivate other people.
                                                          layout | Arrangement in a facility of equipment,           market segments | Group of potential customers
interruption marketing | Marketing that
                                                          machinery, and people to make a production process as      with common characteristics that influence their
interrups people to get their attention (with the hope    efficient as possible.                                     buying decisions.
they will listen to the ad), such as TV advertising.
                                                          leadership style | Particular approach used by a           market share | Company's portion of the market
interview | Formal meeting during which the
                                                          manager to interact with and influence others.             that it has targeted.
employer learns more about an applicant and the
applicant learns more about the prospective employer.     leading economic indicators | Statistical data             Marketing | Marketing is the activity, set of

inventory | Goods that a business has made or             that predict the status of the economy three to twelve     institutions, and processes for creating,
                                                          months in the future.                                      communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings
bought and expects to sell in the process of normal                                                                  that have value for customers, clients, partners, and
operations.                                               legal monopoly | Monopoly in which one seller              society at large.

inventory control | Management of inventory to            supplies a product or technology to which it holds a       Marketing | Marketing is the activity, set of
                                                          patent.
ensure that a company has enough inventory to keep                                                                   institutions, and processes for creating,
operations flowing smoothly but not so much that          legal system | Institutions and processes that             communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings
money is being wasted in holding it.                                                                                 that have value for customers, clients, partners, and
                                                          enforce laws.                                              society at large.
inventory turnover ratio | Financial ratio that
                                                          liabilities | Debt owed by a business to an outside        marketing concept | Basic philosophy of
shows how efficiently a company turns over its
inventory.                                                individual or organization.                                satisfying customer needs while meeting
                                                                                                                     organizational goals.
investing activities | Activity that creates cash         limited liability | Legal condition under which an
                                                                                                                     marketing mix | Combination of product, price,
inflows or outflows through the selling or buying of      owner or investor can't lose more than the amount
long-term assets.                                         invested.                                                  place, and promotion (often called the four Ps) used to
                                                                                                                     market products.
investment banking firm | Financial institution           limited partnership | Partnership made up of a
                                                                                                                     marketing research | Process of collecting and
that specializes in issuing securities.                   single general partner (who runs the business and is
                                                          responsible for its liabilities) and any number of         analyzing data that's relevant to a specific marketing
ISO 14000 | Set of international standards for            limited partners.                                          situation.

environmental management established by the               limited-liability company | Corporation whose              marketing strategy | Plan for selecting a target
International Organization for Standardization.
                                                          members are not personally liable for company debts        market and creating, pricing, promoting, and
job analysis | Identification of the tasks,               and whose earnings are taxed only once, when they are      distributing products that satisfy customers.
                                                          paid out as dividends. It has fewer rules and
responsibilities, and skills of a job, as well as the     restrictions than does an S-corporation.                   mass customization | Production method in which
knowledge and abilities needed to perform it.
                                                          lines of credit | Commitment by a bank that allows         fairly high volumes of customized products are made
job description | Outline of the duties and                                                                          at fairly low prices.
                                                          a company to borrow up to a specified amount of
responsibilities of a position.                           money as the need arises.                                  mass production (or make-to-stock
                                                                                                                     strategy) | Production method in which high
job enlargement | Job redesign strategy in which          liquidity | Speed with which an asset can be
                                                                                                                     volumes of products are made at low cost and held in
management enhances a job by adding tasks at similar      converted into cash.                                       inventory in anticipation of future demand.
skill levels.
                                                          local area network (LAN) | Network that links              master production schedule (MPS) |
Job enrichment | Job redesign strategy in which
                                                          computers that are in close proximity.                     Timetable that specifies which and how many products
management enriches a job by adding tasks that                                                                       will be produced and when.
increase both responsibility and opportunity for          low-context cultures | Cultures in which personal
growth.                                                                                                              material requirements planning (MRP) |
                                                          and work relationships are compartmentalized.
job redesign | Management strategy used to                                                                           Technique of using a computerized program to
                                                          M-1 | Measure of the money supply that includes            calculate the quantity of materials needed for
increase job satisfaction by making jobs more                                                                        production and to reschedule inventory ordering.
interesting and challenging.                              only the most liquid forms of money, such as cash and
                                                          checking-account funds.                                    materials handling | Process of physically moving
job rotation | Job redesign strategy that allows
                                                          make-to-order strategy | Production method in              or carrying goods during production, warehousing, and
employees to rotate from one job to another on a                                                                     distribution.
systematic basis.                                         which products are made to customer specification.
                                                                                                                     materials management | All decisions pertaining
job sharing | Work arrangement in which two               management | Process of planning for, organizing,
                                                                                                                     to the purchase of inputs, the inventory of components
people share one full-time position.                      directing, and controlling a company's resources so        and finished products, and the scheduling of
                                                          that it can achieve its goals.                             production processes.
job specification | Detailed list of the
                                                          Management accounting | Branch of accounting               matrix structure | Structure in which employees
qualifications needed to perform a job, including
required skills, knowledge, and abilities.                that provides information and analysis to decision         from various functional areas form teams to combine
                                                          makers inside the organization to help them operate        their skills in working on a specific project.
joint ventures | Alliances in which the partners          the business.

fund a separate entity (partnership or corporation) to    management information system | System
manage their joint operations.
                                                          used to extract data from a database and compile
                                                          reports that help managers make routine decisions.

                                                          4                                                          https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
middle managers | Those in the middle of the              odd-even pricing | Practice of pricing products a         physical distribution | Activities needed to get a

management hierarchy who report to top management         few cents (or dollars) under an even number.              product from where it was manufactured to the
and oversee the activities of first-line managers.                                                                  customer.
                                                          offshoring | Setting up facilities in a foreign country
misdemeanor | Crime that's not "inherently evil"                                                                    picketing | Union tactic of parading with signs
                                                          that replace U.S. manufacturing facilities to produce
but that's nevertheless prohibited by society.            goods that will be sent back to the United States for     outside a factory or other facility to publicize a strike.
                                                          sale.
mission statement | Statement describing an                                                                         planning | Process of setting goals and determining
                                                          Oligopoly | Market in which a few sellers supply a
organization's purpose or mission--its reason for                                                                   the best way to achieve them.
existence--and telling stakeholders what the              large portion of all the products sold in the
organization is committed to doing.                       marketplace.                                              platform as a service | Those offering the

Money | Anything commonly accepted as a medium            on-the-job training | Employee training (often            platform as a service category of cloud computing
                                                                                                                    provide services that enable users to develop
of exchange, measure of value, and store of value.        informal) that occurs while the employee is on the job.   customized web applications.

money market funds | Fund invested in safe,               open market operations | The sale and purchase            precedent | Rule of case law that must be used by

highly liquid securities.                                 of U.S. government bonds by the Fed in the open           lower courts in deciding future cases.
                                                          market.
money market mutual funds | Accounts that                                                                           Preferred stock | Stock that pays owners a fixed
                                                          operating activities | Activity that creates cash
pay interest to investors who pool funds to make short-                                                             dividend annually.
term loans to businesses and the government.              inflows or outflows through day-to-day operations.
                                                                                                                    premises liability | The duty of innkeepers to take
money multiplier | The amount by which an initial         operational plans | Detailed action steps to be
                                                                                                                    reasonable care in preventing customers and third
bank deposit will expand the money supply.                taken by individuals or groups to implement tactical      parties from being injured on their property.
                                                          plans.
monopolistic competition | Market in which                                                                          prestige-pricing | Practice of setting a price
                                                          operations management (OM) | Management
many sellers supply differentiated products.                                                                        artificially high to foster the impression that it is a
                                                          of the process that transforms resources into products.   product of high quality.
monopoly | Market in which there is only one seller
                                                          operations manager | Person who designs and               primary data | Newly collected marketing
supplying products at regulated prices.
                                                          oversees the process that converts resources into goods   information that addresses specific questions about the
Motivation | Internally generated drive to achieve a      or services.                                              target market.

goal or follow a particular course of action.             Operations support systems | Information                  primary market | Market that deals in the sale of

multinational corporation (MNC) | Large                   system used by lower-level managers to assist them in     newly issued securities.
                                                          running day-to-day operations and making routine
corporation that operates in many countries.              decisions.                                                prime rate | Rate that banks charge their best

NASDAQ | Best-known over-the-counter, electronic          organization chart | Diagram representing the             customers.

exchange system.                                          interrelationships of positions within an organization.   private accountants | Accountant who works for a

national debt | Total amount of money owed by the         organizing | Management process of allocating             private organization or government agency.

federal government.                                       resources to achieve a company's plans.                   private branding | Product made by a

Natural monopolies | Monopoly in which,                   orientation | Activities involved in introducing new      manufacturer and sold to a retailer who in turn resells
                                                                                                                    it under its own name.
because of the industry's importance to society, one      employees to the organization and their jobs.
seller is permitted to supply products without                                                                      privatization | Process of converting government-
competition.                                              outsourcing | Practice of using outside vendors to
                                                                                                                    owned businesses to private ownership.
negligence tort | Tort resulting from carelessness.       manufacture all or part of a company's actual products.
net income | Positive difference between gross                                                                      Process control | Application of technology to
                                                          owner's equity | Amount which is invested in a
profit and total expenses.                                                                                          monitor and control physical processes.
                                                          business by its owners and which owners can claim
net worth | The difference between an individual's        from its assets.                                          process division | Organizational structure that

assets and liabilities.                                   partnership | Business owned jointly by two or            groups people into operating units based on various
                                                                                                                    stages in the production process.
net worth statement | A personal balance sheet            more people.
                                                                                                                    process layout | Layout that groups together
that lists the value of the things you own, the amounts   patent | Grant of the exclusive right to produce or
owed to others, and the difference, called "net worth."                                                             workers or departments that perform similar tasks.
                                                          sell a product, process, or invention.
niche | Narrowly defined group of potential                                                                         product | Something that can be marketed to
                                                          penetration pricing | Pricing strategy in which the
customers with a fairly specific set of needs.                                                                      customers because it provides a benefit and satisfies a
                                                          seller charges a low price on a new product to            need.
nonverbal communication | "Nonword"                       discourage competition and gain market share.
                                                                                                                    product concept | Description of what a new
messages communicated through facial expressions,         pension funds | Fund set up to collect contributions
posture, gestures, and tone of voice.                                                                               product will look like and how it will work.
                                                          from participating companies for the purpose of
North American Free Trade Association                     providing its members with retirement income.             product development process | Series of
(NAFTA) | Agreement among the governments of
                                                          Perfect competition | Market in which many                activities by which a product idea is transformed into a
the United States, Canada, and Mexico to open their                                                                 final product.
borders to unrestricted trade.                            consumers buy standardized products from numerous
                                                          small businesses.                                         Product division | Organizational structure made
not-for-profit (or nonprofit) organizations |
                                                          performance appraisals | Formal process in                up of divisions based on product lines.
Organization that has a purpose other than returning
profits to owners.                                        which a manager evaluates an employee's work              product layout | Layout in which products are
                                                          performance.
not-for-profit corporation | An organization                                                                        produced by people, equipment, or departments
                                                          personal finance | The application of financial           arranged in an assembly line.
formed to serve some public purpose rather than for
financial gain.                                           principles to the monetary decisions of an individual or  product liability | Claim of injury suffered because
                                                          a family.
Objectives | Intermediate-term performance targets                                                                  of a defective product.
                                                          Personal selling | One-on-one communication with
that direct the activities of an organization toward the                                                            product life cycle | Four stages that a product goes
attainment of a goal.                                     customers or potential customers.
                                                                                                                    through over its life: introduction, growth, maturity,
Occupational Health and Safety                            PERT charts | Tool for diagramming the activities         and decline.
Administration (OSHA) | Federal administrative
                                                          required to produce a product, specifying the time        profit | Difference between the revenue that a
agency empowered to set workplace safety and health       required to perform each activity in the process, and
standards and to ensure that employers take               organizing activities in the most efficient sequence.     company brings in from selling goods and services and
appropriate steps to meet them.                                                                                     the costs of generating this revenue.

                                                          5                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
profit margin | Amount that a company earns on              restructuring | Process of altering an existing             span of control | Number of people reporting to a

each unit sold.                                             organizational structure to become more competitive         particular manager.
                                                            under changing conditions.
profit-sharing plan | Incentive program that uses                                                                       specialization | Process of organizing activities into
                                                            Retailers | Intermediaries who buy goods from
a predetermined formula to distribute a share of                                                                        clusters of related tasks that can be handled by specific
company profits to eligible employees.                      producers and sell them to consumers.                       individuals or groups.

project team | Individuals from different functional        rule of law | Principle by which government                 stakeholders | Parties who are interested in the

areas assigned to work together throughout the product      legitimately exercises its authority only in accordance     activities of a business because they're affected by
development process.                                        with publicly declared laws that are adopted and            them.
                                                            enforced according to established procedure.
promotion mix | Various ways to communicate                                                                             Standard & Poor's Composite Index (S&P
                                                            salary | Compensation paid for fulfilling the               500) | Market index of the stocks of five hundred
with customers, including advertising, personal selling,
sales promotion, and publicity.                             responsibilities of a position regardless of the number     large U.S. companies.
                                                            of hours required to do it.
prospectus | Written offer to sell securities that                                                                      statement of cash flows | Financial statement
                                                            sales promotion | Sales approach in which a
provides useful information to prospective buyers.                                                                      reporting on cash inflows and outflows resulting from
                                                            company provides an incentive for potential customers       operating, investing, and financing activities.
protectionism | Use of trade controls to reduce             to buy something.
                                                                                                                        statement of owner's equity | A financial
foreign competition in order to protect domestic            Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOX) | A federal law
industries.                                                                                                             statement that details changes in owner's equity for a
                                                            enacted to encourage ethical corporate behavior and         specified period of time.
prototype | Physical model of a new product.                discourage fraud and other wrongdoing.
Psychographic segmentation | Process of                                                                                 statistical process control | Technique for
                                                            Savings banks | Financial institution originally set
classifying consumers on the basis of individual                                                                        monitoring production quality by testing sample
lifestyles as reflected in people's interests, activities,  up to provide mortgages and encourage saving, which         outputs to ensure that they meet specifications.
attitudes, and values.                                      now offers services similar to those of commercial
                                                            banks.                                                      stock-option plans | Incentive program that allows
public corporations | Corporation whose stock is
                                                            search engine | Software program that scans Web             eligible employees to buy a specific number of shares
available to the general public.                                                                                        of company stock at a set price on a specified date.
                                                            pages for specified kewords and provides a list of
public law | Body of law dealing with the                   documents containing them.                                  stockholders' equity | Amount invested in a

relationship of government to private individuals and       secondary data | Information used in marketing              corporation by its shareholders.
other private entities.
                                                            decisions that has already been collected for other         strategic alliance | Agreement between two
public relations | Communication activities                 purposes.
                                                                                                                        companies (or a company and a nation) to pool
undertaken by companies to garner favorable publicity       Securities and Exchange Commission                          resources in order to achieve business goals that
for themselves and their products.                          (SEC) | Government agency that enforces securities          benefit both partners.

publicity | Form of promotion that focuses on               laws.                                                       strategic human resource planning | Process

getting a company or product mentioned in a                 selection | Process of gathering information on             of developing a plan for satisfying an organization's
newspaper, on TV, or in some other news media.                                                                          human resource needs.
                                                            candidates, evaluating their qualifications, and
punitive damages | Monetary awards to tort                  choosing the right one.                                     strategic planning | Process of establishing an

victims intended to deter similar injurious conduct in      Self-managing teams | Team on which employees               overall plan or course of action for an organization.
the future.
                                                            control the activities needed to meet overall goals.        strict liability torts | Tort resulting from actions
purchasing | Process of acquiring materials and
                                                            Service Corps of Retired Executives | SBA                   that are inherently dangerous and for which a party
services to be used in production.                                                                                      may be liable no matter how carefully he or she
                                                            program in which a businessperson needing advice is         performs them.
quality | Ability of a product to satisfy customer          matched with a member of a team of retired executives
                                                            working as volunteers.                                      strike | Union tactic by which workers walk away
needs.
                                                            service-producing sector | All businesses whose             from their jobs and refuse to return until a labor-
quality circles | Employees who perform similar                                                                         management dispute has been resolved.
                                                            primary purpose is to provide a service rather than
jobs and work as teams to identify quality, efficiency,     make tangible goods.                                        strikebreakers | Nonunion workers who are
and other work-related problems; to propose solutions;
and to work with management in implementing their           skimming pricing | Pricing strategy in which a              willing to cross picket lines to replace strikers.
recommendations.
                                                            seller generates early profits by starting off charging     subprime mortgage loan | Mortgage loans made
quota | Government-imposed restrictions on the              the highest price that customers will pay.
                                                                                                                        to borrowers who don't qualify for market-set interest
quantity of a good that can be imported over a period       small business | According to the SBA, a business           rates because of one or more risk factors.
of time.
                                                            that is independently operated, exerts little influence in  subsidies | Government payments given to certain
ramp-up stage | Stage in the product development            its industry, and employs fewer than five hundred
                                                            people.                                                     industries to help offset some of their costs of
process during which employees are trained in                                                                           production.
necessary production processes and new products are         Small Business Administratio | Government
tested.                                                                                                                 Supply | Quantity of a product that sellers are willing
                                                            agency that helps prospective owners set up small
ratio analysis | Technique for financial analysis that      businesses, obtain financing, and manage ongoing            to sell at various prices.
                                                            operations.
shows the relationship between two numbers.                                                                             supply chain management | Process of
                                                            Small Business Development Center | SBA
recession | Economic slowdown measured by a                                                                             integrating all the activities in the supply chain.
                                                            program in which centers housed at colleges and other
decline in gross domestic productivity.                     locations provide free training and technical               supply curve | Graph showing the quantity of a
                                                            information to current and prospective small business
Recruiting | Process of identifying suitable                owners.                                                     product that will be offered for sale at certain prices.

candidates and encouraging them to apply for                social media marketing | The practice of                    sustainability | The principle of providing products
openings in the organization.
                                                            including social media as part of a company's               today that don't compromise the ability of future
relationship-building role | Member role that               marketing program.                                          generations to meet their needs.

helps a team maintain or improve group cohesiveness.        socialism | Economic system falling between                 SWOT analysis | Approach used to assess a

reporting relationships | Patterns of formal                communism and capitalism in terms of government             company's fit with its environment by analyzing its
                                                            control over allocation and distribution.                   strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats.
communication among members of an organization.
                                                            sole proprietorship | Business owned by only one            tactical plans | Short-term plans that specify the
Resources | Inputs used to produce outputs.
                                                            person.                                                     activities and resources needed to implement a
                                                                                                                        company's strategic plan.

                                                            6                                                           https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
target costing | Pricing strategy that determines         trade deficit | Condition whereby a country buys          variable costs | Costs that vary, in total, as the

how much to invest in a product by figuring out how       more products than it sells, resulting in an unfavorable  quantity of goods sold changes but stay constant on a
much customers will pay and subtracting an amount         trade balance.                                            per-unit basis.
for profit.
                                                          trademark | Word, symbol, or other mark used to           variance | Difference between the actual amount and
target market | Specific group of customers who
                                                          identify and legally protect a product from being         the budgeted amount.
should be interested in your product, have access to it,  copied.
and have the means to buy it.                                                                                       Venture capitalists | Individual who pools funds
                                                          trading blocs | Groups of countries that have joined
Tariffs | Government taxes on imports that raise the                                                                from private and institutional sources and invests them
                                                          together to allow goods and services to flow without      in businesses with strong growth potential.
price of foreign goods and make them less competitive     restrictions across their mutual borders.
with domestic goods.                                                                                                vertical percentage analysis | Analysis of an
                                                          transactions | Financial and nonfinancial events
Task-facilitating roles | Member role that helps a                                                                  income statement treating the relationship of each item
                                                          that affect a business.                                   as a percentage of a base (usually sales).
team accomplish its goals.
                                                          transformational leaders | Managers who                   virtual company | Company without a significant
team | Group of people with complementary skills
                                                          mentor and develop subordinates and stimulate them        physical presence that relies on third parties to
who work together to achieve a specific goal.             to look beyond personal interests to those of the group.  produce, warehouse, price, and deliver the products it
                                                                                                                    sells over the Internet.
technical skills | Skills needed to perform specific      turnover | Permanent separation of an employee
                                                                                                                    virtual teams | Teams whose geographically
tasks.                                                    from a company.
                                                                                                                    dispersed members interact electronically in the
Telecommuting | Work arrangement in which the             two-factor theory | Theory that holds that                process of pursuing a common goal.

employee regularly works from home.                       motivation involves both motivation factors (which        whistle-blower | Individual who exposes illegal or
                                                          contribute to job satisfaction) and hygiene factors
time value of money | The principle whereby a             (which help to prevent job dissatisfaction).              unethical behavior in an organization.

dollar received in the present is worth more than a       unemployment rate | Percentage of the total labor         wholesalers | Intermediaries who buy goods from
dollar received in the future.
                                                          force that's currently unemployed and actively seeking    suppliers and sell them to businesses that will either
time-management skills | Skills used to manage            work.                                                     resell or use them.

time effectively.                                         Uniform Commercial Code | U.S. system of                  wide area network | Network that links computers

Top managers | Those at the top of the                    statutes designed to make commercial transactions         that are spread over a relatively large geographical
                                                          consistent in all fifty states.                           area.
management hierarchy who are responsible for the
health and performance of the organization.               unlimited liability | Legal condition under which         World Bank | International financial institution that

tort | Civil wrong; injury done to someone's person       an owner or investor is personally liable for all debts   provides economic assistance to poor and developing
                                                          of a business.                                            countries.
or property.
                                                          unsecured loan | Loan given by a bank that doesn't        World Trade Organization | International
tort reform | A movement to stem the swelling tide
                                                          require the borrower to put up collateral.                organization that monitors trade policies and whose
of personal-injury litigation in the United States.                                                                 members work together to enforce rules of trade and
                                                          value chain | Entire range of activities involved in      resolve trade disputes.
Total quality management (TQM) | All the
                                                          delivering value to customers.                            World Wide Web | Subsystem of computers on the
steps taken by a company to ensure that its products
satisfy customer needs.                                   variable costs | Costs that vary, in total, as the        Internet that communicate with each other using a
                                                                                                                    special language called HTTP.
trade credit | Credit given to a company by its           quantity of goods sold changes but stay constant on a
                                                          per-unit basis.
suppliers.

                                                          7                                                         https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/54100
Detailed Licensing                                                      3.1: The Globalization of Business - CC BY-NC-SA
                                                                        3.0
Overview                                                                3.2: Opportunities in International Business - CC BY-
                                                                        NC-SA 3.0
Title: An Introduction to Business                                      3.3: The Global Business Environment - CC BY-NC-
                                                                        SA 3.0
Webpages: 145                                                           3.4: Trade Controls - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        3.5: Reducing International Trade Barriers - CC BY-
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial                                  NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        3.6: Preparing for a Career in International Business -
All licenses found:                                                     CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        3.7: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    CC BY-NC-SA 3.0: 93.8% (136 pages)                              4: Selecting a Form of Business Ownership - CC BY-NC-
    Undeclared: 6.2% (9 pages)                                      SA 3.0

By Page                                                                 4.1: Factors to Consider - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        4.2: Sole Proprietorship - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    An Introduction to Business - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                       4.3: Partnership - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        4.4: Corporation - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
        Front Matter - Undeclared                                       4.5: Other Types of Business Ownership - CC BY-
                                                                        NC-SA 3.0
            TitlePage - Undeclared                                      4.6: Mergers and Acquisitions - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            InfoPage - Undeclared                                       4.7: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            Table of Contents - Undeclared
            Licensing - Undeclared                                  5: The Challenges of Starting a Business - CC BY-NC-SA
                                                                    3.0
        1: The Foundations of Business - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                                        5.1: What Is an Entrepreneur? - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            1.1: Introduction - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                         5.2: The Importance of Small Business to the U.S.
            1.2: Getting Down to Business - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0             Economy - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            1.3: What Is Economics? - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                   5.3: What Industries Are Small Businesses In? - CC
            1.4: Perfect Competition and Supply and Demand -            BY-NC-SA 3.0
            CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                                             5.4: Advantages and Disadvantages of Business
            1.5: Monopolistic Competition, Oligopoly, and               Ownership - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            Monopoly - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                                  5.5: Starting a Business - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            1.6: Measuring the Health of the Economy - CC BY-           5.6: The Business Plan - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            NC-SA 3.0                                                   5.7: How to Succeed in Managing a Business - CC
            1.7: Government's Role in Managing the Economy -            BY-NC-SA 3.0
            CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            1.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0

        2: Business Ethics and Social Responsibility - CC BY-
        NC-SA 3.0

            2.1: Misgoverning Corporations- An Overview - CC
            BY-NC-SA 3.0
            2.2: The Individual Approach to Ethics - CC BY-NC-
            SA 3.0
            2.3: Identifying Ethical Issues - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            2.4: The Organizational Approach to Ethics - CC BY-
            NC-SA 3.0
            2.5: Corporate Social Responsibility - CC BY-NC-SA
            3.0
            2.6: Environmentalism - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
            2.7: Stages of Corporate Responsibility - CC BY-NC-
            SA 3.0
            2.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0

        3: Business in a Global Environment - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0

                                                                 1  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/90840
    5.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                  10.3: Identifying Business Opportunities - CC BY-
6: Managing for Business Success - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0             NC-SA 3.0
                                                               10.4: Understand Your Industry - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.1: What Do Managers Do? - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                10.5: Forecasting Demand - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.2: Planning - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                            10.6: Breakeven Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.3: Organizing - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                          10.7: Product Development - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.4: Directing - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                           10.8: Protecting Your Idea - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.5: Controlling - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                         10.9: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    6.6: Managerial Skills - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0               11: Operations Management in Manufacturing and
    6.7: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0              Service Industries - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0

7: Recruiting, Motivating, and Keeping Quality                 11.1: Operations Management in Manufacturing - CC
Employees - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                                    BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                               11.2: Facility Layouts - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    7.1: Human Resource Management - CC BY-NC-SA               11.3: Managing the Production Process in a
    3.0                                                        Manufacturing Company - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    7.2: Developing Employees - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                11.4: Graphical Tools- PERT and Gantt Charts - CC
    7.3: Motivating Employees - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                BY-NC-SA 3.0
    7.4: What Makes a Great Place to Work? - CC BY-            11.5: The Technology of Goods Production - CC BY-
    NC-SA 3.0                                                  NC-SA 3.0
    7.5: Performance Appraisal - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0               11.6: Operations Management for Service Providers -
    7.6: Labor Unions - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                        CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    7.7: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                  11.7: Producing for Quality - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                               11.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
8: Teamwork and Communications - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                           12: The Role of Accounting in Business - CC BY-NC-SA
    8.1: The Team and the Organization - CC BY-NC-SA       3.0
    3.0
    8.2: Why Teamwork Works - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                  12.1: The Role of Accounting - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    8.3: The Team and Its Members - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0            12.2: Understanding Financial Statements - CC BY-
    8.4: The Business of Communication - CC BY-NC-SA           NC-SA 3.0
    3.0                                                        12.3: Accrual Accounting - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    8.5: Communication Channels - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0              12.4: Financial Statement Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA
    8.6: Forms of Communication - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0              3.0
    8.7: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                  12.5: The Profession- Ethics and Opportunities - CC
                                                               BY-NC-SA 3.0
9: Marketing- Providing Value to Customers - CC BY-            12.6: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
NC-SA 3.0
                                                           13: Managing Financial Resources - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    9.1: 0 Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    9.2: What Is Marketing? - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                  13.1: The Functions of Money - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    9.3: The Marketing Mix - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                   13.2: Financial Institutions - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    9.4: Pricing a Product - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                   13.3: The Federal Reserve System - CC BY-NC-SA
    9.5: Placing a Product - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                   3.0
    9.6: Promoting a Product - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                 13.4: The Role of the Financial Manager - CC BY-
    9.7: Interacting with Your Customers - CC BY-NC-SA         NC-SA 3.0
    3.0                                                        13.5: Understanding Securities Markets - CC BY-NC-
    9.8: The Product Life Cycle - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0              SA 3.0
    9.9: The Marketing Environment - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0           13.6: Financing the Going Concern - CC BY-NC-SA
    9.10: Careers in Marketing - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0               3.0
                                                               13.7: Careers in Finance - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
10: Product Design and Development - CC BY-NC-SA               13.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
3.0
                                                           14: Personal Finances - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    10.1: What Is a Product? - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    10.2: Where Do Product Ideas Come From? - CC BY-
    NC-SA 3.0

                                                        2  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/90840
    14.1: Financial Planning - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                 15.6: Security Issues in Electronic Communication -
    14.2: Time Is Money - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                      CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    14.3: The Financial Planning Process - CC BY-NC-SA         15.7: Careers in Information Management - CC BY-
    3.0                                                        NC-SA 3.0
    14.4: A House Is Not a Piggy Bank- A Few Lessons           15.8: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    from the Subprime Crisis - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0             16: The Legal and Regulatory Environment of Business -
    14.5: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0             CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
15: Managing Information and Technology - CC BY-NC-
SA 3.0                                                         16.1: Law and the Legal System - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
                                                               16.2: Criminal versus Civil Law - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    15.1: Data versus Information - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0            16.3: Negligence Torts - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    15.2: Managing Data - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0                      16.4: Product Liability - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    15.3: Types of Information Systems - CC BY-NC-SA           16.5: Some Principles of Public Law - CC BY-NC-SA
    3.0                                                        3.0
    15.4: Computer Networks and Cloud Computing -              16.6: Cases and Problems - CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    CC BY-NC-SA 3.0
    15.5: Data Communications Networks - CC BY-NC-         Back Matter - Undeclared
    SA 3.0
                                                               Index - Undeclared
                                                               Glossary - Undeclared
                                                               Detailed Licensing - Undeclared

                                                        3  https://biz.libretexts.org/@go/page/90840
