FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS

Fourth Edition

SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Financial Strategy for Public Managers Copyright  2023 by Sharon Kioko and Justin Marlowe is licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, except where otherwise noted.
This means you can use it, adapt it, and redistribute it as you like, but you must provide attribution to the original authors, by
retaining this license notice.
 Sharon Kioko & Justin Marlowe. All authors retain the copyright on their work.
We request that you keep this full notice when you use the book.
You can find free copies of this book in multiple formats (web, PDF) at https://uw.pressbooks.pub/financialstrategy/.
Print ISBN: 978-1-927472-59-0
Ebook ISBN: 978-1-927472-60-6
This book was created with support from the Rebus Foundation.
CONTENTS

Foreword                             v

Introduction                         1

PART I.

1. How We Pay for the Public Sector  9

2. The Basic Financial Statements    55

3. Financial Statement Analysis      104

4. Accrual Accounting                139

5. Cost Analysis                     176

6. Budget Strategy                   213

Glossary of Terms                    237

About the Authors                    248
FOREWORD

There are many fine textbooks on public financial management. Each does certain things well, but in
our view, none covers all the concepts, techniques, and analytical tools that today's public policy and
administration graduate students need to put their passion into action. This book is our best attempt
to weave that material together in a fresh, robust, concise, and immersive way. We also believe the
time is right to bring to the market a free, open-source treatment of this critically important subject.

At the University of Washington and the University of Chicago, we use this text for a variety of
quarter-length introductory courses on public finance, budgeting, and financial management. We
believe it's also suitable for a similarly structured semester-long course. Sections of the text might also
be suitable for other courses often found in Master of Public Administration, Master of Public Policy,
and other programs. Chapters 2 and 3 would be appropriate for courses on governmental accounting,
debt management, or non-profit financial management. Chapters 4 and 5 work well for an applied
public or non-profit budgeting course.

The first time we co-taught "Public Financial Management and Budgeting," we quickly realized that
we approached the course in similar ways. That shared thinking is partly the result of our shared
experiences with some exceptional teachers and scholars. They include, in no particular order: the late
William Duncombe (formerly of Syracuse University); Bart Hildreth and Ross Rubinstein (Georgia
State); Katherine Willoughby (University of Georgia); Craig Johnson (Indiana University); Jerry Miller
(Arizona State University); and the late Dwight Denison (formerly of University of Kentucky).

We want to thank Dean Emeritus Sandra Archibald, Evans School Dean Jodi Sandfort, and Harris
School Dean Kate Baicker for their commitment to excellence in the teaching of public finance,
budgeting, and financial management. Without the support of Apurva Ashok (Rebus Foundation),
Lauren Ray (University of Washington Libraries), and Sophia Keskey (Evans School of Public Policy),
this project would not have been possible. Lastly, we are indebted to our students, who, through their
thoughtful suggestions and criticisms, helped shape and enrich this project.

Sharon Kioko
Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy & Governance
University of Washington
skioko@uw.edu

Justin Marlowe
Harris School of Public Policy
University of Chicago
jmarlowe@uchicago.edu

                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS V
VI SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
INTRODUCTION

In 2015, Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook, launched a plan to give away most of his $45
billion fortune. Along with his wife, Priscilla Chan, he announced the creation of a philanthropic
organization known as the "Chan-Zuckerberg Initiative." This "Initiative" defies conventional labels.
At one level, it is similar to traditional non-profit organizations. It can deliver social services,
participate in public policy debates, and partner with other non-profits. Like traditional philanthropic
foundations, it plans to provide grants in key policy areas, including education reform and social
justice.

But the Initiative is also decidedly non-traditional. It is organized as a for-profit limited liability
corporation. That means when it wants to, it can do many things non-profits and governments
cannot. It can invest money in other for-profit entities. It can fund election campaigns. It can manage
and invest money on behalf of other non-profit and for-profit organizations. So, the important
question around Chan-Zuckerberg is not what will it do, but rather, what won't it do? With $45
billion at its disposal and few, if any, limits on how to spend it, the possibilities are endless.

Some are calling this "philanthrocapitalism." Chan-Zuckerberg is the largest and most visible recent
example. But there are many others. If you have ever bought a sweater at Patagonia, worn a pair
of TOMS shoes, or used a shot of insulin from Novo Nordisk, you have participated in
philanthrocapitalism. These are all for-profit companies with a social purpose hard-wired into their
mission. This also works from the other direction. Strange as it sounds, IKEA - whose founder
Ingvar Kamprad was once the wealthiest person in the world - is controlled by a charitable family
foundation.

Maybe you didn't think public finance has anything to do with Fair Trade CertifiedTM fleece vests
or the FJ횸KINGE shelving unit. Turns out it does.

Philanthrocapitalism brings the glamour and prestige of big business to the decidedly un-glamorous
work of feeding the hungry, housing people experiencing homelessness, and the other essential efforts
of governments and non-profits. That's important. But even more important, it's forced us to re-think
what managing "public" money means.

Showtime's hit show Billions is the story of a hedge fund that operates in the shadowy underworld of
finance. That fund - known as Axe Capital, for its founder Bobby Axelrod - will do anything to turn
a profit. Its traders buy and sell stocks on inside information, bribe regulators, and spread market-
moving rumors, among many other nefarious tactics.

Season 2 features a compelling storyline ripped from the proverbial public finance headlines. Axe
learns through a back channel that the Town of Sandicot, a long-struggling upstate New York town
on the verge of bankruptcy, is about to be awarded a state license to open a new casino.

Axe sees an opportunity. When a government is on the verge of bankruptcy, investors steer clear of

                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 1
it. As a result, Sandicot's municipal bonds (a form of long-term loan) are available for pennies on
the dollar. Axe believes the new casino will drive an economic recovery, and once that recovery is
underway, investors will look to buy up Sandicot's bonds. So, he decides to get there first. He "goes
long" and buys several hundred million of Sandicot municipal bonds.

But then the story takes an unexpected turn. Word of the Sandicot play leaks out, and Axe's opponents
persuade the State to locate the casino in another town. At that moment, Axe faces a difficult choice:
Sell the bonds and lose millions or force Sandicot to pay back the bonds in full. Unfortunately,
Sandicot can repay only if Axe forces it to enact savage cuts to its police, firefighters, schools, and
other basic services. Axe is leery of the bad press that will surely follow a group of billionaire hedge
fund managers profiting at the expense of a struggling town.

When asked for their opinion, a superstar Axe analyst named Taylor Mason - the first gender non-
binary character on a major television show - says:

        "In many ways, a town is like a business. And when a business operates beyond its means, and
        the numbers don't add up, and the people in charge continue on heedless of that fact, sure that
        some Sugar Daddy - usually in the form of the federal government - will come along and scoop
        them up and cover the shortfalls, well, that truly offends me. People might say you hurt this
        Town, but, in my opinion, the Town put the hurt on itself. Corrections are in order. There's a
        way to make this work, and that way is hard but necessary... Once we do this, the town will face
        that challenge and come out stronger. Or it will cease being. Either result is absolutely natural."

Governments and non-profits tend to have a "retrospective" view of money. To them, an
organization's money is well-managed if it stays within its budget, complies with donors' restrictions,
and completes its financial audit on time. To them, bigger questions like "Is this program working?"
or "Does this program deliver more benefits than it costs?" are best answered by elected officials
and board members. In their view, if we mingle the different sectors' money, taxpayers will never
know what they get for their tax dollars, and elected officials and board members won't know if
the programs they worked so hard to create and fund are delivering on their promises. To public
organizations, financial accountability has often meant looking back to ensure that public money was
spent according to plan.

Zuckerberg and many others who now operate in the public sector see public money in "prospective"
terms. To them, public money is a means to an end. It's how we'll end racial disparities in public
education, cure infectious diseases, close the gender pay gap, and pursue other lofty goals. These folks
are not particularly concerned with how government tax dollars differ from charitable donations
or business profits. If money can move an organization closer to its goals, regardless of where that
money comes from, why not add it to the mix? They don't think of financial contributions as a way to
divvy up credit for a program's success. They want to know how their money was spent, but far more
importantly, they want to know what it accomplished.

The opposite is also true. Taylor Mason and many others who share their views also see public money
in "prospective" terms. But instead of thinking about what the public sector could accomplish, they
also believe no public sector organization is "too big to fail." If a local government like Sandicot is no
longer accomplishing its mission, they argue, it should cease to exist.

2 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Both these perspectives - "philanthrocapitalism" and "government is like a business" - are significant
departures from public financial management's status quo. They're also why public organizations
have tended to segregate themselves into "money people" and "everyone else." Money people tend to
see the world differently.

And to be clear, both these perspectives illustrate a much broader recent trend: blending the financial
lines across the sectors. Many non-profits now operate profitable lines of business that subsidize
other services they provide for free. Governments around the world have created for-profit
corporations that allow private sector investors to build, operate, and maintain public infrastructure
like bridges, subways, and water treatment facilities. Charitable foundations of all sizes now act
as "Angel Investors." They buy stock in small start-up companies that develop products to improve
the quality of life in the developing world. Many of those investments have turned a handsome profit
that, in turn, subsidized other, far-less-profitable endeavors.

Philanthrocapitalism and "government, like business," are also animated by pressure to do more with
less. For roughly 50 years, taxpayers around the world have said no to new taxes but yes to a steady
expansion of the size and scope of government. They have demanded more spending on health care,
education, environmental conservation, and other services but left unclear how to pay for it. They
have allowed their governments to borrow record amounts of money but denied them the financial
means to repay that debt. Many governments today are simply maxed out. They have little or no new
money to commit to innovative programs that philanthrocapitalists like Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg,
and others would like to see.

These trends - blurring of the sectors, emphasis on outcomes, scarce government resources - are
redefining what it means to manage public money.

You got into public service because you want to make a difference. Maybe, like Mr. Zuckerberg, you
want to tackle big, complex public problems. Maybe you want to make governments and non-profits
work just a bit more efficiently. Maybe you think government should do a lot more in areas like
health care, education, and transportation. Maybe, like Taylor Mason, you think government should
get out of the way and make room for non-profits and for-profits. Regardless of your goals, you'll
need to speak the language of public financial management to make that difference. You'll need to
translate your aspirations into cost estimates, budgets, and financial reports. You'll need to show how
an investment in your program/product/idea/initiative/movement will produce results. You'll need
to understand where public money comes from and where it can and can't go. You probably didn't get
into public service to manage money but in today's rapidly changing public sector,

                                                We're all money people now!

And the opposite is also true. In today's public sector, money people must also step outside of their
comfort zone. They must be able to communicate with program managers, board members, and many
other stakeholders with whom they don't traditionally interact. They must help others translate their
ideas into the language of finance. As a public manager, a big part of your job will be learning to
inspire your money people to step far outside of their comfort zone in the name of accomplishing
your organization's goals.

                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 3
WHAT IS FINANCIAL STRATEGY?

Money is to public organizations what canvas is to painting. The painter wants to bring their artistic
vision to life on the canvas. But to do this, they must work within the confines of that canvas. If the
canvas is too small, too rough, or the wrong shape, the painter must adapt their vision. If they stray too
far from their vision, they must know when to find a different canvas.

As a public servant, you are like a painter. You know what your organization wants to accomplish, but
you must bring those accomplishments to life on its financial canvas. Every organization's financial
canvas is a bit different. Some have many revenue streams that produce more than enough money,
while others depend on a single revenue source to generate just enough money to keep the
organization running. Some have broad legal authority to raise new revenue and borrow money,
while others must get permission from their board, taxpayers, or other stakeholders at every step.
Some have sophisticated financial experts to produce budgets and manage money, while others have
no such expertise.

It's not a problem that each public organization's financial canvas is different from the rest. In fact,
those differences are an essential part of what makes public financial management an exciting and
dynamic field of study. The problem, however, is that many great policies and programs fail because
they're painted on the wrong financial canvas. Public organizations often take on policy challenges
without the right financial tools, authority, and capacity. By contrast, some organizations are too
modest. They have the tools, authority, and capacity to take on big challenges, but for various reasons,
they don't. Financial strategy is how public organizations use their financial resources to accomplish
their objectives. It's how they put their organization's vision to its financial canvas.

All public organizations must confront limits on the amount and scope of financial resources they
can access. So, in practical terms, a financial strategy is often about tempering our expectations to
match what our financial canvas can support. It's about analyzing a program's cost structure to make
it more efficient, scaling back its goals and objectives, or finding partner organizations to help launch
it. Sometimes, strategy means finding a new canvas. That might mean forming a new organization,
re-purposing an existing program, or recruiting a new foundation or venture capitalist to invest. This
book tells you how to understand the many different types of canvases available to you and the many
different ways to put your organization's vision to one of those canvases.

TECHNIQUE SUPPORTS STRATEGY

We organized this book around a simple idea: technique supports strategy. There are many fine
textbooks on public financial management, and almost all of them focus on technical skills. For more
than a generation, students of this subject have learned how to forecast revenues, build budgets,
record basic transactions in an organization's financial books, and many other useful skills. At the
same time, students have rarely been asked a far more important question: Where and how should
they apply those skills? We believe technical skill is useful only if it informs actual management
decisions. A cost analysis is useful only if it tells us whether and how to launch a new program.
Financial statement analysis is a powerful tool because it can inform when to build a new building,
start a capital campaign, or invest unused cash. Budget variance analysis is important because it
tells program managers where to focus their attention. And so forth. We present these and other

4 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
techniques, but more importantly, we try to explain how those techniques can and should inform
crucial management, strategy, and policy decisions.

Strategic thinking is, at some level, about "knowing what you don't know." It's about stepping outside
of your own experience. It's about looking into your organization's future. It's about putting yourself
in your stakeholders' shoes. That's why one of the most valuable tools in financial strategy is asking
the right questions. No one can be an expert on all things financial. But if you can ask the right
questions and access the right expertise, you can know enough to drive your strategy.

That is why one of the most important techniques in public financial management is asking good
questions. This book is littered with questions. Each chapter begins not with learning objectives, but
with the kinds of questions managers ask and how the information, conceptual frameworks, and
analytical tools from financial management can help answer those questions. It includes exercises to
help you refine your financial management technique. But more importantly, it has cases and other
opportunities for you to apply that technique to support a genuine financial strategy.

Financial strategy is not sector-specific. What works in the for-profit sector might work in non-
profits or governments, and vice versa. And as sector distinctions matter less, financial strategy's
origins also matter less. That is why most of the discussion in this book is predicated on the idea
that all governments, non-profits, and "for-benefit" organizations (i.e., for-profit organizations with
an explicit social purpose) are mostly alike. You will see "public organization" and "public manager"
used often. These are generic terms to describe people who interact with the financial strategy
in these types of organizations. To be clear, "public manager" includes policy analysts, community
organizers, for-profit contractors, and anyone else who has a stake in a public organization's finances.
Where necessary and appropriate, you'll see discussions highlighting how each sector's technical
information, legal environment, and strategic directions differ. But for the most part, this text assumes
that public organizations have a lot in common.

HOW THIS BOOK IS ORGANIZED

First and foremost, this is a book about people and organizations. To many of us, finance and
budgeting are abstract subjects. They are numbers in a spreadsheet, but not much more.

In reality, public financial management is how real public servants in real public organizations bring
their passions to life. That is why all of the technical information is presented in the context of specific
people, organizations, and strategies. Throughout this book, you will find lots of illustrations and
examples drawn from real public organizations.

The first chapter is titled "How We Pay for the Public Sector." It covers where public organizations'
money comes from and where it goes. It also highlights some of the pressing challenges facing public
organizations - namely shrinking public resources and burgeoning mandatory expenditures - and
how those challenges present tremendous opportunities for entrepreneurial public managers.

Each of the subsequent chapters covers a bundle of tools that public financial managers use to inform
financial strategy. The second chapter covers the basic financial statements. Financial statements are
an essential and often overlooked tool to understand an organization's financial story. This chapter

                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 5
introduces those statements, the information they contain, and the questions they help public sector
managers ask and answer.

Chapter 3 is about financial statement analysis. If financial statements tell an organization's financial
story, financial statement analysis is the annotated bibliography of that story. It is a tool to understand
the specific dimensions of an organization's financial position, to place that position in an
appropriately nuanced context, and to identify strategies to improve that financial position in both
the near-term and long-term.

To truly understand the numbers in the financial statements - and how those numbers might change
as an organization pursues different financial strategies - you must also understand the core concepts
of accounting. To that end, the fourth chapter is an applied primer on core accounting concepts like
accruals, revenue and expense recognition, depreciation and amortization, and encumbrances. These
concepts and their application to actual financial activity are collectively known as "Transaction
Analysis."

Chapter 5 is about Cost Analysis. Many public organizations need help to meaningfully answer a
simple question: What do your programs and services cost? They struggle not because they are lazy
or inept but because it is challenging to measure all the different costs incurred to produce public
services and then express those costs in an intuitive way. It is even more challenging to think about
how those costs change as the amount of service changes or as the scope of a service expands or
contracts. It is challenging, but it is also essential. Every successful public program ever devised was
designed with a careful eye toward its cost structure. In this chapter, you will learn the different types
of costs, the core concepts of cost behavior, and how to think about ways to improve an organization's
financial position given its cost behavior.

Chapter 6 covers Budgeting. A public organization's budget is its most important policy statement. It
is where the mission and the money connect. Budgeting is, at one level, a technical process. It demands
solid cost analysis, revenue and expense forecasting, and clear technical communication. But more
importantly, it's a political process. It is how policymakers bring their political priorities to life and
shut down their opponents' priorities. It is how the media and taxpayers hold public organizations
accountable. It is where sophisticated public managers can advance their priorities. This chapter
focuses on budgeting as a technical process, emphasizing the different types of budgets and the legal
processes by which budgets are made. But it also covers some of the common political strategies that
play out in the budget process and how public managers do and do not engage those strategies. The
discussion of those strategies is loosely organized around concepts borrowed from the burgeoning
field of behavioral economics, such as loss aversion and the "endowment effect."

At the outset, it is also worth highlighting what this book does not cover:

      Unlike other textbooks in this space, we do not give special attention to financial management
         in healthcare organizations. Healthcare financial management has much in common with
         public financial management. But recent trends in the former - especially the Medicare
         Modernization Act, the Affordable Care Act ("Obamacare"), and the collapse of the municipal
         bond insurance market - have made it too distinct to cover in a coherent way within the
         framework of this book.

6 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
 We gloss over government budgeting systems and processes. We cover the steps outlined in
   law that governments are supposed to follow to arrive at a budget. But for roughly a decade
   now, the actual budget processes in Washington, D.C., and many state governments have been
   quite different from what's prescribed in law. Terms that used to describe deviations from that
   process, like "continuing resolution," "sequestration," "sweeps," and "recissions," now seem like
   parts of that process. That's why it seems silly to devote much attention to the budget process.
   Instead, we treat budgeting as where money, politics, and priorities come together in
   predictable and unpredictable ways.

 Financial managers find themselves in the throes of transformational changes in public
   organizations. They are asked to push the boundaries of what traditional procurement and
   contracting processes will allow. They are often asked to implement massive new information
   technology projects. They find themselves leading new initiatives around "evidence-based
   decision-making," "lean management," and "performance benchmarking," among others.
   Woefully, we do not have time or space to devote to these processes. We hope to cover these
   topics in future iterations of this text.

                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 7
8 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
CHAPTER 1.

HOW WE PAY FOR THE PUBLIC SECTOR

                                    WHERE THE MONEY COMES FROM AND WHERE IT GOES

   Managers need to know where public money comes from and where it goes. That information can answer
   important questions like:

           What revenue options are available to governments? Non-profits?
           What are the advantages and disadvantages of various revenue sources with respect to efficiency,

              equity, fairness, and other goals?
           How will the US federal government's financial challenges shape the financial future of the public

              sector?
           How, if at all, will governments address the challenges of income and racial inequality?

In January 2010, the United States Department of Justice (DOJ) received a formal civil rights
complaint from a local community organization in Ferguson, Missouri. In their complaint, they
accused the Ferguson Police Department of aggressive and biased policing tactics, including large
numbers of traffic stops, searches, seizures, and arrests in the city's African American communities.
DOJ officials corroborated the report with the Missouri Attorney General's office, which had also
received several similar complaints throughout the previous five years. Both offices agreed to monitor
the situation.

On August 9, 2014, Michael Brown, an African American teenager, and resident of Ferguson, was
shot and killed by a Ferguson police officer who was investigating a nearby robbery. Ferguson police
officials drew sharp criticism for the incident and their management of the subsequent investigation
into potential police misconduct. Several weeks later, a grand jury declined to indict the police officer.
In their view, the evidence suggested the police officer had reason enough to consider Brown as a
potentially dangerous suspect.

The shooting sparked violent protests across the United States. Ferguson residents said the shooting
was just the most recent example of the racist policing they had pointed out to federal and state
officials years earlier. They implored Attorney General Eric Holder to immediately open a DOJ civil
rights investigation into the Ferguson Police Department. Holder said his office would gather as much
information as possible but cautioned everyone that anecdotes and demographics are insufficient to
prove an accusation of biased policing. For several weeks, the country anxiously awaited word on
what DOJ would do next.

On September 20, 2014, the DOJ opened a formal civil rights investigation. The report from that

                                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 9
investigation was released in March 2015. It excoriated the Ferguson Police Department and the
Ferguson City Council for actively and passively encouraging the sort of aggressive policing that
Ferguson residents had decried. But perhaps even more importantly, it explained that the most
compelling evidence of biased policing was not arrest records or police reports. It was Ferguson's
budget. The report said, "Ferguson's law enforcement practices are shaped by the City's focus on
revenue rather than public safety needs." It documented a recent trend toward raising new city
revenues through aggressive enforcement of fines and fees. Ferguson generated more than $2.5
million in municipal court revenue in fiscal year 2013, an 80 percent increase from only two years
prior. In all, fines and forfeitures comprised 20 percent of the city's operating revenue in fiscal year
2013, up from about 13 percent in 2011. By comparison, other St. Louis suburbs relied on fines and
fees for no more than six percent of operating revenue. This budget strategy legitimized and even
encouraged Ferguson's law enforcement and court officials, most of whom were not racists, to pursue
aggressive policing against Ferguson's majority African American community.

The takeaway here is clear: where a public organization gets its money says a lot about its
priorities. In Ferguson's case, choices about where to get revenue led to a nationwide social
movement.

                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

           Identify the revenue sources used by the federal, state, and local governments.
           Show how similar governments pay for similar services in quite different ways.
           Identify some of the "macro-challenges" that will shape public organizations' finances well into the

              future.

Governments across the United States do the same basic things. Cities and towns primarily maintain
roads, plow snow, keep neighborhoods safe, prevent and fight fires, and educate children. County
governments run elections, care for the mentally ill, and prevent infectious diseases. State
governments provide schools with funding for education, coordinate health care for the poor,
incarcerate prisoners, and operate public universities and community colleges. The national - or
"federal" - government regulates trade and commerce, defends our borders, and pays for health care
for seniors.

At the same time, governments are remarkably dissimilar in how they pay for and deliver these
services. Some rely on a single tax source for most or all of their revenue. Others draw on many
different revenue sources. Some deliver their services with the help of non-profits, private sector
contractors, and other stakeholders. Others engage outside entities infrequently, if at all. Some
citizens want their government to deliver many different high-quality services. Others want their
government to do as little as possible.

These choices about how governments pay for their services, how much they provide, and how
they ultimately deliver those services matter a lot to citizens. For instance, if a city government

10 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
depends mostly on property taxes, its leaders might have the incentive to emphasize services that
benefit property owners, such as public safety and sidewalks, and worry less about services more
likely to benefit those who do not own property, like public parks or housing people experiencing
homelessness. In some regions, governments pay non-profit organizations to deliver most or all
essential services in areas like foster care, child immunizations, and assisted living for seniors. For
those who use those services, the quality of service they receive can depend a lot on which non-profit
delivers the service or manages their case.
So, at a high level, governments look the same. But if we examine them more carefully, we see they
vary greatly in where their money comes from and where it goes. That variation, and its implications
for citizens, is a key part of the study of public finance. This chapter is a basic overview of where
governments get their money, where they spend it, and some of the financial challenges they will
likely face.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
The national government - also known as the "federal government" - is one of the largest and most
important employers in the United States. Every soldier in the military, customs agent at an airport,
and astronaut at NASA (the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's acronym) works for
the federal government. And so do many, many others. In 2022, the federal government spent just
under $6.3 trillion and employed an estimated 4.3 million people directly and millions indirectly as
government contractors and grant employees. For the past decade or so, federal government spending
has accounted for roughly one-quarter of the U.S.'s entire economic output - otherwise known as its
gross domestic product (GDP).
Federal government revenues in FY 2022 were $4.9 trillion; 84 percent was from two sources
-individual income tax and payroll taxes.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 11
Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "Revenues in Fiscal Year 2022"

The federal government collected just over $2.6 trillion in individual income taxes in FY 2022. The
tax paid on income is determined by applying a tax rate to taxable income with allowances for tax
preferences.

Taxable income is the amount of income (e.g., wages, interest and dividend income, partnership and
business income (or loss), farm income, pension income, rents, royalties, and Social Security benefits)
subject to tax after deductions and exemptions. The federal government offers a standard deduction
that all taxpayers can claim. The reduction of taxable income varies by filer type (e.g., $13,850 for
single filers, $27,700 for married filers filing jointly, and $20,800 for heads of household in 2023).
Beyond that standard deduction, eligible taxpayers can claim hundreds of other exemptions, deductions,
credits, and other tax benefits related to home ownership, retirement savings, health insurance,
investments in equipment and technology, and dozens of other areas. The federal government offers
these preferences to encourage taxpayers to save for retirement, buy a home, invest in a business,
or participate in other types of economic activity. The tax rate is the amount of tax paid per dollar
of taxable income. For 2023, the federal tax code has seven different rates that are applied across
levels of taxable income (also known as tax brackets). Those statutory rates ranged from 10 percent on
individual annual income up to $11,000 to 37 percent on annual income over $578,125 ($693,750 for
married individuals filing joint returns).

12 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
When an individual uses exemptions, deductions, and credits, their effective tax rate (ETR, i.e., tax
liability divided by their taxable income) is frequently lower than the marginal tax rate (i.e., the
statutory tax rate imposed on the last dollar of income). For that reason, the debate on tax policy is
focused on the effective tax rate, not the marginal tax rate.
Social insurance receipts are taxes levied on individuals' wages. Employers and employees contribute
an equal amount in Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance (OASDI) tax equal to 6.2 percent of
gross income up to $160,200 and an additional 1.45 percent in Hospital Insurance (HI), proceeds of
which are used to fund the federal Medicare program. That is why they are referred to as payroll taxes
or withholding taxes. In FY 2022, payroll taxes were $1.48 trillion.
While the income tax is progressive, payroll taxes are regressive, with the highest average rate falling
on Americans with the lowest income. For example, the estimated payroll tax burden for individuals
making less than $50,000 is between 9.1 and 10.9 percent, while the average payroll tax burden for
individuals making more than $500,000 was 5.4 percent - 1.9 percent for those making $1 million or
more.

Average or Effective Income and Payroll Tax Rates by Income Group

Source: Joint Committee on Taxation "Overview of the Federal Tax System as in Effect for 2023" (Table A-6)

There has been a lot of debate surrounding the 47 percent of taxpayers who do not pay federal income

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 13
  taxes. That is correct - 47 percent of taxpayers don't pay federal income taxes. But that is by design!
  The income tax rates are low for low-income households. Coupled with deductions, exemptions, and
  tax credits (e.g., the child tax credit and earned income tax credit) -47 percent of taxpayers do not
  pay federal income taxes. They do, however, pay payroll taxes, state income taxes, sales taxes, property
  taxes, and taxes on gasoline, alcohol, and tobacco. Adjusting for state and local taxes, the U.S. tax
  system as a whole is, in fact, regressive.

  What is frequently overlooked in the debate about the 47 percent is their share of income. The Joint
  Committee on Taxation estimates the 47 percent that did not pay federal income taxes earned 13
  percent of total income. Sixty-six percent of total income is earned by the top 25 percent of tax filers
  (i.e., those reporting an annual income greater than $100,000).1 And while the effective (or average)
  income tax rates are higher for these filers, the economic value of their tax preferences - the value
  of their deductions, exclusions, exemptions, and preferential tax rates - far exceed direct government
  spending (e.g., Medicare, Medicaid, and Social Security) for those that do not pay federal income tax.
  Wealth inequality is even greater. The top 10 percent of households - those with at least $1.2 million
  in net worth - own in aggregate 77 percent of the wealth in America, whereas the bottom half of
  families (approximately 63 million families reporting a net worth of $97,000 or less) own in aggregate
  one percent of the wealth (Source: Ana Kent, Lowell Ricketts, and Ray Boshara "What Wealth Inequality
  in America Looks Like: Key Facts & Figures" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis).

  Suzanne Mettler, author of The Government-Citizen Disconnect, notes that the assumption that the
  welfare state serves low-income households is, in fact, false. We are all beneficiaries! What
  differentiates the 47 percent from everyone else is the visibility of government programs, services,
  and policies. Low-income households rely on government programs that make the government's
  role most apparent. The high-income households benefit from tax preferences that obscure the
  government's role and, as such, are not viewed as spending because appropriations are not made, and
  benefits checks are not sent.

  The remaining 16 percent of federal revenue ($781 billion) was from a variety of sources, including
  the corporate income tax (taxes on business income rather than individual income), excise taxes (taxes
  on the purchase of specific goods like gasoline, cigarettes, and airline tickets), and estate taxes (a tax
  imposed when a family's wealth is transferred from one generation to the next).

  As shown in the figure below, revenues from corporate income tax, excise taxes, and estate taxes
  have either remained constant or declined as a share of GDP. In fact, growth in federal government
  revenues is primarily from the personal income tax, and much of that growth is driven by economic
  expansion as the top marginal income tax rates have declined from 91 percent on income in excess of
  $200,000 in 1962 (or $400,000 filing jointly) to 37 percent in 2020.2 The federal income tax is less
  progressive today than it was in 1962 when the government had 20 income tax brackets.

1. Wealth inequality is even greater. The top 10 percent of households - those with at least $1.2 million in net worth - own in
   aggregate 77 percent of wealth in America, whereas the bottom half of families (approximately 63 million families
   reporting a net worth of $97,000 or less) own in aggregate one percent of wealth (Source: Ana Kent, Lowell Ricketts, and
   Ray Boshara "What Wealth Inequality in America Looks Like: Key Facts & Figures" Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis).

2. Adjusted for inflation, $200,000 in 1962 is equivalent to $1.7 million today.

   14 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Federal Government Revenues (% of GDP)
Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "An Update to the Budget Outlook 2023 to 2033"

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 15
        TAX PREFERENCES: SPENDING BY ANOTHER NAME

           Tax preferences - sometimes called tax expenditures - are provisions in tax law that allow preferential treatment of certain
           taxpayers. They include exclusions, exemptions, deductions, preferential tax rates, credits, deferrals, and anything else to reduce
           an individual's or a corporation's tax liability.
           Exclusions, exemptions, and deductions reduce the amount of income subject to tax. Employer contributions to pension plans and
           employer-sponsored health care plans are excluded from the federal and state income tax. Itemized deductions are a special
           category of deductions, valuable only to taxpayers whose itemized deductions exceed the standard deduction. Itemized
           deductions are most valuable to high-income earners whose annual mortgage interest cost, state and local tax (SALT) deduction,
           and charitable contributions exceed the standard deduction. High-income earners are also more likely to invest in municipal
           bonds. Interest income from municipal debt is exempt from federal taxes. Credits reduce tax liability dollar for dollar by the
           amount of credit. Examples include the earned income tax credit (EITC) and child tax credit. Preferential tax rates benefit
           taxpayers who receive certain income. Income earned from capital gains and dividends, for example, are taxed at preferential
           rates that are significantly lower than the income tax rates. Deferrals allow taxpayers to delay payments without penalty. The
           federal government defers tax payments on income earned in qualified retirement plans. Payments are only required when
           beneficiaries withdraw assets from their retirement plans.

           Source: Joint Committee on Taxation Estimates of Largest Federal Tax Expenditures ($Billions, FY 2021)
           Tax expenditures are, in effect, a form of spending. They are also costly. For comparison, the cost of all federal income tax
           expenditures is higher than Social Security and the combined cost of Medicare and Medicaid. They also exceed the combined
           cost of defense and non-defense discretionary spending.
           Additionally, exclusions, exemptions, deductions, preferential tax rates, credits, and deferrals increase as household income rises.
           Put differently, these subsidies benefit individuals that do not need them, further exacerbating racial disparities in income and
           wealth. The child tax credit ($119 billion) and earned income tax credit ($73 billion) are exceptions.
           The 2017 Tax Cuts and Jobs Act did not advance racial equity in the federal tax code. In fact, core provisions tilt heavily towards
           households at the top of the income distribution. Analysis shows the highest-income (predominately white) households receive
           23.7 percent of the TCJA tax cuts, far more than the 13.8 percent of tax cuts that go to the bottom 60 percent of households (of
           all races).
           Sources: Center for Budget and Policy Priorities (2019) "Policy Basics: Federal Tax Expenditures" and Chye-Ching Huang and Roderick
           Taylor (2019) "How the Federal Tax Code Can Better Advance Racial Equity: 2017 Tax Law Took Step Backward" Center for Budget and
           Policy Priorities.

16 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
We often divide federal government spending into two categories: discretionary and non-
discretionary spending, the latter of which is sometimes referred to as mandatory spending. Non-
discretionary spending is controlled by law. Social Security is a good example. A person becomes
eligible for "full" Social Security benefits once they are over the age of 65 and have paid payroll taxes
for almost four years. Once they become eligible, their benefit is determined by a formula linked to the
total wages earned during their last 35 years of employment. That formula is written into the law that
created Social Security. Once a person becomes eligible, they are "entitled" to the benefits determined
by that formula. Other programs like Medicare, food stamps, Supplemental Security Income, and
many others follow a formula-based structure. If Congress and the President want to change how
much is spent on these programs, they must change the relevant laws.
Discretionary spending includes appropriations for national defense and federal government
agencies. This is spending that Congress and the President can adjust in the annual budget. In fact,
the vast majority of federal spending is driven by laws, rules, and priorities that originate outside the
budget. Data shows that non-discretionary spending is more than 65 percent of all federal spending.
Add to those monies spent on interest on the national debt (roughly 7-8 percent), and we see that
nearly three-quarters of federal spending is "locked in." So, when Congress debates its annual budget,
they are, in effect, debating on about 10 to 25 percent of what it will eventually spend.

Federal Government Outlays (% of GDP)

Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "An Update to the Budget Outlook 2023 to 2033"

In 2022, federal spending on mandatory programs was $4.1 trillion. That included $1.2 trillion
in social security benefits, $1.4 trillion in healthcare spending (primarily Medicare and Medicaid),
$581 billion in income security programs (unemployment compensation, earned income tax credits,
supplemental nutrition assistance programs, etc.), and $348 billion in federal civilian and military
retirement benefits and other veterans' programs.
The federal government spent $1.4 trillion on healthcare, including Medicare and Medicaid. Federal
spending in these two programs represents 37 cents of every dollar spent on health care in the

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 17
U.S. - more than private insurance (33 percent), out-of-pocket expenses (10 percent), or any other
government program (20 percent).

Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "Mandatory Spending in Fiscal Year 2022

Medicare is the federal government's health insurance program for the elderly. The program does not
employ physicians or other healthcare providers. It is, in effect, a health insurance company funded
by the federal government. Established in 1965, Medicare has three main components. "Part A" pays
for hospital stays, surgery, and other medical procedures that require admission to a hospital. "Part
B" covers supplementary medical services like physician visits and procedures that do not require
hospital admission. "Part D" pays for prescription drugs. Part A is funded through payroll taxes and
through premiums paid by individual beneficiaries, and Parts B and D are funded mostly through
payroll taxes. Since 1966, Medicare enrollment has increased from 19 million to almost 60 million
individuals.
Created in 1935, Social Security is a federal income assistance program for retirees. In 2022, 66
million Americans - including 51 million retired workers, 9 million disabled workers, and 6 million

18 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
survivors of deceased workers - received $1.07 trillion in benefits. Average benefits per month were
$1,755 for retired workers, $1,486 for disabled workers, and $1,451 for survivors - all of which are
nominally above the poverty rate.
Medicare and Social Security are intergenerational transfer systems. Today's workers help pay for
current retirees' and beneficiaries' benefits, not their own future benefits. Put differently, there is no
account set aside with your name or contributions on it.
Without legislative action, the Social Security trust funds are projected to be exhausted in 2034.
At that point, the Social Security Administration (SSA) will no longer be able to pay beneficiaries'
benefits in full, as the SSA would be limited to the amounts payable from dedicated funding sources,
per current law.
Income security programs are cash and cash-like assistance programs outside of Social Security. Most
of these programs help individuals pay for specific, basic necessities. Included in income security
programs are the Earned Income Tax Credit, supplemental nutrition assistance program (or SNAP),
supplemental security income, COVID-19 federal stimulus checks, and unemployment
compensation, to name a few. Expanded benefits during and following the COVID-19 pandemic
exceeded 10 percent of GDP in 2020 and 2021.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 19
Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "Discretionary Spending in Fiscal Year 2022

Discretionary spending was $1.7 trillion in FY 2022, including $751 billion in defense spending and
$910 in non-defense spending.

National defense includes pay and benefits for all members of the U.S. Army, Navy (including Marines),
Air Force, and civilian support services. Defense budgets include capital outlays - spending on items
with long useful lives - for military bases, planes, tanks, and other military hardware. National
defense spending remains a top priority of the federal government. In FY 2022, defense spending
was 13 percent of all federal spending (keep in mind that the $751 billion in discretionary defense
spending excludes $113 billion in veterans benefit services that are budgeted as non-defense
discretionary spending and $348 billion in veterans' health and retirement benefits budgeted as
mandatory spending).

The U.S. defense budget exceeds those of China, Russia, Saudi Arabia, India, France, the U.K., and
Japan - combined! There is considerable debate on whether national defense is, in fact, discretionary

20 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
spending. That said, the real question is whether, in the absence of any other military superpower, we
might be spending more than would be appropriate.
All other spending or non-defense discretionary (NDD) includes appropriations for healthcare and
research (including funding for public health and population health agencies like the National
Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), and for health-focused
regulatory agencies like the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)), transportation and economic
development, education, income security (e.g., special supplemental nutrition program for Women,
Infants, and Children (WIC), the low-income home energy assistance program, and child care and
development block grants), law enforcement, the environment, and international affairs.
NDD spending was 3.6 percent of GDP. Except in periods of crisis (e.g., the Great Recession and
the COVID-19 pandemic), NDD spending has been declining as a share of the economy. Congress,
for example, has approved more than $5.3 trillion in federal stimulus spending since the start of the
COVID-19 pandemic.
This discussion raises another absolutely essential point: The federal government has a substantial
structural deficit. A structural deficit is when a government's long-term spending exceeds its revenues.
In 2022, the federal government had a $1.4 trillion budget deficit (or 5.5 percent of GDP). To support
economic recovery, the federal government approved several pieces of legislation that resulted in a
$3.1 trillion (or 14.9 percent of GDP) deficit in 2021 and a $2.8 trillion (or 12.4 percent of GDP) in
2020. Assuming no significant changes in spending or revenue policies, the annual budget deficit is
projected to grow to 10 percent of GDP.

Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "The 2023 Long-Term Budget Outlook"

Why is the deficit expected to grow so quickly? In part because mandatory spending is going to
continue to grow. More and more of the "Baby Boomer" population will become eligible for Medicare,

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 21
Social Security, and other programs. As the eligible population grows, so too will spending. The
cost of health care services has increased three to four times faster than all other costs across the
economy. That's why health-related non-discretionary spending is the proverbial "double whammy"
- the number of people who need those services will increase, and so will the rate of spending per
person to deliver those services. At the same time, most economists are projecting slower economic
growth for the next several decades. Given the federal government's current revenue policies, that
will mean slower revenue growth over time. Those two main factors - growth in non-discretionary
spending and slower revenue growth - will lead to much larger deficits over time.
The federal government's structural deficit is the single most important trend in public
budgeting and finance today. Without major changes in federal government policy, especially in
areas like Medicare and Social Security, the federal government will have no choice but to run
enormous deficits and cut non-discretionary spending. Those cuts will mean less money for many of
the key programs you probably care about basic scientific research, student loans, highways, transit
systems, national parks, and every other discretionary program. In fact, some cynics have said that in
the future, "the federal government will be an army with a health care system."
State and local governments will be forced to take on many of the services the federal government
used to provide in areas like affordable housing, environmental protection, and international trade
promotion. At the same time, some optimists say this is a welcome change. Without the rigidity
and uniformity of the federal government, local communities will have the latitude and flexibility
to experiment with new approaches to social problems. What's not debatable is that absent major
changes in policy, especially for non-discretionary spending, federal government spending will look
quite different in the not-too-distant future.

Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "The 2023 Long-Term Budget Outlook"

You're probably wondering how the federal government will finance those deficits. If the government
does not collect enough revenue to cover its spending needs, it borrows. The figure below shows

22 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
national debt as a percent of GDP from 1943, including projections for the three decades. At the end
of FY 2019, federal government debt was around 79 percent of GDP and increased to 97 percent of
GDP at the end of 2022. The national debt burden is expected to rise to 115 percent of GDP in 2033
and 181 percent in 2053.

Source: Congressional Budget Office (2023) "The 2023 Long-Term Budget Outlook"

        WHAT MOVES INTEREST RATES?

           Interest rates are one of the most important numbers in public budgeting and finance. Interest is what it costs to use someone
           else's money. Banks and other financial institutions lend consumers and governments money at "market interest rates" like the
           annual percentage rate (APR). Small changes in interest rates can mean big differences in the cost of delivering public projects.
           That's why it behooves public managers to know what drives interest rates.
           Interest rates fluctuate for a variety of macroeconomic reasons. If inflation is on the rise, then businesses will be less willing to
           spend money on new buildings, equipment, and other capital investments. If the demand for capital investments is down, then so
           is the demand for borrowed money to finance those investments. In those market conditions, banks and other financial
           institutions will lower their interest rates on loans to entice businesses to make those investments. The opposite is also true.
           Businesses will seek to invest during periods of low inflation, which drives up demand for borrowed money and drives interest
           rates up. Government borrowing and capital investment can also drive demand for borrowed money. Macroeconomists have
           complex models that explain and predict these interrelationships between consumer spending, investments, and government
           spending.
           The U.S. Federal Reserve Bank - "The Fed" - is also a crucial and closely-watched player. The Fed is the Central Bank. It lends
           money to banks and holds deposits from banks throughout the U.S. Its mission is to fight inflation and keep unemployment to a
           minimum. In finance circles, this is called the Dual Mandate.
           The Fed has many tools to achieve that mission, and most of those tools involve interest rates. It can raise or lower the Federal
           Funds Rate or the interest rates at which banks lend money to each other. It can demand that banks keep more money on deposit
           at the Fed. Increases in either will reduce the amount of money banks have available to lend, which drives up interest rates. Its
           most powerful tool is called open market operations (OMO). If the Fed wishes to lower interest rates, it buys short-term Treasury
           bonds and other financial securities from investors. This increases the money available for lending and reduces interest rates.
           When it wishes to raise rates, it sells securities to banks. When banks buy those securities, they have less money available to

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 23
           lend, and that increases interest rates.

This rapid growth in debt is concerning for many reasons. First, federal government borrowing
"crowds out" borrowing by small businesses, homeowners, state and local governments, and others
who need to borrow to invest in their own projects. Since there are only so many investors with
money to invest, if the federal government takes a larger share of that money, there's less for everyone
else. Many economists and finance experts have also warned that if the federal government's debt
grows too high, then investors might be less willing to loan it money in the future. If investors are less
willing to loan the government money, the government must offer higher interest rates to increase
investors' return on investment. As the federal government's interest rates rise, interest rates rise
for everyone else. Occasional increases in interest rates are not necessarily bad, but prolonged high-
interest rates mean less investment by people and businesses, resulting in lower productivity and
slower economic growth.

24 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
           WHAT IS THE DEBT LIMIT?

              Created by Congress in 1917, the debt limit, or debt ceiling, sets the maximum amount of debt the U.S. government can incur.3
              The amount is set by law, and once the limit is reached, the government must either (a) raise the debt limit, (b) suspend the debt
              limit from taking effect, (c) violate the debt limit or (d) default on its obligations to pay its bills. Congress has raised or suspended
              the debt limit more than 100 times since 1940. Raising or suspending the debt limit does not authorize new spending. It simply
              allows for the government to pay for obligations that Congresses and presidents have made in the past.
              With political polarization deepening over the last decade, votes to raise the debt ceiling have remained contentious, with
              congressional budget hawks increasingly demanding spending cuts in return for their support. On January 19, 2023, the U.S.
              Treasury reported it had reached the $31.4 trillion debt limit and begun using "extraordinary measures" to meet the government
              obligations without violating the limit. Following negotiations, Congress voted to suspend the nation's debt ceiling through
              January 2025 in exchange for limits on the growth in non-defense spending. Suspending the debt ceiling gives Treasury the
              latitude to borrow as much money as it needs to pay the nation's bills. It also kicks the potential fight for raising the debt ceiling
              past the next presidential elections.
              Treasury Securities Outstanding (July 2023, $Billions)4

              Debate on the debt ceiling is not a costless effort. With every debt ceiling debacle, confidence in the U.S. government, the world's
              reserve currency, is eroded. The last time the U.S. was pushed to the brink of a default resulted in a rating downgrade by S&P, one
              of the major rating agencies (from AAA to AA+). On August 1, 2023, Fitch Ratings downgraded the U.S. long-term rating to AA+
              from AAA, citing "growing general government debt burden and the steady deterioration in the standards of governance."

3. The first debt limit was established in 1917 to make it easier to finance mobilization efforts in World War I. Before that,
   Congress had to authorize each bond issue.

4. The federal government borrows money by issuing treasury bills, notes, bonds, nonmarketable securities, and other
   securities. Treasury bills have a maturity of three months up to 12 months. Treasury notes have maturities of two years to
   ten years. Treasury bonds mature in 10 years up to 30 years. Nonmarketable securities include securities issued to state and
   local governments and federal trusts (e.g., Social Security). Floating rate notes are short-term investments (mature in two
   years or less) that have an interest rate that may change (or float) over time, while Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities
   (or TIPS) are indexed to inflation to protect investors from a decline in the purchasing power of their investment.

                                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 25
           Uncertainty will likely raise interest rates. Higher interest rates make solving the long-term fiscal problem harder, with
           ramifications for practically every sector of the economy. While the economic consequences of an intentional default, an
           unprecedented event in American history, are unknown, there is no doubt they would be catastrophic.

STATE GOVERNMENTS

There's an old adage that state governments are in charge of "medication, education, and
incarceration." That saying is both pithy and true. State government expenditures in 2021 were
$2.3 trillion, and most of it was spent on primary and secondary education, public universities and
community colleges, healthcare, public assistance, state highways, corrections, and public safety.

States vary a lot in how much of those services they deliver and how they pay for those services. In
some regions, the state is one of the largest employers. This is especially true in rural areas with state
universities or prisons. In other regions, state governments have a limited presence.

States rely on a few key revenue sources. State-wide sales taxes are one-fifth of state government
revenue and nearly 50 percent of state tax revenues. There are two basic types of sales taxes: a
general sales tax that applies to all retail sales transactions and special sales taxes that apply only to
sales of certain goods and services, such as gasoline, tobacco, alcohol, and gambling. Some states tax
construction, personal trainers, catering, and other professional services, while many do not. Many
special sales taxes are administered as excise taxes.

Five states (Alaska, Delaware, Montana, New Hampshire, and Oregon) do not have state-wide sales
tax. Although, Alaska does allow its local governments to collect local sales taxes. California has the
highest state-level retail sales tax rate, at 7.25 percent, followed by Indiana, Mississippi, Rhode Island,
and Tennessee at 7 percent (Tax Foundation, State and Local Tax Rates 2023). States that are heavily
reliant on sales and excise taxes are more likely to have regressive tax systems.

Like with the income tax, sales tax revenues are derived from a tax rate applied to a taxable base. A
state's sales tax base is all the retail sales of personal property that happen within its borders. The
challenge is that it's not always clear what is included in that taxable base. For instance, in Illinois,
candy that contains flour and does not require refrigeration (e.g., Twix) is exempt from the state's
retail sales tax. In New York, an "unaltered bagel" is not subject to the 8.85 percent retail sales tax,
whereas a sliced bagel is. When a company does business in multiple states, it must follow complex
tax codes to determine the sales tax it owes in each state.

Online retailers like eBay and Amazon have long argued that they should not have to collect and
remit sales taxes if they do not have nexus (or physical presence) in the state in which the purchaser
resides. In 2018, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in South Dakota v. Wayfair that businesses with more
than 200 transactions or $100,000 in-state sales - but without a physical presence in the state - must
collect and remit sales taxes. Consumers are now required to remit sales taxes to the vendor or pay
an equivalent amount known as a use tax directly to the state. Some states will go so far as to send
residents an estimated use tax bill to residents if the vendor fails to collect and remit sales taxes.

26 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
In many states, the goods and services purchased by businesses for the purposes of producing a good
or delivering a service are exempt from sales taxes. Doing so prevents tax-pyramiding. For these and
other reasons, sales tax administration is quite complex.

State and Local Government Revenues by Source (2021)

Source: 2021 State & Local Government Finance Census Data and author's estimates.

State-wide individual income taxes are one-fifths of state government revenue and one-third of state
tax revenues. Seven states - Alaska, Florida, Nevada, South Dakota, Texas, Washington, and Wyoming
- do not have a state-wide individual income tax.
State income taxes are administered much like the federal income tax. In fact, most states apply
the federal government's definition of taxable income to determine state taxable income. In New
Hampshire and Tennessee, the individual income tax is limited to dividend and interest income only
(Tax Foundation, State Individual Income Tax Rates, and Brackets 2020).
Thirty-two states have graduated-rate income taxes. A graduated-rate structure does not guarantee
progressivity. Higher rates have to apply to high-income taxpayers while holding harmless low- and
middle-income taxpayers. Tax credits (e.g., childcare credit, earned income tax credit), exemptions,
and deductions specifically targeted toward low- and middle-income taxpayers can enhance the
progressivity of an income tax.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 27
State Government Tax Revenues (by Source, 2022)

Source: The Pew Charitable Trusts - How States Raise Their Tax Dollars (FY 2022) using data published by the Census Bureau

28 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
WHAT IS A "FAIR" TAX?

Governments tax many different types of activity with many different types of revenue instruments (taxes, fees, charges, etc.).
Each instrument is fair in some ways but less fair in others. In public finance, we evaluate taxes across several dimensions:

        Efficiency. Basic economics tells us that if a good or service is taxed, then consumers will purchase or produce less of it.

              An efficient tax minimizes these market distortions. For instance, most tax experts agree that the corporate income tax is
              one of the least efficient. Most large corporations are willing and able to move to the state or country where they face
              the lowest possible corporate income tax burden. When they move, they take jobs, capital investments, and tax
              revenue with them. The property tax, by contrast, is one of the most efficient taxes. The quantity of land available for
              purchase is fixed, so taxing it cannot distort supply the same way that taxing income might discourage work, or that
              taxing investment might encourage near-term consumption.

        Vertical Equity. Vertical equity means the amount of tax someone pays increases with their ability to pay. Most income

              tax systems impose higher tax rates on individuals and businesses with higher incomes. This is meant to ensure that
              taxpayers who have a greater ability to pay will contribute a higher share of their income through taxes.

              A tax with a high degree of vertical equity, like the income tax, is known as a progressive tax. A regressive tax is a tax
              where those who have less ability to pay ultimately pay a higher share of their income in taxes. The retail sales tax is a
              regressive tax. Those who are least able to pay often pay comparatively more of it as a share of income. For instance, a
              family with high annual income will pay the same amount in sales tax for school supplies as a low-income family. The
              effective tax rate (i.e., sales tax liability as a percent of income) will be higher for the low-income household when
              compared to the high-income household.

        Horizontal Equity. Sometimes called "tax neutrality," horizontal equity means that people with similar abilities to pay

              contribute a similar amount of taxes. The property tax is a good example of a tax that promotes horizontal equity.
              With a properly administered property tax system, homeowners or business owners with similar properties will pay
              similar amounts of property taxes. Income taxes are quite different. Because of tax preferences, it's entirely possible
              for two people with the same income to pay very different amounts of income tax.

        Elasticity. An elastic tax responds quickly to changes in the broader economy. If the economy is growing and

              consumers are spending money, collections of elastic taxes increase and overall revenue grows. This is quite attractive
              to policymakers: with elastic taxes, they can see growth in tax collections without increasing the tax rate. Of course,
              the opposite is also true. If the economy is in recession, consumer spending decreases, and so do revenue collections.
              Sales taxes and income taxes are the most elastic revenues.

        Stability. A stable tax does not respond quickly to changes in the economy. Property taxes are among the most

              inelastic taxes. Property values do not fluctuate as much as prices of other goods, so property tax collections don't
              increase or decrease nearly as fast as sales or income taxes. While the tax is stable, it does not grow as fast. Put
              differently, the property tax is stable but inelastic, whereas the income tax is elastic but unstable.

        Administrative Costs. Some taxes require a lot of time and resources to administer. Property taxes are a good

              example. Tax assessors go to great lengths to make certain the appraised value they assign to a home or business is as
              close as possible to its actual market value. To do this, they perform spatial analysis. That analysis demands time and
              expertise.

The chart below illustrates a basic fact about taxation: all taxes come with trade-offs. For instance, the property tax is stable and
promotes horizontal equity, but it's costly to administer and generally non-responsive to broader trends in the economy. The
sales tax is cheap to administer and produces more revenue during good economic times but is regressive. To ensure vertical
equity, the income tax has to impose higher taxes on individuals and businesses with higher incomes. Note that for many of these
instruments, the evidence is mixed. That is, tax policy experts disagree on whether that characteristic is a strength or weakness
for that particular revenue instrument.

                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 29
        In their 2018 "Who Pays" report, the Institute of Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) once
        again found that states that rely on sales and excise tax and less on graduated personal income
        taxes are more likely to tax their lowest-income residents at higher rates than the top one
        percent of taxpayers.
        ITEP's Tax Inequality Index measures the effects of each state's tax system on income inequality
        by assessing its impact on the incomes of taxpayers at different income levels. The chart below
        shows that states without a personal income tax (Washington, Texas, Florida, South Dakota,
        Nevada, and Tennessee) and those with a flat personal income tax (e.g., Pennsylvania and
        Illinois) have regressive tax structures. States with graduated personal income taxes that hold
        harmless low- and middle-income taxpayers are less regressive or, in more positive terms -
        progressive. The distributional impact of the tax systems on income has clear implications for
        wealth inequality among racial groups. Tax codes that are regressive not only worsen income
        inequality; they worsen the racial income and wealth divides.

30 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Source: https://itep.org/whopays/ States with regressive tax structures have negative inequality index scores, meaning incomes are less equal
in those states after state and local taxes than before. States with progressive tax structures have positive inequality index scores. In these
states (California, Washington D.C., Vermont, Delaware, Minnesota, and New Jersey), incomes are more equal after collecting state and local
taxes than before.

All state governments depend to some extent on intergovernmental revenues (IGRs). For state
governments, IGRs are used to meet the federal government's share of mandatory spending. Medicaid
is the largest and most important for most states. The federal government also sends states money for
transportation infrastructure, the Child Health Insurance Program (or S-CHIP), federal student loan
assistance, and many other programs.

Federal IGR falls into roughly two categories: categorical grants that are restricted to specific purposes
and block grants that are less restricted but must produce measurable outcomes or deliverables. Federal
funds for highways and university research are good examples of categorical grants. The Community
Development Block Grant program is a good example of a block grant.

Most state revenues are from the sales tax, income tax, and IGR. That said, states do depend on a
variety of other tax revenues (e.g., taxes on oil, gas, coal, other minerals, timber, and fish, as well as
death and gift taxes). Some states levy a property tax on transactions of certain personal property,
like vehicles. States also generate revenue through fees, including tuition from public universities and
colleges, highway tolls, charges to patients and private insurance companies at public hospitals, and
licenses on everything from hunting to running a tavern to practicing medicine. Some states also tax
private electricity and water utility operators.

State spending has grown substantially over the past few decades. In 1977, the average state's per

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 31
capita spending was around $2,800. In 2021, it was $7,500. Revenues have grown on a similar
trajectory. But note that growth was not uniform. Spending in states like Arizona, California,
Colorado, and Washington grew far slower than the average. This is not a coincidence. These states
have passed strict laws, broadly known as tax and expenditure limitations, that restrict how quickly their
revenues and spending can grow. States without those limits, like Connecticut, Delaware, New York,
and Massachusetts, have seen much faster growth in both revenues and spending. North Dakota,
Wyoming, and New Mexico saw large jumps in revenues and spending in the past decade or so, due
mostly to the growth of their respective shale oil industries (more commonly known as fracking).

A third important trend is that state revenues roughly equal state spending. Virtually every state's
constitution requires that its legislature and governor pass a balanced budget. As you'll see later, a
"balanced budget" can mean rather different things in different places. But overall, states do not spend
more money than they collect. This is in sharp contrast to the federal government. As you saw above,
throughout the past several decades the federal government's spending has routinely exceeded its
revenues. Unlike the federal government, states cannot borrow money to finance an operating budget
deficit. In a number of states, restrictions on balanced budgets are enshrined in law.

Most of state spending is around health, education, transportation, and corrections. About one-half of
state spending was in social services - which includes state spending on the Medicaid and mean-tested
cash assistance programs ($795 billion); state investment in public hospitals and community clinics;
and healthcare programs like vaccinations, diabetes prevention, and outreach programs to prevent
sexually transmitted diseases ($177 billion).

Medicaid is the federal government's healthcare program for the poor. It is delivered in partnership
with the states. Each state designs its own Medicaid program, and the federal government covers
50-70 percent of the spending related to that program.

Medicaid is non-discretionary spending for state governments. Medicaid is to the states what Medicare
is to the federal government: a massive health insurance program that is expected to cover more
people and become vastly more expensive over time. In most states, an individual qualifies for
Medicaid once their income falls below a certain level. Medicaid is also the default health insurer for
many vulnerable populations, including foster children, the permanently disabled, and the mentally
ill. Older individuals who are poor or disabled often qualify for both Medicare and Medicaid. They
are known as dual-eligibles - 18 percent of Medicare patients are eligible for Medicaid coverage as
well. In fact, growth in Medicaid spending is the result of spending on long-term care and nursing
homes for the elderly.

32 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
State and Local Government Spending (by Function, 2021)
Source: 2021 State & Local Government Finance Census Data and author's calculations

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 33
        MEDICAID EXPANSION

           As part of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the federal government offered states a once-in-a-generation opportunity: If states
           expanded their Medicaid programs to cover more uninsured people, the federal government would cover up to 90 percent of the
           costs for that expansion. As of August July 2023, 41 states have implemented the ACA. Analysis shows that expansion states
           experience a substantial increase in Medicaid spending. That spending was subsidized with federal funds. In other words, the
           ACA did not crowd out state spending in other priority areas like education, transportation, or public assistance. More
           importantly, the 35 states that expanded healthcare coverage before the COVID-19 pandemic reported lower uninsured rates
           and were better positioned to respond to the public health emergency by providing coverage to millions of Americans who lost
           their job-based healthcare coverage.

Around 19 percent of state spending was on public education, including public universities, colleges,
and public libraries.
Virtually every state constitution has language that calls out funding primary (Kindergarten through
eighth grade) and secondary (ninth through 12th grade) public education as the state's principal
responsibility. In most states, public education is delivered by local school districts but paid for in
large part with local government property tax revenues and state funds distributed to school districts
using formulas that factor in the number of students, student demographics, and local property
wealth - all to ensure adequate and equitable funding.
State governments' direct expenditures in elementary and secondary education are nominal ($6
billion). Direct spending is executed by local governments - often by school districts, but sometimes
municipal governments or townships ($750 billion, or 38 percent of local government spending).

34 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
State governments directly support public universities and colleges ($264 billion); the remainder is
invested by local governments in their community colleges and public libraries ($76 billion).

State and local government investment in transportation - including highways, airports, sea and
inland ports, and parking facilities - were eight percent of state government spending, with
significant variation across states. Large states like Alaska and Texas dedicate up to 20 percent of
their annual spending to building and maintaining highways, airports, and seaports. By contrast, New
England's state highway systems are far smaller, so state spending on transportation is not nearly as
large a share of overall state spending.

State and local governments finance most of their investments in infrastructure by borrowing money
- usually through municipal bonds - that they repay over time. Interest on that debt was three percent
of state government spending.

Public safety was 5 percent of state government spending. For state governments, corrections (i.e.,
prisons, detention centers, parole officers, and state crime prevention programs) are a significant
proportion of spending. Unlike local governments, state spending on police is a small share of total
spending with much of that spending related to state patrols and criminal investigations.

Spending on parks, environment conservation programs, clean water initiatives, housing
redevelopment, and economic development was three percent of state government spending.

Government administration - including state spending on courts, legal services, legal counseling of
indigent or other needy persons, legislative bodies, and agencies concerned with tax assessment and
collection, budgeting, accounting, and financial reporting was four percent of government spending.

Finally, pensions and other post-employment benefits (OPEB) for retired state government workers
are one of the most important and fastest-growing components of other expenditures (three percent).

The discretionary vs. non-discretionary spending distinction is critically important to the states.
Medicaid and primary/secondary education are effectively non-discretionary programs. State
legislators can change their state Medicaid laws and policies, and many have. But without a policy
change, Medicaid spending is formula-driven and locked in. Primary and secondary education
spending is also driven by formulas that require the state to send a given amount of money to
local school districts each year, barring some substantial policy change. States must also pay the
interest on their debts and make good on their pension and other post-employment benefit (OPEB)
promises. Taken together, non-discretionary spending for state governments is around 70 percent of
total spending. That's why when revenues fall short of expectations and states need to balance their
budgets, they have little choice but to scale back on the 30 percent that remains in discretionary areas
like higher education, public health programs, transportation, and government administration.

We were reminded of this fact in the Great Recession when state governments cut spending on higher
education by an average of 35 percent and public health programs by an average of 50 percent. We
expected history to repeat itself at the start of the COVID-19 pandemic; however, the influx of federal
stimulus funds coupled and the mild recession - amid the pandemic resulted in a majority of states
reporting surpluses, not deficits, FY 2021 and FY 2022.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 35
        PUBLIC PENSION PROBLEMS PERSIST!

           The chronic underfunding of public sector retirement systems is arguably one of the most significant fiscal challenges facing
           state and local governments to date. The 50-state pension funding gap - the difference between state retirement systems' assets
           and projected benefit payments to employees - was $1.25 trillion at the end of FY 2019 (Pew, 2022).
           While the Great Recession exacerbated the public sector retirement crisis, it did not create it. Pension problems were long in the
           making as states opted to increase employee pension benefits in lieu of annual wage adjustments. At the same time, they failed to
           make their annually required contributions and instead relied on robust returns on investments and above-average discount
           rates to value their long-term obligation. These actions resulted in inflated assets and understated liabilities.
           While reforms have faced legal setbacks, several states have been able to scale back on their plan benefits, including limiting
           benefits to current employees, demanding higher contributions, limiting or ending eligibility for new employees, and creating
           defined contribution plans or hybrid retirement plans. While policy changes represent improvements on the margin, they do not
           resolve plan insolvency.
           Why would pension underfunding present a fiscal challenge to governments? First, pension obligations are akin to general
           obligation (GO) debt in that general tax dollars will be used to make payments on retiree benefits. However, unlike general
           government long-term debt obligations, liabilities associated with retirement benefits are less visible to the public, face no
           constitutional or statutory limitations, and do not require voter approval. What's more, governments can do little to modify
           benefits to existing employees, retirees, or their beneficiaries once granted. Unfunded retiree benefits represent a substantial
           reallocation of future cash flows on what is, in essence, an unpaid historical cost.
           Unfunded Pension Liabilities as a Share of State Personal Income (2019)

             Source: Pew (2022) "States' Unfunded Pension Liabilities Persist as Major Long-Term Challenge"

36 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
  LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
  In addition to the federal government and the 50 state governments, the Census Bureau recognizes
  five basic types of local governments: counties, municipalities (i.e., cities, boroughs, and villages),
  townships (i.e., towns or townships), special districts, and school districts. Counties, municipalities,
  and townships are recognized as general-purpose governments, whereas school districts and special
  districts are recognized as special-purpose and single-purpose governments, respectively.5
  Municipalities fund and manage public schools, utilities, large cash-transfer assistance programs,
  and major infrastructure networks. No two municipal governments are alike. Some operate their
  own electric utilities and water companies. Some operate golf courses, swimming pools, and other
  recreational facilities. Cities like Austin, Jacksonville, and Seattle have financial structures dominated
  by large public utilities. Some have programs to fight homelessness and promote affordable housing,
  both areas that until recently were managed by the state and federal governments. Others have
  programs to fight climate change, promote tourism, and acclimate new immigrants to their
  communities. Of all the levels of government, municipalities offer the most variety in their size and
  scope of services.

           Source: 2017 State & Local Government Finance Census Data

  Counties are often called the "bottom of the fiscal food chain." They deliver expensive and human
  capital-intensive services like public health, elections, tax administration, and regional transit
  systems. In some sense, counties are the opposite of municipal governments and townships. Counties
  manage services where a broader geographic reach, relative to municipalities, is more practical and

5. The federal government officially recognizes the sovereignty of 573 Indian tribes in the contiguous 48 states and Alaska.
   U.S. territories (Puerto Rico, Guam, Northern Mariana Islands, U.S. Virgin Islands, and American Samoa) are self-
   governing, and each has a non-voting member of the House of Representatives. We've not included a discussion on the
   revenue structure or spending priorities of these governments in this edition of the text.

                                                                                                                                      FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 37
economical. Elections, for example, are usually a county function. Instead of dozens of municipalities
conducting their own elections, county governments manage county-wide elections that cover all
the municipal and county officials elected within the county. Tax administration is another
example. Property assessors are usually positioned within a county government but execute property
assessments for all the municipalities and other taxing jurisdictions within their county. For this same
reason, counties are usually responsible for a majority of human service programs, including public
health and mental health services.

Local governments depend on the same revenue sources but in different configurations.

Property taxes are the local revenue workhorse. They are the oldest local revenue source and the only
tax found in all 50 states. For the past two decades, they have accounted for at least 30 percent of
all local government revenues - with significant variation across the states. There are good reasons
for this. Property taxes are simple and transparent. They follow the same basic taxable base times
tax rate concept you've already seen with both the income tax and the sales tax (see below for more
details on property tax administration). And yet, property taxes are wildly unpopular. Taxpayers get
angry when their tax bill increases, but their income does not. They also struggle to understand
how the government determines their property value. That's why the property tax is often called the
"necessary evil" of local revenue systems.

In 38 states, the state government has authorized local governments to levy a local sales tax. In all,
around 6,500 municipal governments rely on local sales tax revenues for seven percent of total
revenues. Applicable rates and taxable bases vary. The five states with the highest average local sales
tax rates are Alabama (5.25 percent), Louisiana (5.10 percent), Colorado (4.88 percent), New York
(4.52 percent), and Oklahoma (4.48 percent). Some city and county governments have a general sales
tax to fund local services. Other local sales taxes are much smaller rates but have more specific
purposes like public education, public safety, public health, or tourism. For example, in 2000, voters in
Brown County, WI, authorized a 0.5 percent sales tax to fund improvements to Lambeau Field, home
of the Green Bay Packers of the National Football League (NFL).

Local income taxes are common in areas with lots of commuters. In fact, they are often called commuter
taxes or head taxes. Central cities often lament commuters who work in the central city and use
central city services but do not pay for those services because they own property outside the central
city. Local income taxes impose a tax on wages, income, and other earnings in the jurisdiction
where that income is earned. This is the logic behind local income taxes in several large cities like
Birmingham, Denver, Kansas City, New York City, Philadelphia, St. Louis, and Washington, D.C.
Several municipalities in greater Portland impose a local income tax to help fund Tri-Met, the
regional light rail system. This is an interesting twist on the commuter tax model. Ohio authorizes all
its municipal governments to levy a local income tax. The central criticism of local income taxes is
that they drive away business. That is, if a local business can avoid paying the local income tax simply
by moving to another jurisdiction, it will have a strong incentive to do so.

38 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Local Government Own Source Revenues (by Source 2021)

Source: 2021 State & Local Government Finance Census Data and author's estimates.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 39
        JUMPSTART SEATTLE

           Two years after passing and then repealing the head tax (planned to be $275 per employee), the Seattle City Council approved a
           new payroll tax. Christened "JumpStart Seattle," the city's payroll ordinance imposes a tier-rate payroll tax on businesses with
           annual payrolls of more than $7 million on a sliding scale from 0.7 percent on employee wages between $150,000 and $399,999
           up to 2.4 percent, with the highest rates applying to employees reporting income in excess of $400,000 who are employed by
           businesses with more than $1 billion in annual payroll expenses. However, unlike the OASDI, this payroll tax is a tax on the
           employer, even though the basis of the tax is employee wages.
           Businesses with payroll expenses of less than $7 million, grocery stores, insurance businesses, certain motor vehicle businesses,
           federal, state, and local government entities, and independent contractors whose compensation is included in the payroll
           expense of another business that is subject to the tax are exempt from the payroll tax. Additionally, not-for-profit healthcare
           entities are exempt from the payroll tax on employees with annual compensation of $150,000 up to $400,000 for the period
           January 1, 2020, through December 31, 2023.
           The tax, which was expected to yield $210 million in its first year, brought in more than $230 million. Revenues from the tax were
           used to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 public health and economic crisis and finance affordable housing investments and
           equitable development projects in the future.

Local governments depend on a variety of intergovernmental revenues. Many state governments offer
municipalities grants to fund a variety of needs, especially infrastructure. States have revolving loan
programs to help city and county governments pay for roads, bridges, drinking water systems,
stormwater management systems, and other basic infrastructure.

Federal intergovernmental revenues also assist municipalities with transportation infrastructure,
affordable housing, community development, community policing, and many other initiatives. In a
few states, municipalities receive up to 40 percent of their revenues through state revenue-sharing
programs. This is most common in states where local governments are not authorized to levy a local
sales tax or are subject to strict property tax limits.

Municipalities also employ dozens of "other" revenue sources. Some tax utilities, both publicly owned
and privately owned, are within their borders. Municipalities also impose fees on licenses for
everything from owning a pet to operating a tavern to practicing massage therapy. Municipal courts
also impose a variety of fines on everything from illegal parking to vagrancy.

Like the sales tax, fees and other miscellaneous charges have become a much larger part of municipal
revenue portfolios. These revenue streams are regressive, and their proliferation exacerbates income
inequality.

40 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        PRIMER ON PROPERTY TAX

           The property tax is the most important tax used by local governments, accounting for about 70 percent of local government tax
           revenues and 30 percent of all local government revenues. The property tax is also politically unpopular. The unpopularity of the
           tax is based on its visibility. Taxpayers get angry when their property tax bill increases when their incomes have not, and they
           struggle to understand how the government estimates the value of their property. Even though the tax remains an essential
           source of revenue for local governments, it remains unpopular, and voters have shown their disdain for the tax with their support
           of property tax limits (see Tax and Expenditure Limits).

           Property taxes apply to real property, including land and buildings, and personal property, including moveable items such as
           cars, boats, and value stocks and bonds - although most states have moved away from taxing personal property and now impose
           taxes on real property.

           In its simplest form, the property tax is calculated by multiplying land and buildings' value by the property tax rate. Property tax
           rates are typically expressed in mills (a mill is one-tenth of one percent). An owner of property worth $250,000 subject to a 10
           mill (i.e., 1 percent) tax rate would pay $2,500. In reality, property taxes are often more complicated.

           First, local governments must determine the property's value for tax purposes. Tax assessors use statistical models to estimate
           the property's market price using prices of recently sold properties. They then multiply the estimated market value by an
           assessment ratio ranging from 0 percent (meaning the property is exempt from the property tax) to 100 percent (indicating
           full-value assessment) to arrive at the property's assessed value.

                                                             Market Value x Assessment Ratio = Assessed Value

           While many states use market value (an assessment ratio equal to 100 percent), others assess property at a fraction of its actual
           value. For example, a state may have a 100 percent assessment ratio for commercial property and a 70 percent assessment ratio
           for residential property, which means a $250,000 commercial property is taxed on its full market value, but a $250,000
           residential property is taxed as if it were worth $175,000. States may have exemptions or credits that are available to certain
           types of properties or property owners. Homestead exemptions, for example, reduce the amount of property subject to taxation.
           This exemption is limited to owner-occupied homes. For a home worth $250,000 subject to fractional assessment (at an
           assessment ratio of 70 percent), the home would be taxed as if it were worth $125,000 (($250,000 x 0.70)-$50,000).

                                                                    Assessed - Exemptions = Taxable Value

           The millage rate, usually the sum of tax rates of several jurisdictions (e.g., county tax, city tax, school district tax, special district
           tax (for hospitals, parks, libraries, etc.)), is then applied to the assessed value (net of exemptions). Assuming a millage rate of 10
           mills (or $10 per $1,000 in assessed value), the property tax bill of a $250,000 commercial property is $2,500. In contrast, the
           property tax bill of residential property, subject to a 70 percent assessment ratio and whose owners are eligible for the
           homestead exemption, is $1,250 (i.e., ($125,000 x 0.01).

                                                                  Taxable Value x Millage Rate = Tax Liability

           States may provide means-tested tax credits that lower the property tax liability.

                                                                  Tax Liability - Credits = Property Tax Owed

           More importantly, the fractional assessment, homestead exemption, and property tax credits result in a lower effective tax rate
           for homeowners. The effective tax rate is equal to the actual property tax payment divided by the property's market value. For
           the owner-occupied residential property, the ETR is 0.5 percent (i.e., $1,250/$250,000). ETR for commercial property not
           eligible for the exemption and assessed at full value is 1.0 percent (i.e., $2,500/$250,000).

Local government expenditures in 2021 were $2.2 trillion; most of it was spent on primary and
secondary education, social services, and public safety.

Public education accounts for around 40 percent of local government spending. In 2021, local

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 41
government invested $750 billion in elementary and secondary education, $46 billion in community
colleges, and $13 billion in public libraries.
Social services were 12 percent of local government spending. As we noted earlier, Medicaid and mean-
tested cash assistance programs are all administered by state governments. Local governments are
responsible for funding and investing in public hospitals ($130 billion) and healthcare programs ($69
billion), including spending in public health departments that lead disease prevention and health
promotion efforts such as vaccination programs, food safety, and disaster preparedness and response.
Local governments spent $216 billion (10 percent) on public safety, including police ($116 billion), fire
($61 billion), and corrections ($32 billion). Public safety is one of the fastest-growing spending areas
but ranks third behind local government investment in public education and social services. Spending
on police today remains at the same level it was in 1959 - at about 4.8 percent - even though crime
rates are at their lowest point in decades.
The remainder of local government spending is spent on municipal infrastructure, economic
development, government administration, and employee benefit programs. Municipal infrastructure
includes investments in streets, sidewalks, bridges, drinking water treatment, wastewater treatment,
stormwater management, electricity, cable television, and broadband. Many of our most basic human
needs are met by municipal infrastructure. Economic development includes programs to encourage
small business growth, promote arts and culture, make neighborhoods safer and more walkable, and
provide affordable housing, among others. The remainder is the interest expense on long-term debt
issued to finance municipal infrastructure.
As mentioned above, the priorities of local governments around the country have expanded
dramatically in the past two decades. Today, local governments have programs and services designed
to mitigate climate change, stop the nationwide opioid epidemic, protect the civil rights of the
LGBTQ community, prepare recent parolees for careers in emerging industries, promote
international trade, and assist newly arriving refugees. In the past, these issues were considered state,
national, or even international issues. What difference can a city make, the argument went, around a
problem so vast as climate change? But in the midst of chronic political gridlock in state capitals and
in Washington, D.C., and in a new environment where "symbolic politics" are more potent than ever,
many municipal officials feel compelled to go it alone.

42 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        TAX AND EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS (TELS)

           At the local level, TELs are either limits on the property tax rates, growth in the property tax base (or assessed value), property
           tax revenues, or the aggregate of local government taxing or spending authority.

           Limits on assessed valuation are limits on annual growth in the valuation of the property (e.g., two percent), while limits on
           property tax revenues are dollar limits on the total amount of revenue that can be raised from the property tax. Caps on the
           aggregate of local government taxing or spending authority are dollar limits on overall spending authority. The limits can apply to
           all governments with taxing authority or specific municipalities (e.g., school districts).

           The first property tax limit that is still in effect today was adopted in Alabama in 1875. Adopting restrictive property tax limits
           protected white landowners from new or higher property taxes intended to fund education for Blacks, who were largely
           untouched by property taxes since they owned very little real or personal property. Alabama was not alone. Arkansas, Georgia,
           Missouri, and Texas adopted restrictive property tax limits - some of which remain in the books now.

           At the state level, TELs restrict the growth of government revenues or spending. In estimating limits on spending authority, the
           state is required to establish base-year appropriations subject to the limit and adjust for a factor of growth that is equal to
           changes in population, inflation, or personal income. States can only exceed appropriation caps if they exercise the override
           provision, which often is a legislative majority or super-majority vote.

           Funds in excess of the limitation are refunded to taxpayers, deposited in a reserve fund (commonly referred to as a rainy-day
           fund), or used for purposes as provided by law (e.g., capital improvements, K-12 spending).

           In addition to limits on appropriations, state governments mandate a legislative supermajority vote or voter approval before the
           state can adopt new or higher taxes. Mississippi was the first state to adopt a legislative supermajority requirement - and to
           date, any tax increase must secure three-fifths of votes in both houses of the legislature. Sixteen states have since adopted
           legislative supermajority or voter approval requirements, thereby limiting the government's ability to raise additional tax dollars
           or engage in meaningful tax reform.

           While these revenue suppression measures remain popular, they have had unintended and perhaps detrimental effects,
           especially at the local level. For example, data from 1977 through 2007 - when a number of property tax limits were adopted in
           the states - shows the precipitous decline in property tax revenues as a share of own-source revenues. In California,
           Massachusetts, and Oregon, revenues from property taxes fell more than 15 percent. In response, local governments have come
           to rely more on intergovernmental transfers and user charges and fees. They have also adopted local option sales and/or income
           taxes to make up for lost property tax revenues. The extensive reliance on user charges and fees without a progressive income
           tax means state and local government tax structures are regressive.

           For local governments, revenues are now more volatile, and they have less control over their budgets than they did prior to the
           tax revolt movement. TELs have also altered how local governments are willing to borrow, market perceptions of their credit
           quality (or default risk), and their ability to manage their other long-term obligations and legacy costs.

           Recommended Reading: Michael Leachman, Michael Mitchell, Nicholas Johnson, and Erica Williams (2018) "Advancing Racial
           Equity with State Tax Policy" Center for Budget and Policy Priorities

SPECIAL DISTRICTS

Special districts are independent, special-purpose government units created for a limited, specific
purpose with substantial administrative and fiscal independence from general-purpose governments.
They are called many different things, including public authorities, off-budget entities, special-purpose
districts, autonomous governments, special taxing districts, and public corporations. Authorized by their
respective state governments, special districts deliver a wide variety of services, including fire
protection, parks, parking facilities, libraries, electric power, water supply, sewerage and solid-waste
management, cemeteries, airports, community colleges, industrial development, affordable housing,
hospitals, and sea and inland port facilities.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 43
Consider the following examples:

      The Milwaukee (WI) Metropolitan Sewerage District (MMSD) is a regional agency that provides
         wastewater and stormwater management services for about 1.1 million people. Its service area
         covers 411 square miles and includes six watersheds. It is one of the largest urban sewerage
         districts in the country. In 1996, it contracted out most of its basic operations to the private
         firm United Water, making it the largest urban sewer system in the U.S. under private
         management. It collects revenues from charges to businesses and homes that use its sewer
         system, a 0.5 percent property tax on all land within the district, state and federal grants, and
         sales of "Milorganite," an organic compost product it developed and patented, among other
         revenue sources. In 2015, it spent $252 million and employed 1,200 people.

      The Port of Seattle (WA) manages one of the fastest growing airports in the world (Seattle-
         Tacoma International Airport), the third largest cargo container port on the West Coast, an $8
         billion real estate portfolio, and a variety of technical education programs that train young
         people to work in the maritime and aviation industries. It employs 2,200 people, and in 2022,
         it spent $573 million. It collects revenues from rental fees paid by airlines and shipping
         companies, fees on cargo and airline passengers, and real estate rentals and sales. It also has
         the authority to levy a property tax.

      The Barberton-Norton (OH) Mosquito Abatement District manages populations of "biting
         arthropods" across 60 square miles of northeast Ohio. In its own words, the district is
         successful if "you can prepare a picnic, play cards by moonlight, even sit on your front porch
         without the hassle of mosquitoes." It employs three full-time staff. Its sole revenue source is a
         0.05 percent property tax.

      The Holley-Navarre (FL) Fire District began as a volunteer fire squad with no equipment or
         funding. It operated from 1965 through 1980 using borrowed equipment and was funded
         solely by donations. In 1980, the district was created by a special act of the Florida
         legislature. Today it covers approximately 50 square miles in the Florida "panhandle," with 30
         full-time firefighters across four fire stations. In 2021, it spent $2.8 million. Revenue for the
         fire district comes from property taxes and impact fees, an excise tax levied on the assessed
         value of new construction.

      The New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority (NJSEA)is the planning and land use agency for a
         30-square-mile area just across the Hudson River from New York City. It was created in 1971
         to develop sports and entertainment facilities near the "Meadowlands," a marshy and heavily
         polluted former industrial area (see the opening credits of The Sopranos). Today, it manages
         Met Life Stadium (home of the New York Giants and New York Jets of the NFL), IZOD Arena
         (former home of the New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League), and several other
         racetracks, convention facilities, aquariums, and amusement parks. In 2015 the New Jersey
         Meadowlands Commission, the authority originally tasked with land use planning and
         restoration of the Meadowlands, was folded into the NJSEA. As a result of that merger, the
         NJSEA now delivers services that include planning, zoning, floodplain management, solar
         energy, methane recovery, a marina, and pontoon boat cruises. In 2021 it employed 95 full-
         time staff and spent $102 million. It derives most of its revenue from rental fees and leases
         and a local tourism tax paid on hotel rooms and rental cars.

44 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
      The Utah Housing Corporation is a statewide authority created by the Utah legislature in 1975.
         Its mission is to raise funds to make housing affordable for lower-income Utah households. It
         does this mostly by offering home loans - or mortgages - to first-time home buyers and to
         developers building or renovating affordable apartment projects. The Authority is self-
         supporting and raises hundreds of millions of dollars each year through partnerships with
         banks, real estate developers, realtors, and others. In 2022 it employed 104 people and spent
         $55 million. It collects interest payments on its mortgages, buys and sells mortgages for a
         profit, and receives corporate donations.

In 1977 there were just under 26,000 special districts in the U.S. Today, there are just under 40,000.
The figure below shows the growth in special district revenues and spending from 1977-2012. Solid
lines represent revenues, and dashed lines represent spending for eight different special districts,
including electric power, hospitals, housing and community development, fire protection, mass
transit, sewerage, and water supply. Most districts increased their total revenues and spending by
30-75 percent during this period. Revenues and expenditures in the "other" category, including soil
and water conservation, libraries, cemeteries, parks, and recreation, increased more than 200 percent
over the same period.

Special District Revenues and Spending (1987-2012)

Source: U.S. Census of Governments Data and author's estimates (excludes School Districts). Note: Like state and local governments, special
districts balance their budgets; as such, their revenues exceed expenditures.

The next figure shows the composition of special districts' revenues. It shows each revenue source as
a percent of total revenues for special districts by type. For example, in 2012, public hospitals derived
77 percent of their revenues from charges and fees. In other words, a typical hospital earns revenue

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 45
by collecting fees from patients (and patients' health insurers, including Medicare and Medicaid).
Public hospitals levy property taxes (12 percent) and receive federal (4 percent) and state (7 percent)
intergovernmental revenues. Utility districts are authorized to deliver electricity to customers and
collect fees in exchange.

Revenue Composition of Special Districts (2012)

            Source: U.S. Census of Governments Data and author's estimates. Note: Figures may not add up to 100 percent due to
            rounding and excluding smaller categories.

46 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
This chart's key takeaway is that most special districts depend on one or two main revenue sources.
This is not a coincidence. State and local legislatures typically grant special districts limited revenue
authority, and few can levy a tax or receive funding from the state. In fact, special districts are
engaged in business-type activities where they deliver a specific service in exchange for a fee. This is
quite different from state and local governments, where taxpayers pay general revenue sources like
property and sales taxes and receive general services like public safety and public health.

What accounts for the explosive growth of special districts? Two, sometimes contradictory factors.
First, special districts allow for more direct taxpayer control. Suppose citizens receive a service
through their municipal or county government, and they wish to change how they pay for that
service or how that service is delivered. In that case, they can only affect that change through their
city councilmember or other local representatives who must also attend to dozens of other service
delivery concerns. With special districts, citizens elect a separate governing body that attends only to
that specific service, and they pay taxes or fees dedicated to that service. The relationship between
governance, funding, and service delivery is, in concept, much clearer.

Fire protection is a good example. Citizens in unincorporated areas (i.e., areas that fall outside the
boundaries of any municipality) often receive fire protection from a county government or nearby
municipality. In the event of a fire, they would rather not wait for the county or nearby municipal
fire service to arrive. They'd much rather have local firefighters who understand the local terrain and
offer services that a municipal or county fire service is less likely to deliver (e.g., wilderness rescue,
wildfire prevention, and outreach). So, they create a local fire protection district, pay property taxes
specific to that district, and elect a fire protection district board. We see a similar dynamic in service
areas like flood control, agricultural irrigation, and parks. It is also quite common in the Western
U.S., where local political culture tends to favor populist, local control of government. For example,
while Tennessee and Washington have roughly the same population, Tennessee has 347 municipal
governments and 475 special districts, whereas Washington has 281 municipal governments and
1,670 special districts.

Special districts have also proliferated because they can help citizens circumvent tax and expenditure
limitations. Sometimes those limitations are political. For instance, taxpayers across the country have
voted often to move traditional municipal services like libraries and parks from their municipal
government to a special district. When these services are delivered through a special district, they have
a dedicated revenue source. They need not compete with public safety, roads, water/sewer, and other
municipal services for limited tax dollars. And sometimes, those limitations are legal. For example,
school districts in many states must get voter approval for new school buildings. Before the district
can borrow money to build, voters must approve the additional property taxes needed to pay back
that borrowed money. Voters are reticent to support additional property taxes. So, as an alternative, a
district can authorize the creation of a school building authority. That authority will borrow money,
build the new school building, lease the building to the district, and then repay the borrowed money
with the school district's lease payments. At one point in the early 2000s, nearly half the public school
buildings in Texas were financed through this "leaseback" model.

This proliferation presents a variety of trade-offs for governance and accountability. Special districts
do offer more local control, but the evidence suggests they often do the opposite. Voter turnout for
special district elections is usually among the lowest for all elected offices. Academic research shows

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 47
that citizens rarely know that special districts even exist and almost never know who they voted for in
the last election. So, there is little evidence that special districts offer better democratic accountability.
Another practical concern is that the proliferation of special districts has drastically increased the
total amount of local government debt outstanding. This raises a variety of concerns about whether
local governments are able to repay those debts.

        DEFUND THE POLICE

           The opening salvo to this chapter is the story of Michael Brown, a teenager and a resident of Ferguson, who was shot and killed
           by a police officer who was investigating a nearby robbery. The deaths of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor, and other Black
           Americans have once again raised questions about police training, tactics, and priorities, especially with respect to their
           interactions with communities of color. One response to these tragedies is calls to "defund the police." Defunding the police
           means different things to different communities - but at its core, it is a call for police reform that would divert funds from police
           budgets to community health, economic development, and other services to address the root causes of crime.
           The Defund the Police movement has raised many important questions about how local governments spend money and what
           that spending says about their priorities. Perhaps most importantly, it's shown that those priorities can be radically different
           from one neighborhood to the next. Local government spending on public safety (i.e., policing, fire, and corrections) ranks third
           behind spending on education and social services. The chart below shows that spending on policing today remains at the level it
           was in 1959 - even though today's crime rates are at their lowest point in decades.

           Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and https://fredblog.stlouisfed.org/2020/06/government-spending-on-police/

48 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
           Revenues from the criminal justice system have become an essential part of local government budgets. The DOJ's formal
           investigation of the fatal shooting of Michael Brown found that the city's law enforcement practices were shaped by its focus on
           revenue rather than on public safety. Ferguson's practices may have been more aggressive than some other police departments.
           Still, many local governments have come to rely on fines, fees, and penalties for revenues even though the incidence falls
           disproportionately on the poor and communities of color. In other words, defunding the police also means, to a degree, defunding
           other parts of local government.

           While much of the public debate has focused on defunding the police in the face of police brutality, few have focused on how
           ineffective many police departments are at doing what they are supposed to do - solving crime. Data shows that approximately
           38 percent of murders, 48 percent of aggravated assaults, 66 percent of sexual assaults, and 70 percent of robberies go
           unsolved. Even though budgets define responsibilities and can be used to hold agencies accountable, more often than not, police
           are also asked to respond to everything from loose dogs to disciplining children in our public schools. Police advocates and critics
           alike agree that "policing" resources are not allocated to their best use.

           Now that you have a better grasp of where the money comes from and where it goes, you'll recognize the complexities in the call
           for defunding police. One immediate complication is differences in the scale of spending. Many experts have argued that
           underserved communities need massive investments in public schools and in social services like community health and
           affordable housing. Recall that local governments collectively spend orders of magnitude more money on schools and social
           services than they spend on public safety. Because of that, even a massive reallocation of public safety resources would do little
           to qualitatively increase spending in areas where it's most needed. For some defund policing advocates, that redirection would
           symbolize an important shift in priorities, even if the actual impact was minimal. But any serious attempt to address the needs of
           underserved communities will acknowledge that defunding the police is, at most, a partial solution. Another challenge is to define
           what services the police will provide with lower budgets and whether some of their existing responsibilities will be shifted to
           other organizations in the local government. What changes will lead to police using their budgeted resources more efficiently
           and effectively?

           When we put the movement's goal and tactics in the context of local revenues and spending generally, it is clear that achieving its
           broader goals requires more than just reallocating police budgets. That will require careful attention to local governments'
           overall revenues and spending, what a fiscally sound local government looks like, what it costs to deliver public services, what it
           means to deliver those services cost-effectively, and how local budget politics and processes reinforce or upend existing policy
           priorities. Those are precisely the questions you'll grapple with throughout this textbook.

THE NON-PROFIT SECTOR

Non-profits are big business! According to the National Center for Charitable Statistics,
approximately 1.54 million non-profit organizations were registered with the Internal Revenue
Service at the end of 2016. Note that not all non-profits are registered with the IRS; therefore, the
total number of non-profit organizations in the U.S. is unknown. The sector collectively reported
$5.99 trillion in assets and $2.62 trillion in revenues and contributed an estimated $1.05 trillion to the
U.S. economy (5.6 percent of the nation's GDP).

Public charities are the largest category of more than 30 types of tax-exempt organizations
(totaling1.08 million in 2016) - a majority of which are small, therefore, not required to file tax forms
with the IRS (i.e., Form 990, Form 990-EZ, or Form 990-PF).

The figure below presents an analysis of public charities by size. Just over three-quarters of reporting
public charities - i.e., those reporting expenses of less than $1 million - altogether account for 2.1
percent of total expenses. In contrast, charitable organizations reporting $10 million or more in
revenues reported the largest share of expenses (88 percent) even though they were a smaller share of
the sector (5.3 percent).

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 49
Number and Expenses of Public Charities (as a Percentage of All Reporting Public Charities and Expenses)

Excludes organizations reporting $50,000 or less in revenues. Source: Urban Institute, National Center for Charitable Statistics, Core Files
(Public Charities, 2016).

To understand where non-profits get their money and where their money goes, you must first
understand the many different types of organizations that comprise the "non-profit sector." The
table and charts below illustrate some of these differences. A few key trends stand out. Healthcare
organizations have an outsized role in the sector. Even though they represent 12 percent of
organizations, they account for 59 percent of the sector's revenues and 43 percent of assets. The
Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, together with Kaiser Foundation Hospitals, for example, reported $68
billion in expenses at the end of FY 2016. That has since grown to $97 billion at the end of FY 2022.
Education non-profits (including private schools, universities, and parent-teacher associations) were
17 percent of non-profits but were an oversized share of the sector's assets - 33 percent. That
includes not only the physical assets (e.g., academic buildings and student housing) but also financial
investments. The President and Fellows of Harvard College is a permanent endowment that supports
professorships, financial aid, and student activities at Harvard University. At the end of FY 2021, the
university reported $60 billion in investments ($72 billion in total assets) - the largest of any private
university. The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, the largest U.S. foundation, reported $67 billion
in long-term investments and $68 billion in assets.
These non-profits defy the conventional wisdom that "non-profit" means "not profitable." How can
an organization be that large and profitable yet remain "non-profit"? That's because the term "non-
profit" refers to the organization's tax status, not its business model. By law, non-profits do not pay
federal, state, or local taxes on their net income - except UBIT - that is, unrelated business income
tax paid on income earned on activities that are not substantially related to furthering the exempt
purpose or the organization. They also receive tax-free charitable donations from individuals and
corporations. We grant them these benefits because they deliver goods and services that would benefit
the public. Most non-profit hospitals accomplish this by offering free or low-cost healthcare to people
who can't afford it. As long as they provide that service, there's little restriction on how much profit
they can earn. For public sector organizations, profits are not central to resource allocation. However,
as you'll see in Chapters 2 and 3, profits are essential to their long-term financial health.

50 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Ten Largest Public Charities by Subsector, 2016

Source: Urban Institute, National Center for Charitable Statistics, Core Files (Public Charities, 2016).

Human service organizations (including food banks, homeless shelters, and youth and family service
social service organizations) were the most common type of non-profit (35 percent of public
charities). However, they reported a significantly lower share of the sector's revenues and assets (12
percent and 10 percent, respectively). They are also more likely to rely on individual contributions,
foundation grants, and government contracts. As you'll see in Chapter 3, human service organizations
do not report sizeable investments or endowments, and given the demand for services, they are more
likely to report operating deficits.
The largest human service organizations - American Red Cross, Feeding America, Park Nicollet
Group, Partnership for Supply Chain Management Inc., Navigate Affordable Housing Partners Inc.,
and Community Care - provide access to food, affordable housing, and medical care. However,
intercollegiate sports associations (i.e., the NCAA, SEC, and PAC 12) are registered as non-profits and
among the ten largest human service organizations!

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 51
Public Charities Revenues and Assets by Subsector, 2016

Source: Urban Institute, National Center for Charitable Statistics, Core Files (Public Charities, 2016).

Non-profits provide a staggering variety of services. Many of those services are not unlike
governments - they conserve land for future generations, manage affordable housing programs,
and provide pro bono legal services for people experiencing poverty. Like governments, a sizeable
portion of their budget is spent on employee wages and benefits. And like governments, the sector is
comprised of thousands of small organizations but dominated by a handful of larger organizations.
However, unlike governments, contributions are the primary source of revenues for most non-profits.
Recall from our earlier discussion: public charities reporting expenses of less than $1 million were
three-quarters of the sector. The chart below shows that contributions were a significant revenue
source, particularly for non-profits reporting $1 million or less in expenses. Those reporting revenues
of more than $10 million were less reliant on contributions and more reliant on program service
revenues, including tuition payments to revenues from sales of specialty goods, memberships, and
patient revenues (including Medicare/Medicaid). Many remain skeptical that these large non-profits
need or deserve tax exemption.

52 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Public Charities Revenues by Source and Size, 2016

Source: Internal Revenue Service Statistical Tables (2017)

Federal, state, and local governments are an essential source of revenue for the sector. More than one-
third of non-profit revenue is directly connected with the government - either as a grant, contract for
services, or reimbursement for services provided (e.g., Medicaid/Medicare).
Government revenues are not distributed evenly, with significant variation based on sector and the
size of the organization. This suggests that many non-profits are not necessarily independent entities
with their own mission and organizational capacity but rather low-priced government contracts. In
later chapters, we explore the advantages, disadvantages, and criticisms of this part of the non-profit-
government nexus.
Governments also support the non-profit sector through a powerful tax preference. The federal
government and most state governments offer a tax deduction for charitable giving. Donors give to
non-profits for many reasons. Perhaps they like a non-profit's mission or strategy. Maybe they or
someone they know received that organization's services. Or perhaps the decision to give had a lot
to do with tax planning. When a donor gives to a non-profit, that donor's taxable income is reduced
by the amount of that gift, so, for many individuals and corporations, in addition to supporting their
favorite non-profit, charitable giving can also reduce their income tax liability, sometimes by up to
50 percent. The U.S. Congress' Joint Committee on Taxation estimates that the federal government's
charitable deduction costs about $50 billion annually in foregone revenue.
There is considerable controversy around the charitable deduction. Some believe it only benefits the
wealthy and does little to encourage giving. Critics argue that big philanthropy, more than ordinary
small donations, is wealth-derived power with minimal democratic controls and civic obligations
(Rob Reich (2019) "Just Giving"). Philanthropy perpetuates vast differences in privilege and then tasks
the privileged with improving the system (Darren Walker (2015) "Toward a New Gospel of Wealth").
Perhaps we should stop being grateful for philanthropy and instead direct our skepticism at their
activities.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 53
        NON-PROFIT PILOTS - PAYMENTS IN LIEU OF TAXES

           In every state, charitable non-profit organizations, including private universities, hospitals, museums, and churches, are exempt
           from property taxes. The impact of the property tax exemption largely depends on the degree of reliance on property taxes as a
           revenue source and real estate holdings of charitable organizations in the jurisdiction.
           Yale University, for example, is New Haven's largest employer. The university's real estate holdings, including academic buildings,
           student housing, research facilities, and a sprawling hospital complex - are all property tax-exempt. In fact, 56 percent of New
           Haven's taxable property tax base is exempt. Yale owns a significant proportion of the exempt property.
           Cities like Boston, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and Los Angeles face the same challenge. Their largest employers include private
           universities, non-profit hospitals, and cultural organizations, all of whom own valuable real estate - all of which is tax-exempt.
           While these organizations are economic engines for these cities, the growth in commercial activities by non-profit organizations
           has raised questions about their property tax exemption. More importantly, the substantial reduction in the taxable base has led
           to higher property tax rates for residents.
           PILOTs (or payments in lieu of taxes) are payments made by tax-exempt non-profit organizations in place of property taxes.
           PILOT payments are structured as either one-time or long-term contracts with annual payments at a fraction of the locality's
           foregone property tax revenue.
           PILOTs are often the result of tense negotiations. Consider the case of the City of Pittsburgh and the University of Pittsburgh
           Medical Center. In 2013, the city sued the UPMC. The goal of the lawsuit was to strip UPMC of its tax-exempt status. According
           to the City's complaint, UPMC did not deliver adequate charity care to justify its tax-exempt status, made no payments in lieu of
           taxes, and paid its executives lavish compensation packages. Had the City won in court, it planned to impose a 0.55 percent
           income tax on wages earned by UPMC employees. UPMC counter-sued, claiming it had been unfairly singled out among
           Pittsburgh's dozens of large tax-exempt organizations. The city dropped its suit in July 2014.
           Source: J. Brian Charles (2018) "Towns Gowns and Real Estate" Governing Magazine and Daphne Kenyon and Adam Langley (2010)
           "Payments in Lieu of taxes: Balancing Municipal and Non-profit Interests" Lincoln Institute of Land Policy.

54 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
CHAPTER 2.

THE BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

                                         FINANCIAL STATEMENTS: THE "FINANCIAL STORY"

   Financial statements help managers answer a variety of questions:

           What and how much does the organization own? What and how much does it owe? Does this
              organization have enough financial resources to cover its obligations as they come due?

           What are the major sources of revenue for this organization? What are its spending priorities? Do
              the organization's sources of revenue and spending priorities reflect the organization's core
              mission?

           How much of this organization's spending does it control? How much of its spending is directed by
              outside stakeholders like donors, clients, residents, or investors?

           How much, if any, does this organization report in "reserves" or its "rainy day fund"? Given its
              operations, what would be the optimal level of reserves?

In November 2013, the Contra Costa County (California) Board of Supervisors voted to end nearly
$2 million in contracts with the non-profit Mental Health Consumer Concerns (MHCC). The reason:
MHCC's savings account had grown too large.

Since the late 1970s, MHCC has offered patient rights advocacy, life skills coaching, anger
management classes, and several other mental health-related services to its poorest residents of the
Bay Area. Much of its work was funded through contracts with local governments.

In 2007, its Board of Trustees began to divert 10-15 percent of all money received on every
government contract to a reserve account (or rainy-day fund). MHCC's management concluded
that this policy was necessary after several governments were consistently late on their payments.
MHCC's plan was designed to guarantee that the organization would not be exposed to unpredictable
cash inflows. The board and management considered this a prudent use of public dollars and a
necessary step to protect the organization's financial future. Beginning in 2007 through 2011, nearly
$400,000 flowed into the new rainy-day fund.

Contra Costa County disagreed. They interpreted the contracts to mean reimbursements were only
for actual service delivery expenses. They also pointed out that those contracts prohibited carrying
over funds from year to year. A reserve fund containing County funds was, therefore, a violation
of those contracts. MHCC pointed out that they disclosed the reserve fund strategy in their annual
financial reports. The reserve allowed them to deliver services uninterrupted, even during the worst
moments of the Great Recession. Contra Costa County Supervisor Karen Mitchoff responded by

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 55
saying MHCC's financial statements were not the appropriate channel to communicate such a
contentious policy choice. She added, "I am not sympathetic to the establishment of the reserve, and
the non-profit board knows they had a fiduciary responsibility to be on top of this."

The contracts were canceled, and MHCC dissolved in early 2011.

This episode illustrates two of the key takeaways from this chapter. First, an organization's financial
statements are a vital communication tool. They tell us about its mission, priorities, and service
delivery strategy. In this case, MHCC made a policy decision to deliver less service in the near term
in exchange for the ability to deliver more consistent and predictable services in the future. That
choice is reflected in MHCC's financial statements (e.g., assets exceed liabilities, and unrestricted net
assets were a significant proportion of net assets). MHCC disclosed the rainy-day fund policy in the
notes to its financial statements. Second, and more importantly, financial statements are only useful
if the audience knows how to read them. In this case, Contra Costa County failed to understand
how the rainy-day fund policy was communicated in the financial statements and how it affected
MHCC's finances and its ability to accomplish its mission. Without the ability or desire to interpret
the financial statements, the County considered MHCC's actions a breach of contract. Whether a
rainy-day fund is, a direct service expense is an important policy question. So is the question of if
and how a government should use financial statements for oversight of its non-profit contractors.
But to engage these and many other questions, one must first understand how a public organization's
financial statements tell its "financial story."

                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

           Identify the fundamental equation of accounting.
           Identify the basic financial statements: balance sheet, income statement, and cash flow statements.
           Recognize key elements in every financial statement, including assets, liabilities, revenues,

              expenses, change in net assets, change in net position, and change in fund balance.
           Understand what information each statement is designed to convey about an organization.

BUDGETING VS. ACCOUNTING

If you want to know how an organization connects its money to its mission, read its budget. If the
budget calls for more spending in one program and less in another, that tells us a lot about that
organization's priorities. If one of its programs operates at a loss - but another program's profits
subsidize that loss - that is also a clear statement about how that organization carries out its mission.
We can think of many other ways an organization's money does or does not connect to its mission. A
public organization's budget lays out the many unique ways it makes those connections.

But sometimes, we want an "apples-to-apples" comparison. Sometimes we want to know to what
extent an organization's mission-money nexus is the same or different from similar organizations.
Sometimes we want to know how efficiently an organization accomplishes its mission compared to

56 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
its peers. Sometimes we want to know if an organization is in comparatively good or bad financial
health. To answer these types of questions, you need information found only in financial statements.
In this chapter, we walk through the basic financial statements and the essential concepts from
accounting you need to understand in order to interpret the information presented in those
statements.

We may need to compare an organization's finances to the finances of other organizations. If our
organization's expenses exceeded revenues, we might consider that to be a failure - unless, of course,
we see organizations like it face similar challenges. If it failed to invest in its capital equipment,
we might think it was neglecting its service delivery capacity - unless we saw other organizations
make that same trade-off. These comparisons demand financial information based on standardized
financial information from a broadly shared set of assumptions. As you'll see in Chapters 5 and 6,
budgets rarely present information in a standard format.

Fortunately, we can get that information from an organization's financial statements. Financial
statements are the main "output" or "deliverable" from the organization's accounting function.
Accounting is the process of recording, classifying, and summarizing economic events in a
process that leads to the preparation of financial statements. Unlike budgets, the numbers reported
in financial statements are based on generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) that prescribe when
and how an organization should acknowledge economic activity.

GAAP tells us when an organization can say it owns an asset or earned revenue for delivering a service.
These are known as principles of accounting recognition. The key point is that GAAP is a shared
set of "rules of the game" for summarizing and reporting an organization's financial activities. If an
organization offers GAAP-compliant financial information, we can compare its finances to itself over
time and to other organizations.

Standardized rules are not the only difference between budgeting and accounting. Broadly speaking,
if budgeting is the story, then accounting is the scorecard. An organization's budget tells us the
activities it wants to do, how it plans to pay for those activities, and what it hopes to achieve.
Politicians and non-profit board members love to talk about budgets because budgets are full of
aspirations. Budgets are how leaders translate their dreams for the organization into a compelling
story about what might happen.

Financial statements tell us what happened. Did the organization's revenues exceed its expenses?
Did it pay for goods and services it received with cash or on credit? Did its investments gain value
or lose value? How much revenue would it need to pay for capital improvements and equipment?
Accountants often see themselves as the enforcers of accountability. That is why budget-makers and
accountants often don't see eye-to-eye.

These two worldviews are different in many other important ways. As mentioned, budgeting is
prospective (i.e., about the future), whereas accounting is retrospective (i.e., focused on the past).
Budgets are designed primarily for an internal audience - elected officials, board members,
department heads, program managers, etc. In contrast, accounting procedures produce financial
reports mostly for an external audience, including taxpayers, investors, regulators, and funders.
Budgeting focuses on resources that flow in and out of an organization, also known as the financial

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 57
resources focus. Accounting focuses on the long-term resources the organization controls and its long-
term spending commitments, also known as the economic resources focus. In preparing a budget, the
focus is on revenues and spending. In accounting, the focus is on assets and any claims against those
assets. We present a summary of these perspectives in the table below.

        WHO MAKES ACCOUNTING STANDARDS?

           The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) produces GAAP for publicly traded companies and non-profits. The
           Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB) produces GAAP for state and local governments. Both the FASB and the
           GASB are governed by the Financial Accounting Federation (FAF), a non-profit organization headquartered in Norwalk, CT, just
           outside of New York City. Both Boards are comprised of experts from their respective groups of stakeholders: accounting,
           auditing, "preparers" (entities that prepare financial statements, like companies and governments), and academia. The Securities
           and Exchange Commission (SEC), the federal government agency that regulates public companies, designates the FASB as the
           official source of GAAP for public companies. The GASB has not been designated as such. Still, it is the de facto source of GAAP
           for governments because key stakeholders like municipal bondholders and credit ratings agencies have endorsed its standards.
           GAAP for federal government entities is produced by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB). The FASAB is
           comprised of accountants and auditors from federal government agencies. Federal government GAAP is still an emerging set of
           concepts and practices.

THE FUNDAMENTAL EQUATION OF ACCOUNTING
Everything we do in accounting is organized around the fundamental accounting equation. That
equation is

                                              Assets = Liabilities + Net Assets
An asset is anything of value that the organization owns. There are two types of assets: 1) short-term
assets, known more generally as current assets, and 2) long-term or non-current assets. A current asset is
any asset that the organization will likely sell, use, or convert to cash within a year.
When someone outside the organization owes money, and the organization expects to collect that

58 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
money within the year, that obligation is known as a receivable. If it's due within the year, it is
classified as a current asset. An organization recognizes an account receivable or A/R when it delivers a
service to a client and that client or customer agrees to pay within the current fiscal year. Non-profits
frequently report donations receivable or pledges receivable. Pledges receivable represent a donor's
commitment to give at a future date. The same logic applies to grants receivable when foundations
or governments commit to giving the organization a grant. Governments recognize an overdue tax
payment as taxes receivable. Due from other governmental units represents payments due to a government
from other governmental units.

Organizations will report inventory or supplies if they expect to use these resources as they carry out
routine operations. These are also current assets.

Most public organizations own buildings, vehicles, equipment, and other assets they use to deliver
their services. These are long-term assets, as the organization expects to use them over multiple years
(frequently referred to as useful life). Organizations are not likely to sell these assets, as doing so
would diminish their capacity to deliver services. State and local governments build and maintain
roads, bridges, sewer systems, and other infrastructure assets. These are among the most expensive and
essential long-term assets in the public sector.

By contrast, a liability is anything the organization owes to others. To put it in more favorable terms,
liabilities are how an organization acquires its assets. Here the short-term (or current) vs. long-term
distinction also applies. Current liabilities are liabilities that the organization expects to pay within the
next fiscal year. The most common are accounts payable for goods or services the organization has
received but not yet paid for and wages payable for services delivered by employees but not yet paid
for.

Long-term liabilities are money the organization will pay at some point beyond the current fiscal year.
When an organization borrows money and agrees to pay it back over several years, it recognizes
a loan payable or bonds payable. Many public sector employees earn a pension while they work for the
government, and they expect to collect that pension once they retire. If the government has not
set aside enough money to cover those future pension payments, it must report a pension liability
(sometimes referenced as net pension liability).

What's left is called net assets. Technically speaking, net assets represent the difference between assets
and liabilities. For private sector entities, this difference is known as the owner's equity. Public
organizations do not have "owners." Instead, they have stakeholders, or anyone interested, financial or
otherwise, in how well the organization achieves its mission. For governments, taxpayers are a rough
analog to owners. But unlike shareholders, taxpayers do not have a legal claim to the government's
assets. Their priorities also differ. Taxpayers want to see their governments deliver the services.

Similarly, donors expect contributions to be used to provide services. They do not expect to get their
money back if the organization fails. However, they care about the organization's financial position
and frequently focus on whether its operations are sustainable and will continue serving the public
for generations to come. For these reasons, net assets are an important part of government and non-
profit finances, but they do not have quite the same meaning as owners' equity for a for-profit entity.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 59
That said, irrespective of sector, we should think of net assets as an indicator of the organization's
financial strength. If its net assets are growing, that suggests its assets are growing faster than its
liabilities, and in turn, so is its capacity to deliver services. If its net assets are shrinking, its service-
delivery capacity is also shrinking.

We also have to think about the restrictions on net assets. The new accounting rules require non-
profits to report net assets "without donor restrictions" and net assets "with donor restrictions." Prior to
FASB Accounting Standards Update 2016-14, net assets reported as unrestricted are now reported as
net assets without donor restrictions. Net assets reported as temporarily restricted (i.e., net assets with
time or use restrictions) or permanently restricted (i.e., net assets with restrictions that do not expire) are
now reported as net assets with donor restrictions. While ASU 2016-14 is a significant change in how
non-profits present financial information in their audited financial statements, how they account for
these resources in day-to-day operations remains unchanged. Put differently, changes in GAAP do
not alter or amend donor intent. Non-profits will need to continue to track gifts - but report in the
financial statements in aggregated categories.

Governments use separate classification schemes, but these are a bit more detailed. We describe that
scheme later in this chapter.

        OWNERS = EQUITY HOLDERS

           In for-profit organizations, the fundamental equation is Assets = Liabilities + Owners' Equity. Conceptually, every shareholder has
           a claim to assets that do not have an offsetting liability. Put differently, shareholders have a claim to all assets not otherwise
           promised to creditors or suppliers. When you buy a for-profit company's stock (or "shares"), you are, in effect, purchasing a
           portion of that company's owner's equity. That's why stocks are also known as equities. If a company's assets grow faster than its
           liabilities, its equity will become more valuable, and the price of its stock will increase, meaning investors who hold that stock
           make money. If, for example, you had invested in Apple stocks before the first iPod came to market in 2001, as of June 30, 2023,
           your portfolio's value would have increased by 58,679 percent (from $0.33 per share to $193.97 per share). The price of Apple
           shares reflects growth in revenues and, correspondingly, growth in assets.

THE BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

Organizations that follow GAAP produce three basic financial statements:

    1. A Balance Sheet summarizes the organization's assets, liabilities, and net assets at the end of
         the fiscal period (e.g., as of December 31, 20XX).

    2. An Income Statement presents a summary of the organization's revenues, expenses, and
         changes in net assets for the fiscal year (e.g., for the year ending December 31, 20XX).

    3. A Cash Flow Statement shows how the organization receives and uses cash to carry out its
         mission (e.g., for the year ending December 31, 20XX).

In the discussion that follows, you will see more detail about each statement and how the information
it contains can inform key management and policy decisions.

60 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
When considering an organization's financial statements, keep one central point in mind: Net assets
are the focal point. Regardless of the organization's structure or mission or changes in assets,
liabilities, revenues, expenses, and cash flows will affect net assets. While the content of each financial
statement differs, the focus is on net assets.
Additionally, each statement's presentation style and terminology vary depending on the sector. The
table below summarizes these differences.

Many of the labeling differences are intended to contrast the mission orientation of non-profits
and governments with the profit orientation of for-profits. We see this most clearly in the income
statement. For-profit organizations often refer to the income statement as the "profit/loss statement,"
given that its purpose is to distinguish its profitable products and services from its non-profitable
products and services. For governments and non-profits, the focus is on "activities." The question
here is not whether the organization's activities are profitable but how those activities advance its
mission. To be sustainable, every organization must generate more income than it incurs in
expenses. That said, profitability is not a primary objective for public sector organizations, as it is in
the private sector.
You will also note several differences in what governments call these statements. We have already
discussed how financial statements illuminate operational accountability or how efficiently and
effectively an organization uses financial resources to advance its mission. Taxpayers want to know
that their government delivers services efficiently and effectively. To that end, state and local
governments prepare "government-wide" financial statements. These statements present the
government's overall financial position. These statements offer some insights into the government's
ability to continue to deliver services in the future. With a few modifications, these government-wide
statements are conceptually like the basic financial statements for a non-profit or for-profit.
The government-wide balance sheet is called the Statement of Net Position, and the government-wide
income statement is called the Statement of Activities. By referring to the income statement as the
Statement of Activities, standard setters have sent a clear message: governments exist not to generate
income but to produce activities. This also explains why there is no government-wide cash flow
statement. Information about how a government generates and uses cash does not necessarily help us
understand if it is achieving its mission.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 61
But with governments, operational accountability is only part of the story. Taxpayers also want to
know if their government did what they told it to do. They want to know if services were delivered
with revenues collected. That's fiscal accountability.

When we think of fiscal accountability in government, we usually think of the budget. A
government's budget is not just a plan - it is the law. Most governments' constitutions or charters
require them to lay out their planned revenues and spending in a special law called an appropriations
ordinance. They must pass legislation that makes their budget intentions clear. If they spend more than
their budget allows or if monies are spent in ways not specified in their budget ordinance, they are
breaking the law.

Budgets are enshrined in law because they are one of our most effective tools to ensure inter-period
equity. Inter-period equity is the idea that if a government presents and approves a balanced budget, it
is living within its means and not passing costs onto future generations.

Fiscal accountability and inter-period equity are so important that they are built not just into a
government's budget but also its financial statements. For instance, imagine a school district levies a
property tax to pay for school buildings. Taxpayers want to see how much revenue that tax generated,
how much money the school district borrowed for capital improvements, how much of that revenue
is being used to repay those borrowed funds, and so on. They want fiscal accountability on that special
tax. To assess this, taxpayers need to see those revenues, expenditures, assets, and liabilities presented
separately from all other operations. To do that, the school district must present those finances in a
stand-alone special revenue fund.

A fund is a stand-alone, self-balancing set of accounts with a specific purpose. The General Fund has
every government account for services paid for through general revenue sources. It is where local
governments account for police, fire, public health, and other essential services paid for using locally
adopted property and sales taxes. It is where state governments account for funding for education
(K-12, public universities, and community colleges), public health, public safety, and other essential
services paid for using state-wide income and sales tax revenues. For most governments, the General
Fund is the largest and most carefully watched. According to GAAP, a government's General Fund,
special revenue funds, debt service funds, capital projects funds, and permanent funds are collectively
called governmental funds. The governmental funds account for the government's core operations and
services.

Like budgets, governmental funds focus on near-term revenues and spending (also known as current
financial measurement focus). For that reason, the information you see in governmental funds
statements is prepared using a different set of accounting principles. Those principles are known
as modified accrual accounting (or "fund accounting"). Modified accrual basis of accounting measures
the current financial resources available. To that end, revenues are recognized when they are
both measurable (i.e., revenues can reasonably be estimated) and available (i.e., revenues are available
within 60 days). Expenditures are recognized when the costs have been incurred to acquire goods or
services in the current period.

Funds are so important to governments that governments are required to present a separate set of
fund financial statements prepared using the modified accrual basis of accounting. The balance sheet

62 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
in the governmental funds is called the Balance Sheet, and the income statement is called the Statement
of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balance.

Governments also deliver goods and services whose operations are similar to what we would find in
the private sector. Examples include water and electric utilities, golf courses, swimming pools, and
waste disposal facilities, to name a few. These are known as business-type or proprietary activities. In
concept, business-type activities should cover their expenses with the revenue they generate through
charges for services. Many governments operate business-type activities because they are profitable
and can subsidize other services that cannot pay for themselves. Since business-type activities pay
for themselves, we account for them on an accrual basis and prepare a separate set of fund statements
referred to as proprietary fund statements. Accrual basis of accounting reports on a transaction when
it has an economic impact, regardless of whether it spends or receives cash. Governments reporting
business-type activities will prepare a Statement of Net Position, Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and
Changes in Net Position, and a Statement of Cash Flows in the proprietary fund statements.

        WHAT IS AN AUDIT REPORT?

           You will find an audit report at the beginning of every set of financial statements. The report, formatted as a letter prepared by an
           external financial auditor, is presented to the organization's board and management and incorporated in the audited financial
           statements. The auditor performs a series of tests to assess the strength of internal controls (i.e., rules and procedures adopted
           by an organization to prevent fraud and abuse) and reviews a representative sample of transactions. Their work is designed to
           answer a simple question: Are the organization's financial statements a fair presentation of its actual financial position? Usually,
           the audit report expresses an unqualified opinion, meaning the auditor believes the financial statements are a fair presentation
           of the organization's financial position, operations, and cash flows. An unqualified audit report will contain language to the effect
           of "...these financial statements present, fairly, and in all material respects, this organization's financial position." If the auditor
           has reason to believe the financial statements do not present that position fairly, they will issue a qualified opinion or, in rare
           cases, an adverse opinion or disclaimer of opinion.

BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS

The basic financial statements of non-profit organizations include the Statement of Financial Position,
Statement of Activities, Statement of Cash Flows, and Statement of Functional Expenses. Below is a quick
review of each statement.

THE STATEMENT OF FINANCIAL POSITION

The Statement of Financial Position, the non-profit's balance sheet, is designed to answer a simple
question: What is this organization's financial position? Financial position has both short-term and
long-term components. If current assets exceed current liabilities, then the organization's short-term
financial position is favorable. If long-term (i.e., non-current) assets exceed long-term liabilities, the
organization is in a favorable long-term financial position. As you will see in the discussion that
follows, an organization could be in a favorable long-term financial position but have a weak short-
term financial position, and vice versa.

For that reason, a point of emphasis for the balance sheet is the relationship between the

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 63
organization's assets and liabilities. An organization's net position improves if its assets grow faster
than its liabilities. If an organization's assets decrease or liabilities increase, its net position will
deteriorate. We are always mindful of why an organization's net position has declined over time. Is
that because the organization drew down on its reserves during a recession, or do changes reflect a
loss in value in the non-profit's investments? The balance sheet offers a lot of this sort of detail. It also
helps organizations formulate strategies to address the issues at hand. If the organization had to draw
down on its reserves because of a deficit, it would need to budget for a surplus to replenish reserves.
If the organization reported investment losses because of changes in the financial markets, it might
opt to do nothing. Doing nothing is a strategy. We've seen the markets recover following a recession,
including the Great Recession and the COVID-19 recession.

We provide a review of financial health measures, also known as financial statement ratios, that can help
you answer some of these questions. Below are some questions you should ask when looking at an
organization's balance sheet:

    1. Do its total assets exceed its total liabilities? If they do, that is an indicator that the
         organization's long-term financial position is favorable.

    2. Do its current assets exceed its current liabilities? If they do, that is an indicator that the
         organization's strong short-term financial position, sometimes referred to as working capital, is
         favorable.

    3. Of total assets, what proportion are current assets? What proportion are fixed assets (i.e.,
         buildings and equipment)? What proportion are restricted investments? Buildings and
         equipment add to operating costs (i.e., maintenance and operating costs). Investments,
         including restricted (or endowment) investments, are a real source of income, and
         unrestricted investments may be used to support the organization's operations.

    4. Of current assets, what proportion are receivables? What proportion of receivables is due in
         12 months or less? What proportion of receivables due is from a single donor or grantor? The
         concentration of receivables with an individual donor is a source of financial uncertainty.

    5. What proportion of assets is in the form of cash and cash equivalents? What proportion of
         current assets is in the form of cash and cash equivalents? How much cash does the
         organization have relative to its current liabilities? We often hear the phrase cash is king.
         Cash is a liquid asset that allows the organization to meet its obligations as they come due and
         provides it with the opportunity to invest in new opportunities or immediately respond to a
         crisis. At the same time, an organization can have too much cash. If it has more cash than it
         needs to cover its day-to-day operations, it could invest some of that idle cash in marketable
         securities or other safe investments and earn a nominal return.

    6. What proportion of net assets is without donor restrictions? What proportion of net assets is
         with donor restrictions? Net assets without donor restrictions can be used to cover short-
         term spending needs, while net assets with donor restrictions cannot, as doing so would
         violate donor intent.

    7. Does the organization have non-current liabilities? How might these affect the organization's
         current assets in the future? Long-term liabilities like loans, bonds, legal settlements, and
         pension liabilities increase demand for cash.

64 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
It is essential to keep in mind that the balance sheet is a snapshot in time. When an organization's
accounting staff prepares the balance sheet, they present balances in every account on a particular
day, usually the last day of the fiscal year. If an organization has a dynamic balance sheet, its financial
position could look quite different from one week to the next or one month to the next based on
activities in key balance sheet accounts (e.g., cash, accounts receivable, and investments).
Let's look at an example. The Statement of Financial Position for Treehouse for the year ending June
30, 2022, is below. The financial statements include consolidated accounts of Treehouse and 2100
LLC (i.e., Treehouse's interest in the 2100 Building) in FY 2022. Treehouse did not include FY 2021
information in its financial statements at the end of FY 2022. That information is presented here for
comparison purposes only.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 65
Download Treehouse Financials: https://bit.ly/3OTmpO7

Every balance sheet will begin with a summary of assets first. Assets are listed in reducing order
of liquidity. What that means is that the most liquid asset appears first, and the least liquid assets
appear near the bottom. We can convert an asset to cash by selling it or, in the case of receivables,
collecting it. Cash is, of course, the most liquid asset. That is why it is listed first. Cash equivalents
(including commercial paper and marketable securities like money market mutual funds and overnight

66 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
repurchase agreements or "Repos") are safe short-term investments that can be converted to cash
immediately at low or no cost. Receivables will convert into cash as clients and donors make
payments. Current assets that we do not expect to convert to cash quickly are listed below cash and
receivables. Restricted assets are not considered liquid and are reported below the least liquid current
asset (e.g., inventory or pre-paid expenses) or are not reported as current assets (e.g., endowment
investments).

Treehouse reports the most typical current assets:

      Investments include holdings of stocks, bonds, and other conventional financial instruments,
         including investments in mutual funds. Note that investments are reported separately from
         Endowment Investments (non-current), as the latter is subject to internal (board-designated)
         and external (donor-imposed) restrictions. Note that investments are reported separately
         from cash equivalents, as they are bought and sold less frequently. This, however, should not
         be confused with liquidity. A vast majority of financial investments are liquid. However,
         unlike cash equivalents, investments do not mature every 30 days or every three months; as a
         result, they need not be actively traded.

      Receivables refer to money owed to the organization. When customers pay money owed to the
         organization, that asset converts to cash. Treehouse reports net receivables. This means it has
         subtracted from that receivables figure the portion of those receivables it has determined it
         cannot collect. Those removals are known as an allowance for uncollectible or bad debt
         expenses. The nonprofit reports pledges, rent, and contracts receivable separately. Pledges
         receivable represent a donor's commitment to give at a future date. Rent receivable represents
         rent due from tenants in their building. Rent receivable is reported separately from contracts
         receivable to capture differences in the types of services provided.

      Inventory includes goods that the organization intends to sell or give away as part of delivering
         its services. Much of Treehouse's inventory is in "The Treehouse Store," a thrift store where
         children can pick up clothing and personal items for free. Many organizations (Treehouse not
         included) report a separate category for supplies. These are goods and materials,
         usually commodities, that the organization intends to use while delivering its services. Unlike
         marketable securities and investments, there may not be a robust market for supplies and
         inventory, so they are among the least liquid current assets.

      Pre-paid expenses are incurred when an organization opts to pay in advance for services (e.g.,
         insurance, memberships, subscriptions) it will use later. If the organization cancels or
         renegotiates a pre-paid expense, a refund will be processed for the unused pre-paid amount.
         This is rare and is subject to contract restrictions.

Treehouse also reports the most common long-term assets. These are listed in decreasing order of
liquidity:

      Long-term receivables are monies owed to the organization to be received over multiple
         financial periods. This is especially true for grants, contracts, and pledges that are not in the
         current period. These long-term receivables are also reported as net of allowance for
         uncollectable or bad debt expenses. Long-term receivables must also be discounted to present
         value using the prevailing market interest rate. Recall that present value is the amount of

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 67
         money a future investment is worth today. Reporting long-term receivables in present value
         terms recognizes the foregone interest.
      Fixed assets are the least liquid, as the organization's ability to convert these assets into cash
         will incur costs and take time. Property and equipment are reported book value - that is, historical
         cost or purchase price, net of depreciation. Depreciation is the loss in value of an asset due to
         wear and tear. Effective December 2021, Treehouse became co-owner of its building when a
         portion of the property was donated to the organization. The Statement of Financial Position
         reports the fair market value of Treehouse's share of the building at the time of the donation.
         Going forward, the value of the organization's interest will be reported net of depreciation.

        BOOK VALUE VS. MARKET VALUE

           Accountants usually report assets at historical cost or the cost the organization paid to acquire them. For instance, if an
           organization purchased a building for $500,000 10 years ago, it would report a book value equal to the historical cost net of
           depreciation. Meanwhile, an appraiser might estimate that a buyer would be willing to pay $1,000,000 for that building today.
           This is the building's estimated market value. Accountants prefer historical costs. In fact, that preference is so strong that it is
           called the historical cost rule of accounting. Until that building is sold for $1,000,000, that figure is just a guess that is too
           unreliable as a basis for financial reporting.

      Endowment Investments represent donor-restricted funds. For that reason, endowment
         investments are frequently listed as non-current assets. Note that investments remain liquid -
         the classification as a non-current asset reflects restrictions on use. Investment earnings could
         be invested in the programs or services if donor restrictions do not apply. Treehouse reports
         endowment investments separately from its other investments and cash holdings. Not all non-
         profits will report investments this way. That said, they must disclose the different types of
         endowment funds (or donor-restricted net assets) in the notes to the financial statements.

      Other Investments. Many investments are not liquid because their owner is not allowed to sell
         them. For example, venture capital funds, hedge funds, and private equity funds mandate
         lock-in periods. Investors trade off liquidity in these funds but expect higher investment
         returns. Some investments are less liquid because there are fewer potential buyers.
         Commercial real estate, for instance, can take some time to sell because there are fewer
         potential investors interested in those types of properties than in residential real estate. All
         these investments are reported as "other" long-term assets.

68 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        FAIR VALUE VS. HISTORICAL COST

           Investments are a notable exception to the historical cost rule. Most investments trade on an exchange like the New York Stock
           Exchange. The prices quoted in those exchanges are a reasonable estimate of the value of a stock or bond. Since we can readily
           observe that the fair market value or the value of the investment can be objectively obtained, we replace the historical cost with
           a fair value estimate. Assuming a non-profit purchased 1,000 shares of Apple stock in 2001 for $0.33 per share, the value of that
           portfolio, as of June 30, 2023, would have been $193,970. We adjust our books on an annual basis to recognize the gains or
           losses in the value of our investments. In this case, we would report the change in the investment value as the price of Apple
           stock increased by $55.86 from $138.11 on July 1, 2022, to $193.97 on June 30, 2023. Despite the considerable gain in the
           value, accountants are comfortable relaxing the historical cost rule because we objectively measured the value of the Apple
           stock.

In every balance sheet, liabilities are listed in increasing order of maturity. Maturity refers to the
moment in time when payment is due. Said differently, liabilities are listed based on how quickly
the organization will need to pay them. Treehouse's balance sheet includes the two most common
current liabilities: accounts payable and accrued salaries and related costs (i.e., wages payable). These
are liabilities that will come due within the fiscal year. Like many non-profits, Treehouse does not
report any long-term liabilities like a mortgage or a loan. If it had, it would list the proportion due in
the next twelve months under current liabilities and the proportion due after that under non-current
liabilities.

At a glance, three key features of Treehouse's balance sheet stand out. First, its current assets far
exceed the non-profit's current liabilities. Its near-term financial position is robust, and the non-
profit has more than enough cash to cover its obligations as they come due.

Every balance sheet will present a summary of the organization's net position (equity, net assets,
net position, or fund balance). In the case of Treehouse, a non-profit, its net position is reported in
one of two categories: net assets "without donor restrictions" or net assets "with donor restrictions." Net
assets with restrictions include donor-restricted endowment funds (previously listed as permanently
restricted) and contributions receivable that are restricted over time and/or use (previously listed
as temporarily restricted). Board-designated quasi-endowment funds and accumulated profits are
reported under net assets "without donor restrictions."

The balance sheet shows Treehouse is in a strong financial position, has the right balance across its
current and long-term assets, and does not have any long-term liabilities. It also has greater autonomy
over its financial resources, as 76 percent of its net assets are not subject to donor restrictions.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 69
        NOTES TO THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS

           GAAP imposes uniformity on how public organizations recognize and report their financial activity. But at the same time, all
           public organizations are a bit different. They have different missions, financial policies, tolerances for financial risk, and so forth.
           Moreover, large parts of GAAP afford organizations a lot of discretion on how and when to recognize certain types of
           transactions. For these reasons, numbers in the basic financial statements do not always tell the complete financial story about
           the organization in question. That is why it is essential to read the "Notes to the Financial Statements." The notes are narrative
           explanations at the end of the financial statements. They outline the organization's key accounting assumptions, share its key
           financial policies, and explain any unique transactions or other financial activity.

STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES

The Statement of Activities, the non-profit's income statement, is designed to tell us if an organization's
programs and services cover its costs. In other words, is this organization profitable?

Every income statement will begin with a summary of revenues and a report of expenses, either by
program or line time. In GAAP, revenue is what the organization earns for delivering services or
selling goods. Expenses are the cost of doing business. Whenever possible, think of expenses in terms
of the revenues they help to generate. For non-profit organizations, this relationship is sometimes
clear and sometimes not. For example, imagine that a non-profit conservation organization operates
guided backpacking trips. Participants pay a small fee to participate in those trips. To run those trips,
the organization will incur expenses like wages paid to the trip guides, supplies, costs related to state
permits, and so forth. These are expenses incurred while producing backpacking tour revenue. Here
the relationship between revenues and expenses is clear.

This same organization might sell coffee mugs, water bottles, and other merchandise and then use
those revenues to support its conservation mission. The expenses to produce those mugs are known
as the cost of goods sold. Here again, the revenue-expense relationship is clear. When that link is clear,
we can determine if a program/service/product is profitable. That is, does the revenue it generates
exceed the expenses it uses up?

In for-profit organizations, profitability and accountability are virtually synonymous. But for public
organizations, profitability has little to do with accountability. For instance, our conservation non-
profit might accept donations from individuals in support of its conservation work. Which expenses
were necessary to "produce" those revenues? The development director's salary? The administrator's
travel expenses to visit a key donor? The expenses from a recent marketing campaign? Here, the
revenue-expense link is less clear. Same for in-kind contributions (i.e., donated goods and services)
the organization receives in support of its mission. This link is even murkier for governments, where
taxpayers pay income, property, and sales taxes. Those taxes have no direct link to the expenses the
government incurs to deliver police, fire, parks, public health, and other services.

To put this in the language of accounting, public organizations have a mix of exchange-like activities,
such as backpacking trips and coffee mugs, and non-exchange-like activities, like conservation
programs and public safety functions that are just as, if not more, central to their mission as their

70 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
exchange-like activities. That is why profitability is one of the many criteria we need to apply when
thinking about a public organization's finances.

That said, the main point of emphasis on the income statement is the relationship between revenues
and expenses. As mentioned, net assets are a good indication of that relationship. If revenues increase
faster than expenses, then net assets increase. If expenses increased faster than revenues, net assets
would decrease. The income statement can help illuminate several follow-up questions to understand
an organization's revenues-expenses relationship in some detail:

    1. How much did net assets increase since last year? How much of that increase was in net assets
         without donor restrictions? How much was in net assets with donor restrictions? Growth in
         net assets without donor restrictions indicates that the organization's core programs and
         services are profitable. An increase in net assets with donor restrictions can mean many other
         things. It could mean the non-profit received additional donations that had a time or purpose
         restriction. The non-profit would need to meet those restrictions over multiple years. It could
         also mean the non-profit's endowment reported a positive return. That return may be
         reinvested in the endowment or diverted to cover core operational expenses.

    2. What portion of revenue is from earned income versus contributed income? Earned revenue, or
         revenue generated when the organization sells goods or services, is attractive because
         managers have direct control of expenses needed to generate that income. Contributions are
         less predictable and less directly manageable but do not have an immediate offsetting expense
         - except for fundraising and development costs. That said, the disconnect between donor and
         beneficiary provides the non-profit with the ability to manage expenses given changes in
         contributions.

    3. What percentage of earned revenue is from the organization's core programs and services?
         What proportion is from other activities and other lines of business (sometimes known as
         unrelated business income)? It is common for non-core programs and services to subsidize
         core programs and services, but is that the right policy for this organization to pursue? Non-
         profits that generate unrelated business income must pay UBIT - unrelated business income tax
         on profits earned from activities not substantially related to the charitable organization.

    4. To what extent does this organization rely on in-kind contributions? Investment income? In-
         kind contributions will vary by type of organization. Food banks are more likely to report in-
         kind contributions as a major source of revenue. Treehouse received an in-kind donation of
         an interest in their building. Professionals in legal, marketing, and accounting service
         industries frequently provide local non-profits with services for free or at steep discounts.
         These are reported as in-kind donations.

How much the non-profit reports as investment income largely depends on the size of the investment
portfolio. Foundations, for example, will report investment income as the single largest source of
revenue. In contrast, for most non-profits, investment income makes up a smaller portion of overall
revenues. Still, it often allows the organization to report a surplus at the end of the fiscal year.

To illustrate, let us examine Treehouse's Statement of Activities for the year ending June 30, 2022. The
income statement reports revenues by source and by restriction and expenses by function (program,

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 71
management, or fundraising). While Treehouse does not report expenses for each program, a detailed
list of expenses can be found in the Statement of Functional Expenses.

Download Treehouse Financials: https://bit.ly/3OTmpO7
For FY 2022, Treehouse reported $23.4 million in revenues. Of that, $10.04 million was from
contributions and grants, $0.7 million was from in-kind contributions, and $12.7 million from
contract revenue. Most of Treehouse's income is not subject to donor restrictions (i.e., without donor
restrictions). Investment income, classified as non-operating revenues, is reported separately from
operating revenues (i.e., grants, contributions, and contract revenue). Investment income would be
classified as operating revenue in instances where the non-profit has invested a substantial proportion
of its resources to generate income to support core programs or cover overhead costs. That is not the
case for Treehouse.
Net assets released from restrictions represent a reclassification of net assets. That reclassification will
appear as a reduction in net assets "with donor restrictions" and a corresponding increase in net
assets "without donor restrictions." In doing so, the non-profit is reporting it has satisfied the intent
of the donation or grant received in the current or prior period. Remember, restrictions only apply to
revenues; they do not apply to expenses, hence the need to release assets from restrictions.

72 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
In the expense part of the Statement, we see that expenses for program services were $19.6 million -
approximately 83 percent of total expenses. Treehouse reports non-operating income separately from
operating income, which indicates that income generated from investments and other sources was
not derived from core activities. Not surprisingly, Treehouse reported investment losses at the end
of FY 2022 ($1.4 million). It also reported the in-kind donation of an interest in the building ($7.1
million) as non-operating activity. In doing so, the organization conveys to stakeholders that it does
not view this donation or related activities as part of its core operations.

Change in net assets is a focal point when reviewing the Statement of Activities. In FY 2022,
Treehouse reported a positive change in net assets of $5.6 million. Much of this can be attributed to
the in-kind donation of interest in a building ($7.1 million). Adjusting for the gift, Treehouse reported
a deficit at the end of FY 2022. However, that deficit was primarily driven by investment losses - not
the nonprofit's core operations. Judging an organization's performance using data from a single year
is often difficult. Five years of data could provide a more compelling narrative of the organization's
financial position and operating results. More on this in Chapter 3.

        WHAT IS THE OPTIMAL LEVEL OF RESERVES?

           Well, as one of us likes to say, it depends on a wide variety of factors, including revenue mix and volatility, timing of cash flows,
           changes in demand for services - particularly in an economic downturn - existing capital investments, and the need for capital
           improvements, to name a few. In creating reserves, a clear statement of purpose, size, and strategy to accumulate, expend, and
           replenish reserves should be discussed and adopted.

           The Non-profit Finance Fund (NFF, see https://nff.org/fundamental/kinds-capital) recommends that non-profits create and
           accumulate reserves with specific goals in mind. Categories include (a) working capital reserves to ensure timely payment of
           obligations as they come due, (b) operating reserves used to absorb unforeseen revenue losses or unexpected extraordinary
           expenses, (c) risk and opportunity capital to support program development and innovation, (d) change capital that helps the
           organization address strategic issues including social justice, changes in government policies, or existential threats to operations
           (e.g., disruptive technology), (e) recovery capital to help recover from damaging financial shortfalls, reduce debt, or fund
           much-needed repairs to facilities and equipment, (f) facilities and equipment capital that finances the purchase of capital
           equipment or upgrades to existing infrastructure, and (g) endowments that generate investment income that can be used to
           support core programs or replenish reserves. Organizations need not establish each reserve, and one could argue that the
           categories are fluid. For example, some could consider operating reserves the same as recovery capital. Others are not. For
           example, working capital reserves allow the organization to cover program costs while payments from funders are pending.
           Working capital reserves are essential to every organization and are not the same as operating reserves. Every organization
           needs a working capital reserve, but not all organizations need recovery capital; therefore, the context of operations and
           environmental factors matter in creating and drawing on reserves.

           How do you build and replenish reserves? Non-profits should budget for reserves. To ensure they meet that goal, they should
           include budget reserves as a line item in their operating budget or intentionally budget for a surplus. Capital campaigns would
           raise funds to fund capital improvements or create endowments. However, doing so could divert donations from operating
           activities. For that reason, the use of capital campaigns to create reserves should be strategic. Governments adopt similar
           approaches to build and replenish their "rainy-day" or "budget-stabilization funds." More on this in Chapter 6.

STATEMENT OF CASH FLOWS

The Statement of Cash Flows is just as the title suggests. It tells us how an organization receives and uses
cash.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 73
It might seem strange to devote an entire financial statement to a specific asset. But cash is not just
any asset. Cash is king! For small organizations, especially small non-profits, it is possible to run out
of cash. If that happens, nothing about that organization's mission, clients, or impact on society will
matter. Its employees, vendors, and creditors will not take a compelling mission statement as a form
of payment. If the organization is out of cash, it is out of business.

To that end, the Statement of Cash Flows is quite useful if we want to answer a few key questions
about how a public organization receives and uses cash:

    a. Did the organization's core operations generate more cash than they used? If not, why?

    b. Did the organization depend on cash flow from investing or financing activities to support
         cash flows necessary for basic operations? How predictable are cash flows from investing and
         financing activities?

    c. How much of the organization's cash is the result of transactions it cannot directly control
         (e.g., receivables)?

    d. How much of the organization's cash flow is related to sales of goods and inventory? How
         predictable are those sales?

From the cash flow statement, we can learn a lot about the specific ways an organization generates
and uses cash. The statement breaks cash flows into three categories: operations, investing activities,
and financing activities. Euphemistically, we call this "OIF" (pronounced "oy-f"):

    1. Cash Flow from Operations presents a summary of how the organization receives cash and uses
         cash for its core activities. Negative cash flow from operations indicates that the
         organization's basic operations use more cash than they produce. It could mean the
         organization reported profits because of growth in revenues - but those revenues remain
         uncollected and are reported as receivables. It could also be the case that the non-profit did
         not report a profit but reports positive cash flows from operations as a result of collecting
         outstanding receivables. While our discussion is focused on profitability, keep in mind that
         without positive cash flows from operations, the organization's finances are not sustainable.

    2. Cash Flow from Investing Activities. In this case, investing includes investments in financial
         instruments or fixed assets like property and equipment. For most non-profits, this section is
         focused on cash earned from investments. If those investments produced more cash than what
         was spent to acquire them, they provide positive cash flow. Purchases of buildings and
         equipment are a cash outflow, and if the organization sells any buildings or equipment, the
         receipts from those sales also appear here as a cash inflow (though this is rare). In general, we
         expect positive cash flow from investing activities. It's essential, however, to know the origins
         of that positive cash flow. If the organization sold a building, that might produce positive cash
         flow, but at the expense of its ability to deliver services in the future. It might see negative cash
         flow from investing activities if, for instance, it moves idle cash into short-term investments.

    3. Cash Flow from Financing Activities. Financing activities capture any cash the organization
         borrows to finance its operations. Most of the activity in this section has to do with borrowed
         money. For-profit entities use this section of the cash flow statement to show how issuing
         stock produces a cash inflow. For non-profits and governments, the cash inflow from issuing

74 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
         bonds or taking out a loan will appear here. For non-profits with an endowment or
         other permanently restricted net assets that produce unrestricted investment income, that cash
         flow will also appear here.
Like with the balance sheet and income statement, net assets are a key part of most public
organizations' cash flow statements, especially cash flows from operating activities. It might seem
strange that net assets are the point of departure for a statement about cash, but it makes sense if we
are willing to make a few assumptions.
Recall that the most common way for net assets to increase is for revenues to exceed expenses. To
understand the cash flow statement, take this idea a step further. Assume that a public organization's
total cash will increase during a fiscal period if the cash inflows from its main operating revenues
exceed the cash it pays out to cover its main operating expenses. The "cash flow from operations"
part of the cash flow statement is based on precisely this idea. It starts with the assumption that an
organization's change in net assets is a good indicator of its cash flows from operations.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 75
Download Treehouse Financials: https://bit.ly/3OTmpO7

Most sizable public organizations follow this concept and report their cash flows from operations
using the indirect method. This method starts with the Change in Net Assets, assuming that change is
the result of cash flows from operations. But of course, not all changes in net assets are the result of
positive or negative cash flow. Different transactions and accounting procedures can affect revenues
or expenses without affecting cash flow. A typical example is depreciation. Depreciation is when an
organization "uses up" some portion of an asset to deliver services. The portion of that asset's value
that is used up is recorded as a depreciation expense. Like all expenses, depreciation reduces net
assets. But at the same time, there is no cash flow associated with depreciation. You will not find
checks written to an entity called "Depreciation." The same is true for changes in the value of an

76 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
organization's investments. Its stocks, bonds, and other investments can increase in value, but unless
it sells those investments, that increase in value will not produce any positive cash flow. Depreciation
and changes in the value of investments are both examples of reconciliations. These are transactions
that affect net assets but do not involve a cash flow.

In FY 2022, Treehouse produced its Statement of Cash Flows using the indirect method. Treehouse
reported a positive change in net assets or surplus at the end of FY 2022 ($5.6 million). Using the
Statement of Cash Flows, we want to understand how core operations contributed to the nonprofit's
operating position ($5.6 million) and whether that operating position resulted in higher cash balances.
Skip down to the row "Net cash flows from operating activities," and you will see that in FY 2022,
Treehouse's operating activities resulted in a net cash outflow of $1.8 million. In other words, while
the nonprofit reported a large surplus, that surplus did not result in an increase in cash. In fact, core
operations resulted in a $1.77 million decrease in cash balances.

To appreciate these differences, review the reconciliations reported under "Adjustments to reconcile
change in net assets to net cash flows from operating activities." Recall that the figures in this part of the
statement are reconciliations, so we interpret them inversely. Any activity that decreases net assets
is shown here as a positive value because we are "adding back" those activities to arrive at Net Cash
Flows from Operations. Any activity that would increase net assets is shown as a negative value (or in
parentheses) because we are "backing out" those activities to arrive at Net Cash Flows from Operations.

Treehouse reported several reconciliations in FY 2022. Treehouse reported $286,275 in depreciation
expense. Depreciation expenses decrease net assets. We add back deprecation to the Change in Net
Assets to arrive at Net Cash Flows from Operations - i.e., the estimate of the change in cash flows
from operating activities.

Treehouse reported an increase in discounts and allowances for uncollectables of $24,422. That
increase in discounts and allowances decreases Change in Net Assets. We reconcile this item by
backing out the change in allowances.

Treehouse received $336,936 in donated investments and $7.097 million in donated interest in the
2100 building. These transactions increase net assets (or profitability) but do not produce a positive
cash flow. We deduct (or back out) contributed property and investments from Change in Net Assets.
The same logic applies to realized and unrealized losses (gains) on investments. Treehouse reported
$1,568,107 in investment losses at the end of FY 2022. Since these cash flows are restricted, and all
cash flows are reported under investments - not cash - we add (or deduct) back that loss (gain) from
Change in Net Assets.

Below the reconciliations, you will see "Change in Operating Assets and Liabilities." The figures listed
here are also reconciliations, this time to reconcile changes in assets and liabilities that do involve cash
to Changes in Net Assets. The key here is that we are focused on changes in assets and liabilities as a
result of cash flows. So, to make sense of the Change in Operating Assets and Liabilities section, first,
think about how typical assets and liabilities interact with cash.

Cash balances are lower if assets other than cash are higher. If, for example, receivables are higher
this year compared to the previous year, cash balances will be lower - in other words, the payment

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 77
we should have received for a donated pledge or services provided has yet to be received. Consider
contracts and other receivables. In FY 2022, contracts receivable was $3,528,538. In FY 2021,
contracts receivable was $1,141,268. The increase in receivables implies that payments were pending,
so our cash balances are $2,387,270 lower. The same logic applies to prepaid expenses, which
increased from $46,213 at the end of FY 2021 to $364,127 at the end of FY 2022. The same logic
applies when assets other than cash and investments increase. For example, balances in contributions
receivable in FY 2022 were $195,182 - $386,917 lower than they were in FY 2021 ($582,099). That
reduction resulted in an increase in cash. The same logic applies to inventories and unemployment
trust deposits.

Cash balances are higher if balances in liability accounts are higher. Given the focus on Net Cash
Flows from Operations, we focus here on accounts payable, other liabilities, and accrued salaries and
related costs. As we noted earlier, any change in balances of any notes payable or loan payable would
be reported in Net Cash Flows from Financing Activities. More on this below.

Consider Accounts payable. In FY 2022, accounts payable were $143,584, nearly half the balance
reported at the end of FY 2021 ($286,030). This decrease in payables implies payments were made, as
such, cash balances are $142,446 lower. Conversely, balances in other liabilities and accrued salaries
and related costs were higher in FY 2022. Delayed payments mean the non-profit holds more cash
now, so cash balances are higher ($266,444 and $113,227, respectively).

The Cash Flows from Investing Activities and Cash Flows from Financing Activities sections are more
intuitive. Like before, an increase in an asset account reported under Investing Activities (e.g.,
Investments or Property and Equipment) results in a decrease in cash and cash equivalents and vice
versa. An increase in a liability account reported under Financing Activities (e.g., Loan Payable) results
in an increase in cash.

Returning to Treehouse, we see that in FY 2022, it purchased $286,933 in furniture and equipment
and $195,512 in investments. The nonprofit reported the sale of investments ($1,129,561). The net
effect of investing activities was $647,116 - in other words, investing activities (including the sale of
investments) increased the cash position of the nonprofit.

Treehouse did not report any Cash Flows from Financing Activities. It did not report any long-term
obligations, did not draw on any line of credit, and did not rely on borrowed funds. This reflects
the nonprofit's strong financial position but also the choice of the board to use internal resources to
manage its cash position.

We can draw two immediate and important conclusions from Treehouse's Statement of Cash Flows.

78 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
First, the non-profit reported a large surplus ($5,622,029). While there were changes in account
balances related to the non-profit operating activities, those activities did not generate cash. As a
result, net cash flows from operating activities are negative ($1,739,671). The nonprofit relied on
proceeds from the sale of investments to improve the organization's cash position. At the end of FY
2022, the nonprofit's cash position had declined from $5,552,763 at the start of the year to $4,430,208
at the end of the year. While the cash position has declined, it's important to contextualize those
findings. The nonprofit reported a large surplus because of a significant increase in revenues and
the value of donations (investments and interest in building). While the nonprofit does not expect to
liquidate the donated space, the contracts and other receivables should be collected in the next 12
months, improving the nonprofit's cash position.

STATEMENT OF FUNCTIONAL EXPENSES

One of the central questions in non-profit financial management is: How well does this organization
accomplish its mission? From a financial standpoint, one way to answer this question is to determine
how much of the organization's expenses are related to its core, mission-related services. In the
language of accounting, this distinction is program services vs. support services (i.e., administrative
services). According to paragraph 28 of FASB Statement 117, program services are "activities that
result in goods and services being distributed to beneficiaries, customers, or members that fulfill
the purposes or mission for which the organization exists." Support services are everything else:
fund-raising, communications, management, administrative support, and other activities necessary to
deliver program services.

Donors want to support a non-profit's primary goals. They want to know if their contribution
improved a child's education, fed the hungry, funded scientific research, or advanced objectives
outlined in the organization's mission. They are less interested in funding rent, insurance,
professional memberships, administrators' salaries (gasp!), or other support services. To be clear,
support services are essential. They're just not sexy. That is why one of the most closely watched
numbers in non-profit financial management is the program expense ratio, computed as total
program service expenses/total expenses. Many donors look for organizations with comparatively
high program expense ratios, and many non-profit leaders work hard to minimize their support
service expenses for that same reason.

The program services vs. support services distinction is so important that GAAP calls for a fourth
basic statement to illustrate it. This statement is called the Statement of Functional Expenses. It shows
three basic categories of expenses:

    1. Program. Many non-profits report their program expenses separately for each of their major
         mission or programmatic areas.

    2. Management and General are principally salaries and benefits for administrators, technical
         support services like accounting and information technology, and reconciliation expenses in
         areas like depreciation.

    3. Fundraising includes expenses related to fundraising and special events, identifying and
         contacting donors, and other expenses associated with soliciting and generating
         contributions.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 79
Download Treehouse Financials: https://bit.ly/3OTmpO7
Let's return to Treehouse and examine its Statement of Functional Expenses. Treehouse reports
expenses for each of its main programs in the first three columns from the left.
Education programs are by far the largest spending area. In FY 2022, Education programs were $5.6
million, or 23.7 percent of the organization's total expenses. The previously mentioned Treehouse
Free Store program expenses were $1.5 million (6.4 percent of total spending), and all "other"
programs were $12.5 million (53.1 percent of total expense).
Total expenses in all program services in 2022 were $19.6 million, or 83.3 percent of total spending.
In other words, the program service ratio is 83.3 percent. To put it one more way, 83 cents of every
dollar Treehouse spends goes directly to fund the organization's core programs.
One appealing feature of the Statement of Functional Expenses is that the expense categories are
intuitive. Items like payroll, payroll taxes and benefits, occupancy (i.e., expenses related to maintaining
buildings), licenses and fees, and transportation are self-explanatory.
Like many other human services-focused non-profits, most of Treehouse's spending on support
services is for fund-raising, and most of its spending on support services overall is for payroll. The
same applies to spending on education programs. All these functions are labor-intensive.

80 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
BASIC FINANCIAL STATEMENTS - STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

The basic financial statements of state and local governments include four sets of financial statements.

      Government-wide statements - Statement of Net Position and Statement of Activities that report on
         the government as a whole and with a long-term focus.

      Fund Statements, including the:
               Governmental fund statements - the Balance Sheet and Statement of Revenues, Expenditures,
                  and Changes in Fund Balance report on activities financed with revenues from taxes,
                  intergovernmental transfers, and other non-exchange or non-market transaction-based
                  revenue sources with a short-term focus.
               Proprietary fund statements - the Statement of Net Position, Statement of Revenues,
                  Expenses, and Changes in Net Position, and Statement of Cash Flows report on business-
                  type activities of the government that are financed primarily with user charges and fees
                  with a long-term focus.
               Fiduciary fund statements - the Statement of Net Position and Statement of Changes in Net
                  Position that account for funds held by the government in a trustee or agency capacity.

GOVERNMENT-WIDE STATEMENTS

Governments prepare government-wide financial statements that are like the basic financial
statements for a non-profit or for-profit entity. Government-wide statements help users assess
the finances of the government in its entirety. These government-wide statements answer key
questions taxpayers ask about their government:

      Has the government's overall financial position improved or deteriorated?
      Were its current-year revenues sufficient to cover the full costs of services?
      How much did the government invest in infrastructure and other capital improvements?
      How much does it depend on user fees and other exchange-like revenues compared to general

         tax revenues?
      How does its financial position compare to other, similar governments?

To illustrate, let's look at the financial statements for the City of Bothell, WA. The City of Bothell, part
of the Seattle metropolitan area, is in King and Snohomish counties. In 2021, its population was just
under 48,920.

STATEMENT OF NET POSITION

Let's start with Bothell's government-wide balance sheet, formally known as the Statement of Net
Position. It shows Bothell's balances for its assets, liabilities, and net position on the final day of
its fiscal year (December 31, 2021). This statement includes separate presentations for governmental
activities and business-type activities. Taxes and other non-exchange revenues support governmental
activities. Business-type or proprietary activities are supported by exchange-like revenues or fees the
government charges for goods and services it delivers. For local governments, government-owned

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 81
utilities (water, gas, electric, sewer, solid waste), recreational facilities (e.g., convention centers, golf
courses, hotels, swimming pools, ice arenas, etc.), and other enterprises are almost always considered
business-type activities. For state governments, business-type activities often include state lotteries,
unemployment benefit funds, workers' compensation funds, university tuition assistance programs,
public hospitals, universities, community colleges, and public authorities supporting housing and
economic development, to name a few.

On the asset side, we see many of the same assets reported in the Statement of Financial Position for
Treehouse. The city of Bothell reports cash and cash equivalents, investments, receivables, restricted
assets, and capital assets (non-depreciable and depreciable). Recall assets will be listed in reducing order
of liquidity - the most liquid assets, cash and cash equivalents, are reported first, and the least liquid
assets - capital assets (or infrastructure investments) and net pension assets - are listed last.

Governments will report amounts owed to the city for goods or services (e.g., outstanding payments
for licenses, permits, fines, rents, royalties, or charges for services) separately from amounts due
from taxes. Taxes receivables consist of property taxes and related interests and penalties the city of
Bothell was owed at the end of 2021. Keep in mind that governments will report receivables for special
assessments (a surtax in addition to the regular property tax) separately from taxes receivable as funds
are used to fund specific activities (e.g., sidewalks, street lighting, economic development activities,
etc.). Governments will also report receivables due from other governments. These capture inter-local
agreements or cross-jurisdictional sharing arrangements common in areas like transit, emergency
management, police and fire response, and public health.

It is important to note that this is the only financial statement that will report the value of the
government's investment in infrastructure or capital assets. Capital assets may be reported by type
(e.g., land, buildings, leased assets, infrastructure, etc.) or classification (e.g., depreciable versus non-
depreciable). Capital assets are reported at historical costs. Depreciable capital assets are reported net
of depreciation.

Liabilities are listed in increasing order of maturity. Maturity refers to the moment in time when
payment is due. The proportion due in the next twelve months is reported under "due within one
year." The accounts payable, unearned revenue, long-term liabilities, and other post-employment
benefits due within one year are considered current liabilities. The remainder is non-current.

The city reported unearned revenue, sometimes referred to as deferred revenue. Unearned revenues
represent revenues the government has received for services it has yet to provide. If the city fails to
provide services, it will need to issue refunds. If the city owed another government based on an inter-
local agreement, that obligation would appear here as due to other governments.

The city reports long-term liabilities, other post-employment benefits (OPEB), and net pension liability.
Long-term liabilities include a variety of bonds (general obligation and revenue), as well as loans and
leases associated with capital improvements. State and local governments finance most of their
infrastructure improvements with long-term loans, bonds, notes, and leases that are paid off over 20
to 30 years. Cities, counties, and school districts rarely cease operations, even when they go bankrupt,
so investors are willing to invest in them for long periods. It is quite different for non-profits or for-
profits, where the going concern question is not always so clear.

82 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Net pension liability represents the net obligation of retirement benefits the government owes its
current employees, retirees, and beneficiaries. It represents the difference between the present value
of projected retirement benefits and the plan assets, mainly financial investments. A net pension
liability is reported if the current value of investments is less than the present value of projected
benefits. If the current value of investments is greater than the present value of projected benefits,
a net pension asset is reported. A majority of governments report pension and OPEB liabilities. OPEB
(also known as other-post employment benefits) liabilities represent the net obligation of benefits
other than pension benefits (principally healthcare benefits - including medical, dental, vision,
hearing, death benefits, life insurance, disability, and long-term care) a government owes its
employees and retirees. While governments have consistently funded their pension plans, few have
set aside funds to meet their OPEB obligations. This is true for the city of Bothell - which reported
$1.5 million in net pension liabilities and more than $6.5 million in OPEB obligations at the end of
FY 2021.

Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB
Below total assets and total liabilities are two new categories of deferrals - deferred inflows of
resources and deferred outflows of resources. A government records a deferred inflow of resources when
it receives resources as part of a non-exchange transaction in advance. Pre-paid property taxes are a
good example. Imagine a property owner in Bothell who paid property taxes for 2022 in October of

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 83
2021. The City of Bothell might be tempted to call this deferred revenue because it received payment
in advance for services it will deliver next year. However, that would be incorrect because property
taxes are a non-exchange revenue. Taxpayers in Bothell do not pay property taxes for specific services
at specific times; they pay for a variety of services delivered at various times throughout the year.
There is no real exchange. In this case, the city would recognize the taxpayer's payment as an asset
but simultaneously recognize a deferred inflow of resources. Next year, when the city delivers services
funded by property taxes, it will reduce cash and reduce that deferred inflow.

The inverse is true for deferred outflows. Say, for example, that most of the city's employees belong
to the public employee retirement system (there are several, including PERS 1, PERS 2/3, PSERS 2,
LEOFF 1, LEOFF 2). The pension systems, collectively administered by the State of Washington, send
the city a bill for $2.7 million to cover pensions and other costs related to the city's employees. That
bill is due on January 20, 2022. If, before the city closes its books on December 31, 2021, the city
council signs papers acknowledging its commitment to making that $2.7 million payment shortly
after the start of the coming fiscal year, those resources are effectively unavailable for the following
year. The City of Bothell might be tempted to classify this under accounts payable because it owes
money. But that is not entirely true. A state retirement system is not a service, and even if it were, it
would not deliver that service until the next fiscal year. Instead, the city will book this as a deferred
outflow of resources and book a corresponding increase in liabilities. By not booking a liability and
not spending the cash, the city's balance sheet looks much stronger. At the same time, it has committed
resources to the future, which will impact its operations in the coming year. By recognizing a deferred
outflow of resources, the city has offered us a clearer picture of how well the resources it collects each
year cover its annual spending needs.

With the addition of deferrals, we re-write the fundamental equation for the government-wide
financial statements as

               Assets + Deferred Outflows = Liabilities + Deferred Inflows + Net Position

In the traditional fundamental equation, we use "net assets" to identify assets minus liabilities. When
we add deferrals, the "net assets" label no longer captures everything on the right side of the equation,
but "net position" does. Net position and its components are also a uniquely governmental reporting
feature. Here, Bothell's net position is similar to other states and local governments.

      Net Investment in Capital Assets is the historical cost of capital improvements or infrastructure
         investments - net of depreciation - and debt associated with the acquisition, construction, or
         improvement of capital assets. All capital assets are reported in this component of net assets,
         even if there are legal or other restrictions on how the government uses them for service
         delivery.

      Governments restrict portions of their net position for many purposes. Restricted net position
         is virtually the same as restricted net assets for a non-profit. According to governmental
         GAAP, a portion of net position is restricted if: 1) an external body, like bondholders or the
         state legislature, can enforce that restriction, or 2) the governing body passes a law or other
         action that imposes that restriction. If there are assets that are restricted, that restriction will
         be reported in the net position. The city reports a restricted net position for a wide variety of
         activities, including transportation, parks, and street maintenance. These restrictions are

84 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
         based on laws adopted by the governing board or contracts with an external third party (e.g.,
         bondholders).

      The government's unrestricted net position is akin to a non-profit's unrestricted net assets.
         These are net assets available for spending in the coming fiscal year. A negative unrestricted
         net position occurs if liabilities exceed assets. This does not mean the government is on the
         brink of fiscal disaster. It simply means the government's non-current liabilities, particularly
         retiree benefit obligations, far exceed its unrestricted non-capital assets. Governments
         reporting a sizeable unfunded liability are more likely to report a negative unrestricted net
         position.

        WHAT'S A STREET "WORTH"?

           When we look at Net Investment in Capital Assets, we are forced to evaluate the "book value" of a capital asset. Recall that most
           organizations - public and private - record their tangible capital assets at historical cost. That means they record a new asset at
           whatever it cost to construct or purchase it and then depreciate it over its useful life. Most of the fixed assets non-profits carry
           on their books - buildings, vehicles, office furniture, etc. - have useful lives of 10-30 years. But how does a government
           determine the book value of a street? Or a school building? Or a sewer system? Many were built long before governments
           started preparing modern financial statements, and many of them have useful lives of more than 100 years.

           States and localities dealt with precisely this issue when they implemented Governmental Accounting Standards Board (GASB)
           Statement 34. This statement, euphemistically known as "GASB 34," required governments to report the book value of their
           capital assets. Prior to GASB 34, governments reported what they spent each year on capital assets as an expense, but they did
           not include their full book value. In other words, they did not capitalize on their infrastructure assets.

           Fortunately, many governments were able to reconstruct historical cost figures by reviewing old invoices, purchase orders,
           construction plans, and other documents. Public works staff at state and local governments around the country spent thousands
           of hours researching old records to determine what they spent to build their original streets, bridges, sewer systems, university
           buildings, and other key pieces of infrastructure. Those assets were then grouped into fixed asset networks, assigned a useful life
           and a depreciation schedule, and depreciated to the present day. That depreciated figure became the original capitalized
           infrastructure asset value.

           So, for most governments, the figure Net Investment in Capital Assets is the original capitalized value depreciated to a
           present-day value, plus any investments since implementing GASB 34. A few governments take a different approach allowed
           under GASB 34, known as the modified method. Here, a government capitalizes its infrastructure assets, but instead of
           depreciation, it estimates how much it will need to spend each year to maintain those assets in good working condition. If it can
           demonstrate that it's making those investments, it need not depreciate, and the book value does not change.

           Why take the time and effort to do this? Because investors and taxpayers want to know if the government is taking care of its
           vital infrastructure. If the Net Investment in Capital Assets is stable or increasing, it suggests a government is precisely making
           those investments.

STATEMENT OF ACTIVITIES

A government's Statement of Activities presents much of the same information we see on the income
statement for a for-profit or non-profit. It lists a government's revenues and expenses or expenditures
and the difference between them. It reports the change in net assets or net position and explains why
that change happened. Like an income statement, it tells us where the government's money came
from, where it went, and whether its core activities pay for themselves.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 85
That said, the Statement of Activities is also quite different from a traditional income
statement. Expenses in the upper left are presented first. These are listed by function or program,
with the governmental activities presented separately from the business-type activities. Recall that
governmental activities are those supported by taxes and other non-exchange revenues. In contrast,
business-type activities are supported with exchange-like revenues, primarily user charges and fees.
Governmental activities and business-type activities together comprise the primary government. Next
to expenses, you may occasionally see (although not with Bothell) indirect expenses the government
has allocated to each activity (more on this in Chapter 5).

Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB
Program revenues include (a) charges for services, (b) operating grants and contributions, and (c) capital
grants and contributions. Charges for services include revenues based on exchange or exchange-
like transactions that can be directly linked to programs. For example, the city of Bothell reported
$6.1 million in charges under General Government. Revenues were from the sale of licenses and
permits. The $6.8 million in charges reported under the Security of persons and property include
anything from fees for fire protection and emergency medical services to civil penalties, including
parking fees and traffic violations. Charges for services will vary by type of government and scope of
activities. The city reported $4.1 million in operating grants and contributions and $12.7 million in
capital grants and contributions. A significant proportion of the capital grants and contributions were
in Transportation. Business-type activities similarly reported operating ($7,763) and capital ($1.8
million) grants and contributions.

86 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Shifting to the right, we see columns with the heading "Net (Expense) Revenue and Changes in Net
Position." The net cost format nets program revenues from expenses. The city reports a net expense
of $12,069,005 for the General government. This figure represents the sum charges for services,
operating grants and contributions, and capital grants and contributions minus expenses (($6,079,031
+ $795,460 + $0) - $18,943,497). This deficit (or net expense) tells us that general government
activities do not pay for themselves. Similarly, public safety programs (police, fire, emergency medical
services) do not pay for themselves (-$17,827,855). Governmental activities are not self-sustaining.
Except for the "economic environment," every program reported a net expense (or deficit) - for a total
of $65.9 million.

Should the city council be concerned that its core services are hemorrhaging money? Not really. We
do not want local government services like public safety, planning, and zoning to pay for themselves
because there is no clear link between the users and the beneficiaries of these services. The city exacts
fines on people who break the law when they park illegally or speed on city streets, but those fees are
designed to deter those behaviors. Perpetrators who pay these fines do not receive a service, and as
we saw in Ferguson, MO, and elsewhere, bad things happen when local governments turn fines into a
viable revenue source.

But that leaves open an important question. Citizens want to see these essential services provided.
How, then, do we help fund public transit or public safety?

To answer that question, skip down to the lower right corner of the statement. Here we see a list
of General Revenues like property taxes, sales taxes, excise taxes, business taxes, and other revenues.
General revenues are not directly connected to a specific activity. The city of Bothell reported
$63.8 million in general revenues for FY 2021. Compare that figure to the $65.9 million in net
expense for governmental activities - we are left with a decrease in the government's net position for
governmental activities of $2.1 million. The city's total revenues (taxes, charges and fees, and grants)
were not sufficient to cover its expenses.

Should the city council be concerned with this figure? Well, it depends. We need to understand
whether the negative change in net position resulted from a decline in revenues, an increase in
expenses, or both. We also need to understand whether the changes resulted from changes in the
economic environment, tax policy, or accounting standards. The answer, sometimes, is not as
straightforward. As you will see in Chapter 3, more questions than answers will arise from any
review of financial statements. That said, the relationship between expenses, program revenues,
and general revenues is one of the most important things to observe in a government's Statement
of Activities.

The expense versus program revenues link is much more straightforward for business-type activities.
Recall that business-type activities are designed to pay for themselves through charges and services.
For the city of Bothell, Water, Sewer, and Storm Water reported net revenue of $4.8 million at the end
of FY 2021. Their operations were not subsidized with tax revenues.

Not all business-type activities are self-supporting, and not all business-type activities consistently
report a surplus. For example, public universities and hospitals listed under business type are
frequently subsidized with tax revenues. States will report transfers to business-type activities to

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 87
finance the operations of its universities and hospitals. The unemployment benefits program is
another example of a program that reports sizeable surpluses when unemployment rates are low but
reports sizeable deficits when unemployment rates are high, as benefit distributions in a recession
will exceed program revenues. So again, it depends!

That said business-type activities present challenging strategic and policy questions. How profitable
is too profitable? Moreover, should business-type activities subsidize governmental activities? If a
business-type activity like a golf course is not profitable, does it offer enough indirect benefits in areas
like economic development and tourism to justify that lack of profitability? With a careful look at the
Statement of Activities, you can begin to put numbers to these and other questions.

        ARE WE COMPONENTS?

           A component unit is a legally separate entity for which the government is financially accountable. The primary government is
           financially responsible if it can appoint a voting majority to the unit's governing body, if the component unit can impose financial
           burdens on the primary government, or if the unit is fiscally dependent on the primary government. Special districts like local
           development authorities, transportation improvement districts, and library districts are typical local government component
           units. Component units reported by larger governments, including states, include housing authorities, tollway authorities, public
           insurance corporations, state lotteries, and state universities.
           Most component units are small relative to the primary government. But some are pretty large. The Cherokee Nation of
           Oklahoma (www.cherokee.org), for example, counts among its component units three casinos, a housing development company,
           a home health services company, a public health insurance company, a waste management company, a large community
           foundation, a historic preservation society, and an economic development corporation, among others. At the end of FY 2022,
           total revenues from the primary government were $2.17 billion. Revenues of the various components of the Cherokee Nation
           were $2.14 billion.

THE FUND STATEMENTS

A fund is a stand-alone, self-balancing set of accounts with a specific purpose. Funds are one of our
main tools to assess a government's fiscal accountability. Fiscal accountability is the responsibility of
governments to justify that their actions in the current period have complied with public decisions
concerning the raising and spending of public money (GASB Statement 34). That responsibility
is fundamental to financial reporting and why governments prepare separate fund-based financial
statements. They include:

    a. Governmental Fund Statements that report on activities financed primarily with revenues from
         taxes, intergovernmental transfers, and other non-exchange or non-market transaction-based
         revenue sources. Governments will prepare a Balance Sheet and a Statement of Revenues,
         Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances for the governmental funds.

    b. Proprietary Fund Statements, which report on business-type activities of the government that
         are financed primarily with user charges and fees. Financial statements include a Statement of
         Net Position, a Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net Position, and a Statement of
         Cash Flows.

    c. Fiduciary Fund Statements account for funds held by the government in a trustee or agency

88 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
         capacity. Governments will prepare a Statement of Net Position and a Statement of Changes in Net
         Position.
GOVERNMENTAL FUND STATEMENTS
The governmental fund statements are prepared on a different basis of accounting, known as modified
accrual accounting. Modified accrual accounting is designed to reflect this unique focus on short-term
fiscal accountability. To that end, we rewrite the fundamental equation of accounting for the modified
accrual context as follows

               Assets + Deferred Outflows = Liabilities + Deferred Inflows + Fund Balance
In the governmental fund statements, we care most about fund balance - the difference between
assets and liabilities in each fund. Fund balance is the most closely watched number in all
governmental accounting. Taxpayers seem to understand that if a government is living within its
means, then its assets should be greater than its liabilities, and it will report a positive fund balance.
Policymakers seem to understand that ending the fiscal year with a positive fund balance means there
is a bit of money to spend in the next fiscal year. That's why many fiscal policy and financial strategy
discussions often come back to a simple "Goldilocks" question: Is our general fund balance too large,
too small, or just right?
It is important to note that the change to reporting on a modified accrual basis does not apply
to proprietary or fiduciary fund statements. In fact, proprietary and fiduciary fund statements are
prepared using the same accounting basis used to prepare government-wide statements. So why
prepare an additional set of financial statements if the same basis of accounting applies? Again, the
idea goes back to the responsibility of governments to fulfill their fiscal accountability responsibility.
More on this below.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 89
Fund Structure - City of Bothell

*The "Combining Financial Statements" are included in the Required Supplementary Section of the Annual Comprehensive Financial Reports
(ACFRs) and provide details on each non-major fund. For the city of Bothell, there were no non-major funds in the Proprietary Fund.

The governmental fund statements report on a fund basis on activities in the general fund, special
revenue funds, capital projects funds, debt service funds, and permanent funds. The city of Bothell
reports fourteen separate funds in the governmental fund statements, four in its proprietary fund
statements, and two in fiduciary funds. The larger the government or, the more complex its
operations are, the more likely it will report a multitude of funds.
Critics of government financial reporting often say that governments have too many funds. That is
true. But government finances are complex. They are spread across many reporting units and serve
a wide variety of mandates. So, while fund statements are cumbersome, they are the best available
means to ensure fiscal accountability. Below is a quick tour of the fund statements. We begin with a
review of the governmental fund statements.
BALANCE SHEET
GAAP requires governments to prepare a balance sheet that shows the assets, liabilities, and fund
balance in every major governmental fund and the combined assets, liabilities, and fund balance in
non-major funds.
Bothell's governmental fund Balance Sheet is presented here. It shows three discretely presented
funds - the General Fund, two special revenue funds (Arterial Street and American Rescue Plan Act),
and two capital projects funds (Capital Improvements and Public Safety Capital). All other funds
are reported in aggregate in the "Other Governmental Funds." They include five special revenue
funds (Street Fund, Park Reserve, Drug Forfeiture, Fire Impact Fee, and Public Safety Levy), three

90 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
debt service funds (Public Safety GO Bond, 2013 GO Bond, and LIFT Bond), and a permanent fund
(Cemetery Endowment).

        THAT'S HOW WE ROLL

           Most governments have dozens, if not hundreds, of individual funds. It's not feasible to report on all of them in the financial
           statements. To simplify financial reporting, governments draw a distinction between major funds and non-major funds. A fund is
           classified as a major fund if government officials believe that the fund is particularly important to financial statement users (e.g.,
           the General Fund) or whose total assets plus deferred outflows of resources, liabilities plus deferred inflows of resources, and
           revenues or expenditures/expenses are at least 10 percent of the relevant fund category (governmental or proprietary) and 5
           percent of the corresponding total for all governmental and proprietary funds combined. GAAP requires a set of financial
           statements for each fund. The major funds are reported in the Basic Financial Statements. Non-major funds are reported in an
           aggregate format in the Basic Financial Statements and on a disaggregated basis in the Combining Statements, included in the
           Required Supplementary Section of the Annual Comprehensive Financial Reports (ACFRs).

Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 91
Bothell's General Fund has $28.3 million in assets. General fund assets far exceed General Fund
liabilities ($3.2 million). The city reports deferred inflows related to pre-paid property taxes, special
assessments, and grants. While the focus is the General Fund, a significant proportion of resources
are restricted and reported outside the General Fund. For the city of Bothell, the General Fund only
accounts for 27 percent of the $106.3 million in assets.

The difference between assets and liabilities (net of deferred inflows and outflows) is Fund Balance.
According to GAAP, there are five types of fund balance, each corresponding to the strength of
restrictions on how fund balance resources can be spent:

      Non-spendable fund balance is, as the name suggests, not available for spending in the next
         fiscal period. Governments usually record non-spendable fund balances for items like
         inventory, legal settlements, small trust funds or endowment funds, or other long-term
         investments where the corpus of the investment must remain intact. Bothell did not report a
         non-spendable fund balance in any of its funds.

      The restricted fund balance, like restricted net assets, can only be spent on purposes prescribed
         in the government's constitution, enabling legislation, or some action from an external funder.
         Bothell, like many other local governments, reports restricted fund balance in the General
         fund ($1.01 million), special revenue fund ($4.8 million), capital projects funds ($43.9 million),
         and other non-major funds (including cemetery endowment fund $17.6 million) - for a total
         restricted fund balance of $67.3 million.

      Committed fund balance includes amounts that can be used for purposes determined by a
         governing body's formal action. State and local legislators will occasionally commit fund
         balances for capital projects or other one-time spending needs or for rainy-day funds or
         other budget stabilization funds designed to prevent spending cuts during an economic
         downturn. The city of Bothell committed $3.5 million in the General Fund and $67,692 in
         other non-major funds (specifically the Cemetery Endowment Fund). Like most local
         governments, the City of Bothell does not report a formal rainy day In these instances, the
         unassigned fund balance becomes an important measure of liquidity (or short-term solvency).

      Assigned fund balance is restricted by some action other than a governing body commitment
         or other enforceable restrictions. Usually, this means restrictions that management places on
         fund balances without the approval of the governing body. The city of Bothell reported $1.7
         million in the General Fund as an assigned fund balance. Note 20 in the Notes to the Financial
         Statements provides additional detail on fund balances. In this instance, the $1.7 million
         reported in the General Fund is currently assigned to capital projects. Unlike funds reported
         as committed or restricted, there is greater flexibility in reassigning funds to other uses.
         Therefore, we consider the assigned fund balance as an "informal" rainy day fund that
         management, not the governing body, maintains.

      The unassigned fund balance reports fund balances not subject to any restrictions. At the end
         of FY 2021, the city of Bothell reported $18 million in unassigned fund balance. Again, the
         General Fund's unassigned fund balance is one of the most closely watched indicators of a
         government's overall financial position.

Some readers review the governmental fund balance and ask an intuitive question. Do the fund balances

92 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
in the governmental funds equal the net assets in the governmental activities we see on the government-wide
Statement of Net Position? Fund balance and net assets are the residual left when we subtract liabilities
from assets. If that is true, the fund balance should be equal to the net position. Except when we look
at the two statements, it is quite evident they are not the same. Why? Again, this goes back to the bases
of accounting used to prepare financial statements. The government-wide statements are prepared
using the accrual basis of accounting with an economic resource measurement focus. In contrast,
governmental fund statements are prepared using the modified accrual basis of accounting with
a financial resource measurement focus. Given the current financial resources measurement focus,
there are no long-term assets or long-term obligations listed in the Balance Sheet. For this, and
a variety of other reasons, the fund balance reported in the governmental fund statements differs
substantively from the net position reported in the Statement of Net Position.
As noted earlier, the city of Bothell reports nine non-major funds, including (a) Street, (b) Park
Cumulative Reserve, (c) Drug Forfeiture, (d) Fire Impact Fee, and (e) Public Safety Levy, (f) the 2013
General Obligation Bond, (g) the 2014 Local Infrastructure Financing Tool (LIFT) Bond, (j) Public
Safety GO Bond and (k) the Cemetery Endowment Fund. Detailed information on every fund can
be found in "Combining Financial Statements." The combining financial statements supplement the
basic financial statements. The basic financial statements for governmental and proprietary funds
have columns for each of the major funds and a single column in which all the nonmajor funds are
aggregated. The combining statements provide the details of the nonmajor funds with one column for
each.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 93
Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB

The "Combining Balance Sheet" reports assets, liabilities, and fund balances in each of these funds.
Total assets reported here ($18.1 million) are also reported, in a single column, in the Balance Sheet
included in the Basic Financial Statements (see second-to-last column titled "Other Governmental
Funds"). Again, the main difference here is that we now know how these assets are reported in each
non-major fund. For example, we now know that the Public Safety Levy fund is the largest non-major
fund ($6.3 million in assets). We also know that of the $5.1 million reported in the Street Fund, $1.8
million was in cash and cash equivalents, $3.1 million was in investments, and the remainder was
in receivables. So why is reporting information in the combining statements important? If you are a
resident of Bothell, you want to know if dedicated taxes for streets, parks, or public safety are reported
in the appropriate special revenue fund - or that dedicated tax revenues are appropriately transferred
from the General Fund to the special revenue fund. The Combining Financial Statements provide you
with that additional information.

That said, there is not a lot of activity reported in the non-major funds. For that reason, the combining
financial statements are relegated to the Required Supplementary Section of the ACFRs. The city reports
fund balances in every special revenue fund and the sole permanent fund (i.e., the Cemetery
Endowment fund). Two of the three debt service funds do not report fund balances. That is not
unusual.

94 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENDITURES, AND CHANGES IN FUND BALANCE
The Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balance is an income statement prepared
on a modified accrual basis in the governmental fund statements. It lists the revenues, expenditures,
and the change in fund balances. In this case, changes in fund balance are akin to changes in net assets
or changes in net position.
Bothell's Statement of Revenues, Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances shows that its two
largest overall revenue sources are taxes ($40.5 million in the General Fund, $62 million total). Other
sources of revenue include licenses and permits ($4 million in the General Fund, $4.6 million total),
intergovernmental revenue ($2.8 million in the General Fund, $14.9 million total), and charges for
services ($12.7 million in the General Fund, $17.8 million total).
An expenditure is roughly equivalent to an expense, albeit on the modified accrual basis of accounting
(again, more on this in Chapter 4). Nearly two-thirds of the city's total governmental funds
expenditures are in the General Fund ($55.4 million). More than half of Bothell's General Fund
expenditures are for public safety ($29.4 million). This is typical of mid- and large-sized suburban
cities. The remainder of governmental fund expenditures go to administrative functions of the city
($14.2 million), transportation ($12.2 million), economic environment ($5.9 million), capital outlays
($18 million), and debt service ($4.3 million). In general, non-capital expenditures in the General Fund
are a good proxy for a government's "operating costs." Most of its salaries, benefits, and operational
spending will appear as General Fund expenditures. By contrast, most of the revenues and
expenditures in the special revenue and debt service funds will be related to capital spending and debt
repayments, neither of which are considered day-to-day operations costs.
At the bottom of this statement, we also see "other financing sources." These are inflows and outflows
of resources that affect fund balance, which are neither revenues nor expenditures. They frequently
include loan or bond proceeds, proceeds from the sale of assets, and insurance recoveries, to name a
few.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 95
Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB
The last two lines of other financing sources are an important and sometimes controversial part of
governmental accounting: inter-fund transfers. Transfers in are movements of resources into a fund
from some other fund. Transfers out are movements of resources out of a fund into some other fund.
For example, in 2021, the city transferred to the General Fund $6.8 million. Transfers from the
General Fund ($2.1 million) were distributed to the Capital Improvement Fund and Internal Service
Funds. How are we able to know this? Governments frequently chart the transfers to and from funds
in the notes to the financial statements. Look for a note on "interfund transfers."
Critics say governments use inter-fund transfers to perpetuate a financial "shell game." By
opportunistically transferring money in and out of funds (frequently known as fund sweeps) at just
the right moment, the government can obscure its actual financial position. How and when transfers
can and should happen are important parts of financial strategy and policy.

96 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        WHEN TRANSFERS ARE FRAUD?

           In September 2016, the former mayor and finance director of the City of Miami, FL, was convicted in federal court of defrauding
           investors. Their crime, according to prosecutors from the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), was that they improperly
           transferred money that had been committed to debt service in other funds into the City's General Fund. City officials argued
           those transfers were common and were necessary to bolster the City's financial position just before the credit rating agencies
           updated the city's rating.
           SEC officials and the jury disagreed. In their view, those transfers misled investors into thinking the City was financially stronger
           than it really was. Shortly after the verdict, City officials began negotiating a financial settlement with the SEC.
           See SEC compliant: https://www.sec.gov/litigation/complaints/2013/comp-pr2013-130.pdf

As we noted earlier, detailed information on every non-major fund can be found in the Combining
Statements of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Fund Balance. Total Revenues reported in the "Other
Governmental Funds" ($15.8 million) previously are now reported in the combining statement for
every non-major fund. We see that much of the revenue is reported in the Street fund ($6.1 million),
the Park Cumulative Reserve fund ($1.6 million), and the Public Safety GO ($1.6 million). There were
no revenues reported in the permanent fund and transfers to the 2013 GO Bond and LIFT GO Bond
fund were used to meet principal and interest payments on outstanding bonds. This is not unusual.
General obligation bonds would be repaid with tax revenues. If there are no dedicated taxes, revenues
would be to a bond fund to meet debt service obligations. This is a policy decision.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 97
Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB

PROPRIETARY FUND STATEMENTS

Governments account for their business-type activities using the accrual basis of accounting. This is
the same basis of accounting used to prepare government-wide statements. The proprietary fund
statements disaggregate information reported under business-type activities by fund type. We rewrite
the fundamental equation of accounting as follows

               Assets + Deferred Outflows = Liabilities + Deferred Inflows + Net Position

STATEMENT OF NET POSITION

Governments report proprietary fund assets, liabilities, and net position in a Statement of Net Position.
Proprietary fund statements draw a distinction between major and non-major proprietary funds.
Bothell is unique in that it did not have any non-major proprietary funds. There are only three funds
- Water, Sewer, and Storm and Surface Water.

Total assets in Water ($25.9 million), Sewer ($23.5 million), and Storm and Surface Water ($42.2
million) add up to the total assets reported under business-type activities ($91.5 million). Again, the
difference between the government-wide statement of Net Position and the proprietary fund

98 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Statement of Net Position is the detailed reporting of assets, liabilities, revenues, and expenses by fund
type - Water, Sewer, and Storm and Surface Water.
The proprietary fund Statement of Net Position reports current assets ($26.3 million) separately from
non-current assets ($65.2 million). Governments are not required to report current assets separately
from their non-current assets in the government-wide statements, but that breakdown is required in
the proprietary fund statements.
Like most local governments, revenue bonds make up a large proportion of liabilities ($13.5 million).
A large proportion of the city's proprietary fund liabilities are in the Storm and Street Water fund
($10.9 million).
Like the government-wide Statement of Net Position, the proprietary fund Statement of Net Position
classifies the position as either Net Investment in Capital Assets, Restricted Net Position, or
Unrestricted Net Position.

      Net Investment in Capital Assets in the historical cost of capital improvements - net of
         depreciation - and debt associated with the acquisition, construction, or improvement of
         capital In the Water Fund, net investment in capital assets is equal to $16,634,885 - i.e.,
         Capital Assets not being depreciated plus capital assets being depreciated minus depreciation
         ($19,670,033) minus the current portion of revenue bonds payable, net ($183,345) minus non-
         current revenue bonds payable ($2,851,803).

      The restricted net position represents assets restricted by a third party or law. Governments are
         frequently required to establish restricted reserve funds following a revenue bond issue to
         ensure payments occur on time and in full. Revenue bond reserve funds are often the lesser of
         (a) maximum annual debt service, (b) 125 percent of average annual debt service, or (c) 10
         percent of original bond proceeds.

      The remainder is reported as the unrestricted net position. Each business-type activity reports a
         positive unrestricted net position.

                                                                                                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 99
Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB

Internal service funds are reported in the proprietary fund statements. They account for programs in
government that serve other parts of the government. The city of Bothell has three internal service
funds - Equipment Rental (Fleet), Self-Insurance, and Asset Replacement. Internal service funds are
designed to be self-supporting. They bill the receiving department at rates intended to cover the costs
of goods or services provided. Keep in mind that these funds are not reported in the government-wide
statements, as internal service accounts cancel out once we aggregate governmental activities with
proprietary activities.

STATEMENT OF REVENUES, EXPENSES, AND CHANGES IN NET POSITION

The proprietary fund Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Fund Net Position presents a
summary of revenues, expenses, and changes in net position in the proprietary fund statements by
fund type. A couple of features here merit additional discussion.

First, you will notice that Proprietary Fund Statements draw a distinction between operating
revenues and non-operating revenues (expenses). Charges for services ($21.9 million) are reported
under operating revenues. Note that the amount reported in the Statement of Revenues, Expenses,

100 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
and Changes in Net Position is the same as that reported under business-type activities as Charges for
Services.
Business-type activities report a modest amount in operating grants and contributions ($7,763)
and capital grants and contributions ($1.8 million). Operating grants and contributions are not
reported as operating revenues; rather, they are reported as non-operating revenues. The capital
grants and contributions are also reported as non-operating revenues, just below transfers out.
Reporting operating and capital grants and contributions as non-operating revenues reflects the non-
recurring nature of revenues. The capital grants are reported separately from operating grants to
reflect the fact that these revenues are not part of general operations.

Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB
FIDUCIARY FUNDS STATEMENTS
We've covered governmental, proprietary, and internal service funds. The final type of fund you'll see
on a government's financial statements is fiduciary funds. Fiduciary funds account for resources held
for the benefit of parties outside of the reporting government. Fiduciary funds are not reported in
the government-wide financial statements because the resources of those funds are not available to
support the government's own programs.
Most fiduciary funds relate to retiree benefits (i.e., pension and OPEB). Different plans are managed

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 101
in quite different ways. Some are managed at the state level, and beneficiaries are not only state
employees but also employees of local governments that participate in state-sponsored or state-
administered plans. Some governments are "self-funded," meaning they manage a plan whose
members come only from their government. In Washington, most public employee pension and
OPEB plans are managed by the state. For that reason, the fiduciary fund statements for the State of
Washington are extensive, as they account for all retirement plans administered and managed by the
state.
The City of Bothell does not report any assets held on behalf of its employees. In other words,
retirement benefits for current and former employees of the city of Bothell are administered by the
state. The city does not report any employee retirement benefit funds in its fiduciary funds. Rather the
city reports two trust funds a Private-Purpose Trust Fund and a Custodial Fund. The Private Purpose
Trust funds include proceeds held on behalf of beneficiaries in the Court Bail Bond Trust and Court
Restitution Trust. The Custodial Fund reports court collection fees on behalf of King County and the
state of Washington.

Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB
Governments also produce a Statement of Changes in Fiduciary Net Position. This statement is similar
to an income statement. Instead of revenues and expenditures, it identifies additions and deductions to
the fiduciary funds. Additions reflect the increase in assets - deductions account for the decrease in
assets. For the city of Bothell, additions in the fiduciary fund statements included payments to the
Court Bail Bond Trust, the Court Restitution Trust, and fees collected on behalf of King County and
the state of Washington. Deductions reported payments in each of these accounts.

102 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Download City of Bothell's 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial Report: https://bit.ly/3sskqZB

        FEDERAL GOVERNMENT FINANCIAL REPORTING

           The federal government does, in fact, prepare a set of audited financial statements known as the Financial Report of the United
           States Government. A division of the U.S. Treasury known as the Bureau of the Fiscal Service prepares this report according to a
           set of accounting principles developed by the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board (FASAB). Those principles are
           similar to modified accrual accounting, focusing on financial resources and fiscal accountability. They also incorporate some
           recognition concepts that speak to the unique nature of federal appropriations and budget authority. The Government
           Accountability Office (GAO) then audits those statements according to those standards.
           The federal government has never received an audit opinion on these financial statements. GAO has yet to issue an opinion due
           to several material weaknesses in internal controls, especially at the Department of Defense (DOD). That said, the federal
           government has substantially improved its financial reporting processes. Today almost all of the 24 major cabinet agencies have
           received an unqualified audit opinion, and the DOD has convened a high-level task force to address its internal control
           shortcomings.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 103
CHAPTER 3.

FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS

                                   FINANCIAL STATEMENT ANALYSIS: "HOW ARE WE DOING?"

   Financial statement analysis informs a wide variety of strategic management questions, including:
           What is this organization's overall financial position? Is it liquid? Profitable? Solvent?
           How does this organization's financial position compare to its peer organizations?
           How much debt or other long-term liabilities can this organization afford?
           How can this organization adjust its operations and policies to strengthen its financial position?

On March 22, 2014, the side of a hill near the town of Oso, Washington, gave out after three days
of relentless rainfall. A massive landslide followed, with mud and debris covering more than a square
mile. Forty-three people were killed when the slide engulfed their homes.

In the days that followed, more than 600 personnel participated in search and recovery operations.
They rescued eight people from the mud and evacuated more than 100 others to safety. Most of the
rescue personnel came from the four rural Snohomish County fire districts surrounding Oso.

Minutes after hearing of the slide, staff at the Washington State Office of Financial Management
(OFM) - the governor's budget office - made two critical phone calls. Earlier that week, they had
reviewed some data on the financial health of local special districts across the state. They observed
that rural fire districts in the counties north of greater Seattle showed signs of acute fiscal stress.
Those districts had seen huge growth in property tax collections during the real estate boom of the
2000s. But since the real estate crisis of 2007-2009, those revenues had fallen precipitously. Many of
these districts had laid off staff, cut back on specialized training, and back-filled shifts with volunteer
firefighters.

So, moments after hearing of the slide, OFM staff called the fire chiefs at two of the most financially
stressed Snohomish County fire districts. Their message to those chiefs was simple: send your people.
OFM agreed to reimburse the districts from state or federal emergency management funds if needed.
In turn, personnel from two of those districts were among the first on the scene and were responsible
for three of the eight life-saving rescues.

A few weeks later, the chiefs of both those districts acknowledged that had OFM not called, they
would not have sent their personnel. Both districts were so financially stressed that they could not
have afforded the overtime wages and other expenses they'd have incurred to participate in the rescue
operations.

104 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Financial condition matters. It shapes how a public organization thinks about its mission and
capacity. In the case of the Oso mudslide, it was the focal point for some life-saving decisions. That
is why all aspiring public servants need to know how to evaluate financial statements and measure,
manage, and improve their organization's financial position.

                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

           Compute and interpret ratios that describe liquidity, profitability, and solvency. Contrast how
              those ratios mean slightly different things across the government, non-profit, and for-profit
              sectors.

           Understand the typical strategies organizations employ to improve their liquidity, profitability, and
              solvency.

           Contrast short-term solvency with long-term solvency, particularly for governments.

WHAT IS FINANCIAL POSITION?

Financial position is a public organization's ability to accomplish its mission now and in the future.
When stakeholders ask, "How are we doing financially?" the answer should reflect that organization's
financial position.

An organization's financial position has three main components:

    1. Liquidity. Does the organization have liquid resources to cover its near-term liabilities?
    2. Profitability. Do the organization's revenues cover its operating expenses?
    3. Solvency. Can the organization generate enough resources to cover its near-term and long-

         term liabilities?

In the previous chapter, you learned how to extract information about an organization's financial
position from its balance sheet. For example, are most assets liquid (e.g., cash and marketable
securities), or does the organization have assets that are more difficult to convert to cash (e.g.,
receivables, inventory, or prepaid expenses)?

The balance sheet also tells us a lot about solvency, namely if the organization has a lot of long-term
liabilities (e.g., long-term debt or pension liabilities). Long-term liabilities mean the organization will
have to divert some of its resources to meet those obligations, which can mean fewer resources to
invest in its mission. To be clear, there are times when an organization can and should take on long-
term liabilities in pursuit of its mission. Sometimes it makes sense to borrow and invest in a new
facility that allows the organization to serve its clients effectively. Pensions and retiree health care
benefits are an important employee recruitment and retention tool, even though offering current and
future employees these benefits could result in a long-term obligation.

To learn about profitability, we typically look to the income statement. Recall that if an organization's

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 105
revenues exceed its expenses, its net assets will grow. The income statement clarifies the
organization's key sources of revenues, which revenues are growing, and whether those revenues
cover program and administrative expenses. The income statement also shows depreciation, bad debt
expenses, and other expenses that reduce net assets but do not impact cash. These are all solvency
considerations.

While financial ratios can provide useful metrics, always start with a quick review of the financial
statements. Ideally, the financial statements you are working with should report on the organization's
operating and financial position for at least two financial periods - though that is not always the case.
Keep in mind that funding agencies and financial analysts need access to at least four, if not five years,
of financial data. A review of the trends should inform your interpretation of the ratios.

A review of the Statement of Financial Position (or Statement of Net Position) can be guided by the
following questions:

      Assets: How have the assets changed? What proportion of assets are current? How much is
         reported under cash and cash equivalents? How much is reported under property plant and
         equipment, net of depreciation? Were there any new investments in property, plant, and
         equipment (review note on fixed assets)? How much is reported in investments? What
         proportion of investments are restricted? Have investments changed significantly, and was
         this the result of market gains and investment income, a capital campaign, or transfers from
         cash? How much more or less is the organization reporting in receivables, prepaid expenses,
         or inventory? Have changes in current assets had a negative or positive impact on cash flows?

      Liabilities: How have the liabilities changed? What proportion of liabilities is the result of
         operations? What proportion of liabilities is current? What proportion of liabilities is the
         result of financing activities? Of that, how much is in the form of a short-term loan or a line of
         credit? Is the organization subject to loan covenants or restrictions, and are these disclosed in
         the notes to the financial statements? Are there any contingent liabilities because of recent
         lawsuits, and what is the probable liability?

      Net Assets: What proportion is reported as net assets without donor restrictions? What
         proportion is reported as net assets with donor restrictions? Of net assets with donor
         restrictions, what proportion is reported as permanently restricted (review notes on
         Endowment funds)?

Similar questions can guide your review of the Statement of Activities:

      Revenues: What are the major sources of revenues? Were there significant changes in operating
         revenues? Of total revenues, what percent is "with donor restrictions"? What proportion is
         contributed versus earned (e.g., fee for services, government contracts)? How much does the
         organization report as foundation grants? Corporate gifts? Is the organization susceptible to
         changes in governmental agency or foundation funding priorities?

      Expenses: How much did the organization spend on programs? How much did the
         organization spend on administration? Fundraising? Were there significant changes in the
         level of spending? What proportion of our expenses are personnel costs? Have personnel costs
         changed? How much did the organization report in depreciation and amortization? Are there

106 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
         other fixed costs that limit budget flexibility?

FINANCIAL STATEMENT RATIOS

The purpose of accounting is to help organizations make better financial decisions. Financial statement
analysis is the process of analyzing an organization's financial statements to produce new information
to inform those decisions. Public organizations make dozens of crucial decisions every day: Should
we expand a program? Should we lease or buy a new building? Should we move cash into longer-
term investments? Should we accept terms in a contract with a government agency? Should we
accept a grant with restrictions from a foundation? Should we, as a funding agency, fund a particular
organization?

These decisions can be informed by financial statement analysis. An organization should only expand
if its existing programs are profitable. It should invest in new property or equipment once it
understands how existing fixed asset costs contribute to or detract from its net position. It should
move cash into less liquid investments once it knows the organization has sufficient liquid resources
to cover its operating expenses.

To answer these questions, we need metrics that demonstrate an organization's liquidity, profitability,
and solvency. We turn to financial ratios (sometimes called financial statement ratios) for those
metrics. Financial ratios are calculations derived from information included in the financial
statements. Each ratio illustrates one dimension of an organization's overall financial health. Analysts
who evaluate public organizations' financial statements employ dozens of different financial ratios.
However, the way they use ratios will be unique to their needs. For example, the criteria used by
financial institutions (or credit rating agencies) will differ from those used by funding agencies. In
other words, context and goals matter.

Therefore, a word of caution is necessary when it comes to financial ratios. For many, financial
statement ratios objectively assess the organization's financial position and overall performance.
However, when applied incorrectly, they can lead to improper allocation of resources within an
organization. For example, focusing on profit maximization, particularly on programs that do not
align with the organization's core values or mission, could lead to mission creep.

Relatedly, criteria used to assess the organization's financial health should not be the sole criteria
used to determine a non-profit's eligibility for a grant or contract. As you'll see below, financial
ratios are objective measures of financial position and performance that do not incorporate an
organization's proven track record in service delivery. Financial ratios emphasize the organization's
financial strengths and do not address the organization's effectiveness. Financial ratios do not relay
the organization's unique challenges, or the efforts management and staff have undertaken to address
those challenges. In fact, the widespread use of ratios has resulted in widespread inequity in
philanthropic giving. Research shows that Black-led organizations receive less funding and are more
likely to receive funding with restrictions when compared to peer white-led organizations. As a result,
these organizations report low cash reserves, frequently report operating deficits, and often report
fewer net assets without donor restrictions. Continued use of financial ratios as criteria for funding
organizations perpetuates the cycle - well-funded organizations continue to receive funding without

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 107
restrictions. In contrast, smaller organizations in poor financial health receive less or restricted
funding.

We apply a similar word of caution when using ratios to assess the financial health of governments.
A careful review of budget documents or related socio-economic or legal environments would give
users a better understanding of why the government reported a deficit or high debt burden. And as
we discuss later in this chapter, governments need not be profitable to continue operations.

So, while we endorse the use of financial ratios, we recognize there are limits to their usability and
encourage users to contextualize their analysis to the organization, industry, and region of operations.

        ADDRESSING RACIAL BIAS IN PHILANTHROPY AND GRANTMAKING

           Philanthropy has proven itself as a powerful mechanism for working toward a more equitable society by challenging oppression
           and seeking to ensure social, economic, and political change (Powell, 2015). But biases based on race, gender, and other factors
           are still a real problem in the sector, often in the form of implicit bias. Implicit bias refers to the attitudes or stereotypes that
           affect our understanding, actions, and decisions in an unconscious manner. These biases, which encompass favorable and
           unfavorable assessments, are activated involuntarily and without an individual's awareness or intentional control.

           Implicit bias in philanthropy affects not just which groups get funded but also who sits on the boards of philanthropic
           organizations, how grantmaking foundations set priorities, how decisions are made, who makes those decisions, and even who
           gets hired (Powell, 2015). A D5Coalition 2016 report found that 92 percent of foundation CEOs were white, 83 percent of
           full-time executive staff were white, and 68 percent of program staff were white. Studies have shown that three-quarters of
           white people have entirely white social networks, a factor that further excludes organizations led by people of color from
           philanthropic networks (Dorsey et al., 2020). The D5Coalition report also found that only eight percent of grants were directed
           to organizations that served diverse communities.

           A 2020 study (completed by Echoing Green and Bridgspan) found that Black-led organizations were more likely to receive less
           funding, receive restricted grants, and were required to meet rigorous reporting requirements. Undoubtedly, the lack of
           unrestricted support reflects a lack of trust in organizations led by people of color (Dorsey et al., 2020). Over time, disparities in
           revenue and restrictions result in few net resources that do not have donor restrictions. Data shows that Black-led organizations
           reported a net asset position without donor restrictions that was 76 percent less than white-led organizations. Additionally, data
           shows organizations led by Black women consistently receive less support than either Black men or white women. Disparities
           persist even considering factors like issue area, education level, and gender.

           Financial metrics (e.g., revenue growth, demonstrated operating performance, and accumulated reserves) are frequently used to
           determine organizations with the "capacity" to manage grants, discounting the value of the organization's work. Using financial
           health criteria to determine who receives funding perpetuates a vicious cycle, further depriving chronically underfunded
           organizations that have the potential to do good work!

           So, what should funders do? Below are some recommendations based on our review of the existing research. Our list is not
           comprehensive - we have included an extensive list of readings at the end of this section.

                 Focus on organizational strengths. Assess the organization's proposals based on its ability to do the work, not trends

                         in revenues or whether the non-profit has reserves or an endowment. Allow for a narrative contextualizing the
                         non-profit's operating environment and financial history. Understand all the financial and non-financial resources the
                         organization mobilizes to achieve its mission and endeavor to value the work being performed. Funders should
                         provide unrestricted capacity-building grants to strengthen organizational leadership and management and eliminate
                         matching grant requirements, as these requirements marginalize organizations that lack the fundraising capacity and
                         unconsciously steer funding to well-resourced organizations with accumulated resources or access to fundraising
                         networks (Nonprofit Finance Fund, 2019).

                 Cover full costs. Recognizing overhead costs is essential for the proper function of any organization. Smaller

                         organizations do not benefit from economies of scale and, as a result, report higher-than-average overhead costs

108 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
                         (median ratio of 20 percent). Larger organizations, especially those with a regional presence or brand recognition,
                         have the capacity to raise public support from individual donors. In contrast, smaller organizations do not have a large
                         or wealthy donor base or the capacity to create one. Understand operational context and challenges. For example,
                         non-profits that rely on government contracts are more likely to be chronically underfunded, as governments rarely
                         cover overhead costs. To that end, funders should consider providing capacity-building grants, as these investments
                         position the organization to deliver higher-quality services beyond the life of the grant.

                 Shift focus from reporting to engagement. Evaluate whether reporting requirements are grounded in organizations

                         demonstrating results or distrust of leaders. Funders should streamline grant application processes and eliminate
                         redundancies in reporting. Where possible, shift the funding model away from restricted annual grant awards to
                         unrestricted multi-year grants, demonstrating the funder's trust and investment in the organization. Engage with
                         grantees in tangible ways other than grant reports and develop relationships that are not contingent on funding. Build
                         grantee capacity by providing additional funding to smaller organizations to meet reporting requirements and create
                         reporting mechanisms that result in program metrics relevant to both the grantor and grantee.

                 Give more - much more! Foundations consistently use the five percent payout rule as a maximum level of giving, even

                         though the tax law established the five percent payout rule as the minimum. Data shows that even though foundation
                         wealth has nearly doubled since the Great Recession, the level of giving did not change significantly over the period. A
                         philosophical shift that puts "spending decisions within the context of mission" rather than "mission in the context of
                         available resources" shifts the focus away from wealth accumulation and perpetuity of foundations to investing in
                         mission-aligned priority areas at levels that would lead to sustained changes. Additionally, foundations should
                         diversify their grantee portfolio. They should invest in smaller organizations led by Black, Indigenous, or people of
                         color that work in communities that face funding disparities.

                 Make diversity, equity, and inclusion a top priority. The world of philanthropy relies on relationships. Whom you

                         know and who knows you matter! Philanthropic organizations committed to social, economic, and political change
                         lack the lived experience of people of color in low-income communities. Funding organizations should prioritize
                         diversifying their organization, from the non-profit board to the program staff. They should expand their grantee
                         sourcing mechanisms and intentionally reach out to smaller grassroots organizations whose programming and values
                         align with foundation priorities. Finally, they need to be accountable to themselves and the community they serve. To
                         that end, they should report on their diversity, equity, and inclusion goals, benchmarks, and progress.

           Our knowledge of implicit bias in philanthropy benefited from the work of many, including Cheryl Dorsey, Jeff Bradach and Peter Kim.
           (2020). Racial Equity and Philanthropy: Disparities in Funding for Leaders of Color Leave Impact on the Table (Echoing Green and The
           Bridgspan Group), D5Coalition (2016) "State of the Work: Stories from the Movement to Advance Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion," John A
           Powell (2015) "Implicit Bias and its Role in Philanthropy and Grantmaking" and Non-profit Finance Fund (2019) "Addressing Racial
           Biased Financial Analysis."

The first table lists a set of liquidity ratios. Recall that liquidity is the ease with which an asset can
be converted to cash with minimal loss in value. Liquidity ratios assess liquid assets that can cover
the organization's obligations or day-to-day expenses. The numerator in these ratios measures liquid
resources - either current assets or a specific type of current asset (e.g., cash and cash equivalents,
receivables, etc.). The denominator is a measure of existing obligations - either current liabilities or
average daily cash expenses. To estimate average daily expenses, we take total expenses and deduct
expenses like depreciation, amortization, and bad debt expense that do not require an outflow of
liquid resources. Our estimate of cash expenses is then divided by 365 days to produce a rough
measure of average daily cash spending.

For governments, the focus is on the General Fund. Recall that the General Fund accounts for
unrestricted resources or resources that are not required to be accounted for in other funds. The

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 109
unassigned fund balance is the most closely watched number in governmental accounting. It
reports on the government's unrestricted resources.

        LIQUIDITY AND AVAILABILITY OF FINANCIAL ASSETS DISCLOSURE

           FASB Accounting Standards Update No. 2016-14 requires non-profits to disclose qualitative (narrative) and quantitative
           (numeric) information about their liquidity and availability. According to the standard, the most basic measure of liquidity is the
           "availability of resources to meet cash needs for expenses within one year of the date of the statement of financial position." The
           availability of a financial asset may be affected by (1) its nature, (2) external limits imposed by donors, grantors, laws, and
           contracts with others, and (3) internal limits imposed by the governing board. Qualitative information communicates how the
           non-profit entity manages its liquid resources to meet cash needs for expenses. In contrast, quantitative information
           communicates the availability of the non-profit's financial assets to meet cash needs for expenses - all within a year of the
           balance sheet date.
           Although common sense tells us that having more assets available for use without limitations allows for greater flexibility to
           meet unforeseen financial circumstances, it does not immediately follow that a not-for-profit organization that shows a
           relatively small portion of its assets as "available for general expenditure" is experiencing financial difficulty.
           Non-profits routinely use assets received with donor restrictions in ongoing programmatic and operational activities. In those

110 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
cases, assets that appear to have limitations are, in fact, being put to immediate use paying for day-to-day operations. The
narrative disclosure should give financial statement users insight into the full range of assets available for use.
Non-profits may also describe established operating reserve policies, how they manage cash based on major receivables cycles,
and the availability and use of lines of credit. When contemplating liquidity disclosures, NFPs should:

        Consider the message they want to convey to stakeholders: Does your organization have ample resources to fund

              activities over the next 12 months? If yes - you want to make that clear in the disclosure. You may also want to discuss
              your policy for dealing with excess revenues (e.g., the board designates a certain percentage of excess budgeted funds
              to be added to the organization's operating reserves). If your organization struggles to maintain sufficient resources
              to cover expenses, you may want to disclose your action plan for covering those expenses. Perhaps you have lines of
              credit that could be drawn upon if needed, or maybe you are expecting a large grant that will fund a significant portion
              of your expenses.

        Review its current procedures around board designation of net assets: What are the board's current procedures for

              identifying and designating net assets - are they formally documented, or are amounts designated by the board on an
              ad-hoc basis? Considering the board's awareness of management's designations is important, given the new
              standard's emphasis on board designation of net assets. In addition to reviewing current procedures, this may be a
              good time for the board to revisit existing board designations to determine if they still make sense and determine if
              any new policies will be required.

        Adopt an operating reserve policy if your organization doesn't already have one. This policy would document (a) what

              the organization considers an appropriate level of reserves, (b) how the reserves will be built, and (c) the steps to
              follow if the reserves fall below the set level.

        Decide on the best presentation approach for your organization. The format of the new liquidity disclosures will

              depend on the type of non-profit, the relative liquidity of the organization's resources, donor-imposed restrictions on
              those resources, internal board designations on resources, and so on.

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 111
           The non-profit may also consider adding or augmenting other disclosures. For example, suppose in your liquidity disclosures, you
           choose to break out the availability of promises to give into those that are donor-restricted and those that are not. In that case,
           consider whether providing the same breakout in your pledges receivable disclosure would be useful to the users of your
           financial statements.
           We drew heavily from two articles prepared by the American Institute of CPAs (AICPA), including "The New Liquidity and Availability
           Disclosure and Going Concern Issues" and "Steps You Can Take Now to Create Exceptional Liquidity Disclosures."

Profitability is an intuitive measure derived from changes in net assets (or change in net position).
Recall that net assets increase when revenues exceed expenses - and vice versa.

The operating margin speaks to profitability in the organization's core operations (i.e., change in net
assets without donor restrictions). Gross margin (sometimes called margin) is the difference between
net sales and cost of goods sold. Industries like retail clothing have extraordinarily tight margins,
meaning the price often exceeds unit costs by a percent or two. Low-margin businesses must be
"high volume," meaning they must sell a lot of products to be profitable. Professional services like
accounting, tax consulting, and equipment leasing are "high margin," meaning the price charged
far exceeds the unit cost, sometimes by orders of magnitude. High-margin industries tend to have
barriers to entry. They require highly trained professionals, expensive equipment, or other significant
up-front investments.

The total margin is a broader measure of profitability across the entire organization. For non-profits,
the total margin accounts for all activities reported in the year, regardless of the restriction. For
governments, the total margin incorporates the change in the net position of business-type activities.
For for-profit or hybrid organizations, total margin accounts for all expenses before interest, taxes,
depreciation, and amortization, frequently referred to as "EBITDA" (e-bit-dah).

There are caveats to the total margin ratio - particularly for governments and non-profit
organizations. Organizations that receive funding with donor restrictions are more likely to report a
total margin ratio greater than their operating margin. As noted in Chapter 2, change in net assets has
two components - net assets without donor restrictions and net assets with donor restrictions. The
total margin includes the latter, even though the organization will need to expend those resources
at a future date or are restricted in perpetuity. Using the organization's total margin ratio would
incorrectly signal the non-profit's profitability.

112 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
For governments, the total margin ratio would include the change in the net position of their
business-type activities. While business-type activities are self-sustaining, the profits cannot be used
to subsidize the government's core operations without legislative approval or a voter referendum.
Consider the case of the City of Detroit when it filed for bankruptcy protection in 2013. City officials
sought to transfer funds from its business-type activities (mainly funds in water and sewer) to the
General Fund. Bondholders, secured with revenues from water and sewer services (i.e., business-
type activities) sued and successfully prevented the transfer of funds to the General Fund, arguing
resources are not fungible. Changes in law, contract, and administrative procedures would be
required before resources are transferred from one fund to another.

Profitability measures are less salient for governments because governments need not be profitable
to continue operating. Governments have the legal authority and monopolistic advantages that non-
profits and for-profits do not. Governments can bolster their financial position by raising taxes or
imposing fees. That's why profitability measures for government are focused on not just the change in
net position but the share of revenues derived from general revenues versus grants or contributions.

Solvency measures speak to where the organization gets its resources. Revenues - earned or
contributed - pay for regular programming and operating expenses. Capital - loans and mortgages
- are how an organization acquires its assets. If a non-profit depends too much on unpredictable
or volatile donor revenues, that's a potential solvency concern. The same is true of revenues from
governments. Intergovernmental grants and contracts can disappear quickly if the government
changes its fiscal policies and priorities.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 113
Non-profits will report a wide variety of obligations, including accounts payable, accrued salaries and
benefits, deferred revenue, long-term debt, and pension obligations. Since these are the result of doing
business, they are expected and acceptable.
Although necessary, long-term debt is a drain on future resources. Research has shown that non-
profits with long-term debt are less liquid and less profitable. An organization with long-term debt
will make principal and interest payments every month (e.g., loans or mortgages) or semi-annually
(e.g., bonds) - and, therefore, strain liquid resources and operating costs. Fixed assets frequently
add to maintenance costs and depreciation expenses, resulting in lower profitability margins. These
factors could inhibit an organization's ability to continue to serve its mission.
The liability-to-asset ratio is an alternative measure of solvency. This ratio allows analysts to assess
the scope of non-current liabilities that are not in the form of loans, mortgages, or bonded debt. For
example, a significant proportion of liabilities reported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
and the Susan G. Komen Breast Cancer Foundation were non-current grants payable. This reflects
the organization's use of multi-year grants to support the operating activities of other non-profits.
The Boy Scouts of America, USA Gymnastics, and various Catholic dioceses have sizeable contingent
liabilities following several recent sexual abuse lawsuits. These obligations are contingent on a court
ruling or legal settlement. Accounting rules require organizations to report a contingent liability in
the basic financial statements or notes to these financial statements. These disclosures depend upon
the degree of certainty and materiality of the court ruling or legal settlement. These organizations
will likely need to liquidate their existing assets to meet these obligations (as a side note, these
organizations have filed for bankruptcy protection to allow for a negotiated settlement of outstanding
obligations). The March of Dimes, Girls Scouts of America, American Civil Liberties Union, and the
Metropolitan Opera Association all report an accrued pension liability. If the obligation is unfunded,
it represents a drain on the organization's resources.
We, therefore, encourage users to estimate a liability-to-asset ratio, keeping in mind that all debt is a
liability, but not all liabilities are debt.

114 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) monitors the contributions ratio as part of its public support test
for charitable organizations. According to this test, a non-profit must receive at least 10 percent of
its support from contributions from the public or gross receipts from activities related to its tax-
exempt purposes. Less than that suggests the public is not invested in that organization's mission. By
contrast, non-profit analysts also emphasize the tipping point where a non-profit depends too much
on individual donors. Different analysts define the tipping point threshold differently, but most agree
that 80 percent of total revenues from individual contributions is dangerously high. At that point, a
non-profit's ability to serve its mission is far too dependent on unpredictable individual donors and
not dependent enough on either earned income (e.g., government contracts or fees-for-services) or
gifts from corporations or foundations.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 115
For governments, the solvency ratios are focused entirely on debt and other long-term obligations.
Governments can borrow money that won't be paid back for decades. If careless, a government can
take on too much leverage. That is why solvency ratios for governments focus on how much money
a government has borrowed or owes in its governmental and enterprise funds and its ability to meet
those obligations as they come due. The latter is known as coverage. Bond investors, particularly for
public utilities, often stipulate how much coverage a government must always maintain. Coverage
ratios are usually expressed as operating revenues as a percentage of interest expenses.

In addition to financial health, financial statements can illuminate how efficiently a non-profit raises
money and how much of its resources it devotes to its core mission. These effectiveness measures are
related to but separate from the financial position. Fundraising efficiency shows the financial return
a non-profit realizes for its investments in its fundraising capacity.

The program expense ratio is one of the most closely watched and controversial ratios in non-
profit financial management. It tells us how much of a non-profit's total expenses are invested in its
programs and services rather than administration, fundraising, and other overhead spending. Many
analysts and non-profit monitors recommend a program service ratio of at least 80 percent - though
we caution against the use of the program-expense ratio as allocation of expenses into program,
administrative, and fundraising is far from clear cut.

RATIOS AND RULES OF THUMB

These rules of thumb are derived from the rich academic literature and industry analysis. To be
clear, there is no legal or GAAP-based definition of "financially healthy" or "strong financial position."
Every financial institution, foundation, donor, or grantor defines these metrics differently. Measures
of financial health will vary by sector and the size of the organization. The rules listed in the ratio
tables above represent figures cited by analysts in the public and private sectors. Before going further,
let's consider a few key points about financial statement ratios:

      Ratios are only part of the story. Ratios are useful because they help us quickly and efficiently
         focus our attention on the most critical parts of an organization's financial position. In that
         sense, they are a bit like watching ESPN's 30-second highlight recap of a football game (or
         whatever sporting event, if any, you find interesting). If we want to know which team won
         and who made some big plays, we'll watch the highlight reel. If we want to know the full story
         - the coaches' overall game plan, which players played well throughout the game, when a key
         mistake changed the course of the game, etc. - we need to watch a lot more than just the
         highlights. Ratios are the same way. They are fast, interesting, and important. If we want a
         quick overview and not much more, they are useful. If we don't have the time to dig deeper

116 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
   into an organization's operations, or if it's not appropriate for us to dig deeper, then they're
   the best tool we have. But they are never the whole story. Always keep this limitation in mind.
 Always interpret ratios in context. Ratios are useful because they help identify trends in an
   organization's financial behavior. Is its profitability improving? How has its overall liquidity
   changed over time? Are its revenues growing? And so on. But on their own, ratios don't tell us
   anything about trends. To reveal a trend, we must put a ratio in context. We need to compare
   it to that same ratio for that same organization over time. For that reason, we often need
   multiple years of financial data. It is also essential to put ratios in an industry context.
   Sometimes, a broader financial trend will affect many organizations in similar ways. A decline
   in corporate giving will mean lower donor revenues for many non-profits. Increases in overall
   healthcare costs will impact all organizations' income statements. Reductions in certain
   federal and state grants will affect particular types of non-profits in similar ways. To
   understand these trends, we need to compare an organization's financial ratios to the ratios of
   organizations in similar industries. It is useful, for instance, to compare human services-
   focused non-profits with less than $2 million in assets to other small, human service-focused
   non-profits in the same region with less than $2 million in assets. We should compare fee-for-
   service, revenue-based non-profits to other fee-for-service, revenue-based non-profits. Large
   non-profits with national or international missions should be compared to each other.
 Financial statement analysis raises questions. A good financial statement analysis will almost
   always reveal some contradictory trends. Why does this organization's profitability look
   strong, but the current ratio is well below the rule of thumb? Why is this organization less
   liquid than its peers? Why does this organization not have debt and is far more liquid than
   similar organizations? A good financial statement analysis raises questions about the
   organization's financial assumptions, program operations, and overall effectiveness.
   Sometimes these follow-up questions can be answered from other publicly available
   information, such as the notes to the financial statements or the annual report. Sometimes
   they can't. If your analysis concludes with many unanswered questions, that does not mean
   your analysis is bad. It simply means there are limits to what we can learn from financial
   statements alone.
 Ratios are retrospective. Most organizations release their financial statements three to six
   months after the close of their fiscal year. As a result, analysis based on those statements relies
   on information that is at least 12 to 18 months old. A lot can happen in 18 months! Always
   keep this in mind when doing financial statement analysis.

                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 117
        NON-PROFIT BUSINESS MODEL AND CAPITAL STRUCTURE

           A non-profit's financial self-assessment is based on a coherent analysis of the organization's business model and capital
           structure. What do we mean by business model? It is the nature and distribution of an organization's revenues and expenses. The
           business model reflects the non-profit's strategic choices to fund operations (e.g., individual donors vs. corporate gifts,
           contributions vs. earned income, private support vs. government contracts) and resources allocated to programs and
           administrative services. A sustainable non-profit business model provides reliable revenues to cover the full cost of doing
           business. Sustainable non-profits understand how programs subsidize or are subsidized by others and maintain a specific,
           actionable plan to respond to unexpected events. Capital structure refers to the nature and distribution of an organization's
           assets, liabilities, and net assets. A well-capitalized organization can access the cash necessary to cover its obligations, has the
           reserves to weather downturns in the external operating environment, and can take advantage of new opportunities to
           innovate.

           We have modified the Non-profit Financial Assessment Toolkit developed by the Non-profit Finance Fund (NFF) to help
           non-profits assess their financial health. To contextualize questions included in the survey, let's review the connection between
           an organization's business model (i.e., Statement of Activities or Income Statement) and capital structure (i.e., Statement of
           Financial Position or Balance Sheet).

           Thus far, we have focused on the idea that the non-profit's revenues must meet or exceed program and overhead costs. However,
           a broader definition is necessary - one that accounts for the full costs of operations (a term we've also borrowed from NFF).
           Non-profits that generate enough resources to cover full costs of operations have sufficient reserves to meet unexpected costs
           or revenue shortfalls; can invest in technology, property, or equipment; and take advantage of new opportunities and are
           innovative in program or service delivery.

           A non-profit's ability to do so will be a function of the type of revenue it earns. Unrestricted contributions provide an
           organization with the greatest flexibility. Studies show that non-profits that rely on government contracts are more likely to
           report deficits and are more likely to be insolvent for two reasons. First, governments do not cover overhead costs. Failure to
           cover overhead costs means the organization has a structural deficit baked in the service agreement with the government
           agency. On the revenue side, the non-profit will need to raise additional donor support or rely on profitable ventures. On the
           expense side, the non-profit will likely scale back on administrative functions, including finance, technology, and other back-office
           staff. Eventually, it will need to draw down on reserves or cut back on critical program staff. Second, governments are more likely
           to delay payments. As a result, the non-profit will need to draw down on existing reserves, rely on lines of credit, or delay
           payments to vendors. It will forego investment income, incur an interest expense if it uses a line of credit, incur late payment
           penalties with vendors or suppliers, or forego pre-payment discounts.

           A non-profit that consistently reports a surplus will see continued and sustained growth in assets. We'll likely find that a
           significant proportion of its long-term obligations are used to acquire fixed assets (i.e., a mortgage or long-term debt). Those
           reporting a greater share of unrestricted public support are more likely to report a larger share of net assets without donor
           restrictions. That organization has a greater ability to expand programs. It can invest in new equipment, and excess funds can be
           transferred to a long-term investment portfolio that would generate investment income.

           Non-profits reporting deficits are more likely to report fewer assets, and their liabilities are likely to grow over time. How does
           this happen? In the short term, it will draw on reserves, but persistent deficits will likely result in increased reliance on lines of
           credit and delayed payments to suppliers and vendors. Deficits will demand cuts to critical program and administrative staff. The
           deficits may incentivize the organization to pursue profitable but non-essential programs to subsidize essential programs,
           resulting in mission drift. Over the long term, the organization could become vulnerable to after-the-fact audits and claw-backs
           for disallowed expenses as a result of significant cuts in grant administration and finance staff. These create unexpected and
           sizeable contingent liabilities. The non-profit could also report a growing pension liability if it fails to fund employee benefit
           programs adequately. Growth in liabilities reflects the organization's inability to generate revenues sufficient to cover full costs.

           The figure below shows the connections between the non-profit's business model (i.e., revenues, program expenses, and
           overhead costs) and capital structure (i.e., assets, liabilities, and net assets). As we noted in Chapter 2, non-profits need to budget
           for reserves. We, therefore, reflect not just program expenses and overhead costs in "Full Costs" but also reserve needs for the
           organization. Practically speaking, a non-profit would need to report a surplus equal to five percent of operating revenues for 10
           consecutive years to accumulate reserves equal to six months of operating expenses. Given the evidence that most non-profits
           report deficits, a mix of budget surplus and capital campaigns would be necessary to create meaningful levels of reserves.

118 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
The more revenues (and, correspondingly, surpluses) a non-profit generates, the more assets it will report. Those will appear first
in receivables and then in cash. Over time, these are invested in property and equipment or used to create informal or formal
reserves.
Non-profits that are profitable can invest in or expand programs. Those that are not profitable will need to tap into reserves (i.e.,
cash and investments) in the short term or cut spending or sell assets over the long term to balance budgets and make payments
on obligations as they come due. Selling assets and eliminating programs may be the only way the non-profit can maneuver out of
a financial crisis.

Recommended readings include Morris, G., et al. (2018). The Financial Health of the United States Non-profit Sector: Facts and
Observations, MacIntosh, J., et al. (2016). Understanding Overhead: A Governance Challenge for Non-profit Trustees and Nonprofit
Finance Fund (2011) "Case for Change Capital in the Arts"

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 119
120 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Download Non-Profit Financial Self-Assessment Worksheet: https://bit.ly/3rbVKUR

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 121
NON-PROFIT FINANCIAL RATIOS - AN ILLUSTRATION
To see these ratios in action, let us return to Treehouse. We use FY 2022 data to illustrate how each
ratio is estimated and include FY 2021 ratios for comparative purposes. We highlight the key findings
below. Note that our discussion below does not focus on how one should interpret each ratio. Instead,
we tell a story about the organization's financial position and operating performance. That story -
not the ratios - helps formulate questions and additional lines of inquiry. Notwithstanding, we've
included comments in the tables to help you understand how to interpret each ratio.
FINANCIAL RATIOS - TREEHOUSE

What do the financial statements and estimated ratios tell us about Treehouse's financial position
and performance? Treehouse reported a strong financial position. At the end of FY 2022, the non-
profit reported $27 million in assets, including $7.6 million in cash and investments, $5 million
in receivables ($4.7 million are due in the next 12 months), $8.3 million in fixed assets (net of
depreciation), and $5.2 million in endowment investments. That said, the non-profit reported a

122 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
$2.1 million drop in cash and investments. While the drop in cash and investments has a negative
impact on the non-profit's liquidity position, the liquidity ratios remain at or above recommended
benchmarks.

Treehouse reported $516,298 in income at the end of FY 2022 - approximately 2 percent of operating
revenues. Operating revenues in FY 2022 ($24 million) were up 75 percent. Much of the growth in
revenues was driven by contracts, most of which were with the State of Washington. Contributions,
grants, and in-kind donations increased 14 percent. The nonprofit's expenses ($23.5 million) were
also higher, particularly in program services. Changes notwithstanding, the non-profit had a
program-expense ratio of 83 percent. Total Change in Net Assets for FY 2022 was $5.7 million,
including $1.4 million in losses from investments - which mirrors outcomes in the broader financial
markets and in-kind donation of an interest in the building ($7.1 million).
Unlike most health and human services organizations, Treehouse has no long-term debt, and its
liabilities are modest ($1.2 million).

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 123
Download Treehouse Financial Statement Analysis: https://bit.ly/44SwTTL
Treehouse's investments in fundraising are productive. For every $1 in fundraising expenses, the non-
profit raised at least $5.00 in contributions and grants over the last five years. What's more, our
analysis shows it collected those receivables in 60 days or less. This ratio is critical to non-profits
that rely on government contracts. If payments are late, the non-profit will need to draw down on its
cash reserves and investments to meet operating expenses until the next payment is received. Non-
profits that rely on monthly contributions, particularly from small donors, report a collection period
that is less than 30 days. The financial statements show a significant increase in contracts in FY 2022
(up from $3.9 million in FY 2021 to $12.7 million in FY 2022) that led to a 204 percent increase in
contract receivables ($3.5 million). This increase in receivables could negatively impact cash flows.

124 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
THE FINANCIAL HEALTH OF THE NON-PROFIT SECTOR

Unless specified, non-profit financial statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. They are not, however, the only source
of financial data. The IRS Form 990 provides the public with financial information comparable to that reported in the financial
statements.
Form 990 is a unique blend of GAAP and tax-basis of accounting. For various reasons, the assets, liabilities, revenues, and
expenses reported in the tax form 990 will differ from those reported in the financial statements. Limitations notwithstanding,
the IRS maintains an electronic database that can be used to assess the financial health of the non-profit sector. Using 990 data
reported by more than 200,000 non-profits reporting $2.45 trillion in expenses, Morris, Roberts, MacIntosh, and Bordone
(2018) found the non-profit sector in the U.S. to be financially fragile, with non-profits in every sector frequently reporting
deficits.

That research found:

        Operating margins were largest for small non-profits (<$1 million), but there is significant variation in the data. For

              example, small non-profits were more likely to report large deficits or surpluses (the operating margin range was -21
              percent to 32 percent). Large non-profits (>$10 million) were more likely to report a surplus. The distribution of
              operating margins was tighter (between -5.9 percent and 12.9 percent) and the largest non-profits (>$5 billion in
              expenses) did not report deficits.

        Smaller organizations (<$5 million) are more likely to be liquid. While larger organizations (>$50 million) reported

              low current ratios, they maintain sizeable long-term investment portfolios, making them more resilient to an
              economic downturn. There was significant variation in liquidity by sector, with hospitals and human service
              organizations reporting low current ratios and reserve balances (and the lowest operating margins). Remember that
              these two sectors accounted for 55 percent of expenses and 36 percent of organizations. They represent
              organizations that underserved communities rely on.

        Large non-profits (>$10 million in expenses) were more likely to report long-term debt. Not surprisingly, hospitals

              and health and human service organizations were more likely to report debt, as their business model mandates
              investment in property and equipment to meet the needs of the communities they serve. Philanthropic and
              environmental organizations reported the lowest debt burdens. These sectors were also the most profitable - 4.4
              percent and 5.0 percent, respectively.

        There are economies of scale with overhead costs, with larger non-profits reporting a lower share of overhead costs

              (i.e., administration and fundraising ratio). There were notable differences in fundraising ratios, with non-profits

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 125
                         relying less on contributions reporting the lowest fundraising efficiency ratios and vice versa.
           For detailed distributions of financial ratios, see Morris, G., et al. (2018). The Financial Health of the United States Non-profit Sector: Facts
           and Observations, Oliver Wyman, SeaChange Capital Partners, GuideStar and MacIntosh, J., et al. (2016). Understanding Overhead: A
           Governance Challenge for Non-profit Trustees, Oliver Wyman, SeaChange Capital Partners.
           *Sample was limited to 10,754 non-profits in New York City. We believe the sample is sufficiently large and the results are representative
           of all non-profits. We transpose the author's original estimate of fundraising efficiency ratio to estimate fundraising efficiency.

ASSESSING THE FINANCIAL HEALTH OF GOVERNMENTS USING THE TEN-POINT
TEST
Throughout the past few decades, analysts have developed a popular framework to evaluate a local
government's financial condition. It is known as the "Ten Point Test." It's comprised of 10 key ratios
that, when taken together, summarize a government's liquidity, profitability, and solvency. In the
Ten Point Test framework, a government earns "points" based on how its ratios compare to its peer
governments. If its ratios are consistently better than its peers, it earns a higher score. If its ratios are
consistently worse than its peers, its scores are lower and, in some instances, negative.
To see the Ten Point Test at work, let's return to the City of Bothell. The table below shows the city's
ratios and their computations based on information in its 2021 Annual Comprehensive Financial
Reports (ACFRs). Bothell's 10-point ratios are a mixed bag. The government's General Fund liquidity
position is relatively strong. The city's General Fund unassigned balance at the end of FY 2021 was
$18 million (a historical high), approximately equal to 30 percent of the revenues reported in the
General Fund. The government also reported $18.8 million in cash and investments (approximately
584 percent of its General Fund liabilities).
FINANCIAL RATIOS - CITY OF BOTHELL

That said, the ACFRs show that the City's net position declined $2.1 million or 0.4 percent of the
net position. The $2.1 million deficit was a fraction of what the city reported prior to the COVID-19

126 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
pandemic. A quick review of the financial statements shows that depreciation expense has increased
over the years - reflecting the city's investment in infrastructure. This is also evident in the ratio
measuring capital asset improvement, which continues to be negative (-7 percent).
The city relies on general revenues - specifically property and excise taxes - to cover operating
expenses. The city reported $4.1 million in operating grants and contributions, approximately 3.12
percent of primary government revenues. Intergovernmental transfers were higher in FY 2020 and
FY 2021, reflecting the infusion of federal stimulus funds in the city's operations. The city's operating
margin for governmental activities was 61 percent. This ratio is larger because the city reported a
deficit. The ratio would be lower if expenses were lower or if the government had reported more in
either program revenues or general revenues. Notwithstanding, strong revenue growth and effective
management of the city's expenses have allowed the city to improve its net position.

The city of Bothell reports a high debt burden ($2,637 per capita). The rapid growth in population
and the city's planned expansion in capital improvements have resulted in the growth in the debt
per capita. The government's capital improvements make the city more attractive, which would lead
to a growth in residents, resulting in a growth in revenues. Notwithstanding, its near-term solvency
ratio (120 percent) is below the benchmark - reflecting growth in economic activity and, as a result,
revenues. More importantly, the city's pension and OPEB obligations are a modest share of the city's
non-current liabilities ($8.1 million, or 6 percent of non-current liabilities).
Moody's upgraded the city from Aa2 to Aa1 on October 11, 2019. The rating agency noted that
the city "benefited from its inclusion in the Puget Sound area." Factors that could lead to a rating
downgrade include "deterioration in the city's financial position" because of "material contractions
of the city's taxable base." The COVID-19 pandemic did not have a material negative effect on the
government's revenues. The city's revenue portfolio is inelastic. Property values have not changed
significantly since the start of the COVID-19 recession, and the housing market remains competitive.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 127
Download Bothell Ten-Point Test: https://bit.ly/4684Kcj

Fortunately, the Ten-Point Test framework allows us to go a step further. Instead of asking how
Bothell compares to generic benchmarks (or rules of thumb), we have the tools to compare Bothell
to peer local governments. This allows us to make much more precise statements about the City's
financial position and operating performance.

Analysts typically make these peer comparisons by computing the Ten Point Test ratios for various
local governments and assigning point values based on relative rankings. For example, to calculate
Bothell's Ten Point test score for FY 2017 - 2021, refer to the Ten-Point Test Scores table. This
table shows national trends for these same ratios. These trends are based on data from the financial
statements of 3,721 city governments and 1,282 county governments from FY 2005 to FY 2015.

The ratios are presented in quartiles. Recall that a quartile is a group of percentiles, and a percentile
identifies a point in the distribution of that ratio. The table is organized by population groups. So,
for instance, for cities with populations between 25,000 and 50,000 (Bothell's peer group), the 25th
percentile for the short-run financial position was eight percent. That means one-quarter of Bothell's
peer cities had short-run financial positions of less than nine percent, and three-quarters had short-
run financial positions equal to or greater than nine percent. For all the ratios shown here, the first
quartile starts at the lowest ratio and ends at the 25th percentile, the second quartile covers the 25th

128 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
percentile through the 50th percentile, and the third quartile covers the 50th percentile through the
75th percentile. The fourth quartile includes all observations above the 75th percentile.

        INSOLVENCY AND MUNICIPAL BANKRUPTCY

           Extreme instances of fiscal distress could lead a municipal government to file for Chapter 9 bankruptcy protection. Having
           satisfied state-specific eligibility requirements, a municipality's petition in federal bankruptcy court must demonstrate the
           municipality (a) is insolvent, (b) desires to implement a plan to adjust, satisfy, or discharge debts, (c) has either negotiated in good
           faith, attempted but failed to negotiate with creditors, or negotiations are impracticable prior to bankruptcy protection
           application, and (d) has filed for bankruptcy protection in good faith.

           The burden of demonstrating insolvency is extremely difficult. It requires the municipality to demonstrate that it is unable to pay
           its obligations as they come due or provide an adequate level of services. In recent years, the courts have sought an expansive
           definition of insolvency. Municipalities must demonstrate

                 an inability to generate and maintain cash balances to pay all its obligations as they come due (i.e., cash insolvency),

                 an inability to create a balanced budget that provides enough revenues to cover expenditures that occur in the budget

                         period (i.e., budget insolvency),

                 an inability to pay for its long-term obligations given its current taxing or revenue authority (i.e., long-run insolvency),

                         and

                 an inability to provide services at the level and quality that are required for the health, safety, and welfare of the

                         community (i.e., service-level insolvency).

           There are no financial ratios to assess service-level insolvency. Rather, service-level insolvency is a qualitative assessment of a
           government's ability to deliver essential services. Service-level insolvency is characterized by longer fire and emergency services
           response rates, high rates of violent crimes and low rates of clearance, abandoned and blighted structures and lots, and poor
           service delivery (e.g., polluted water systems, broken streetlights, closed parks, etc.). In other words, governments that are
           service-level insolvent are struggling to deliver essential services.

           In ruling on a government's eligibility, federal courts have said the government's insolvency position cannot be temporary.
           Rather, insolvency is the result of a fundamental change in the socioeconomic environment that has, over time, resulted in
           persistent operating deficits and growth in long-term obligations. For that reason, courts have dismissed bankruptcy applications
           resulting from lawsuits (see, for example, the County of Boise, ID - 2011) or onerous labor contracts (see, for example, the City
           of Bridgeport, CT - 1991).

           Municipalities like Stockton (CA), Jefferson County (AL), and Detroit (MI) successfully petitioned federal courts for Chapter 9
           bankruptcy protections. They demonstrated insolvency would not be resolved with higher taxes, as levying additional taxes or
           collecting more in fees would be at the detriment of the entire community and would not necessarily generate sufficient funds to
           balance budgets, pay obligations as they come due, or resolve constraints on cash flows. The bankruptcy processes allowed these
           governments to get back on track, having won concessions from a wide variety of constituents (e.g., taxpayers, employees,
           retirees, and creditors) in an organized and fair manner.

           Recommended readings include Moldogaziev, Tima T., Sharon N. Kioko, and W. Bart Hildreth. 2017. "Bankruptcy Risk Premium in the
           Municipal Securities Market" 37(4):47-73. Public Budgeting & Finance and Moody's (2012) "Key Considerations for Municipal
           Governments in Bankruptcy"

These quartiles are the basis for assigning scores for all ratios. If a local government is in the second
quartile for a ratio, its score for that ratio is zero. It is not qualitatively better or worse than its peers,
so that ratio does not help or hurt its relative score. If a ratio is in the third quartile, it earns one point.
The logic here is that a ratio above the median (i.e., the 50th percentile) is a financial positive for that
government. If a ratio is in the fourth quartile, it earns two points. To land in the fourth quartile,
a government is better than most of its peers on that ratio, and that indicates a source of financial

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 129
strength. By contrast, a ratio in the first quartile means that government is comparatively weak in that
dimension of financial health. To reflect that weakness, we subtract one point.

A local government's overall Ten Point Test score is easy to interpret. Analysts generally use the
following categories:

      A score of 10 or greater suggests a government's financial position is "among the best." It can
         easily meet its immediate spending needs; it has more-than-adequate reserves to mitigate the
         effects of recessions, natural disasters, or other unexpected events; and it can generate
         adequate resources to cover its long-term spending needs. Most of its ratios must be as good
         as or better than its peers to earn that score.

      A score between 5 and 9 means the government is "better than most." Most of its ratios are better
         than its peer governments.

      A score between 1 to 4 means the government is "average." Most of its ratios are equal to, or
         weaker than, its peer governments.

      A score between 0 and -4 means the government is "worse than most." Most of its ratios are
         weaker
         than its peer governments.

      Scores less than -5 mean the government is "among the worst." It has major financial problems
         and may be insolvent. Scores this low are quite rare.

Let's return to Bothell's Ten Point Test Score. Recall that the city's population in FY 2021 was 48,920,
so we will use the "Population 25,000 to 50,000" quartiles to assign points to the city.

Bothell's liquidity is strong and improved significantly over the last five years. The city scores in the
second (0 points) or third quartile (1 point) for its short-run financial position and third (1 point) or
fourth (2 points) quartile on its liquidity position. The city's profitability ratios are below average.
The city was in the lowest quartile for net asset growth (-1 point) and operating margin (-1 point). Its
dependency on operating grants was limited before the COVID-19 pandemic. The infusion of federal
funds resulted in a higher ratio (and correspondingly a lower score); this should revert to historical
trends now that federal funds have been disbursed.

As we noted earlier, Bothell's solvency profile is mixed. It has virtually no current liabilities in the
General Fund but reports $157 million in liabilities, including $129 million in long-term debt and
$8.1 million in pension and OPEB obligations. However, given the City's revenue profile, its near-
term solvency ratio puts it in the third quartile (1 point). Its high debt burden and substantial debt
service, particularly on core operations (i.e., Coverage Ratio), put it in the lowest quartile for both
metrics. Finally, the rate of depreciation of capital assets far exceeds the rate of investment in capital
improvements, far below its peers (-1 point each).

130 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
TEN-POINT TEST SCORES
CITY & COUNTY GOVERNMENTS

Trends are based on data from the financial statements of 3,721 city governments and 1,282 county governments from FY 2005 to FY
2015. Source: Merritt Financial Services and authors' estimates.

Download the Ten-Point Test: https://bit.ly/3r4ydFo

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 131
Bothell's ratios add up to an overall Ten-Point Test score of 2. Its main financial strengths are
its liquidity and its near-term solvency. At the same time, its higher-than-average debt load and
operating deficits lower the city's score. Recall that a score of 2 suggests Bothell is "average" relative to
similarly sized local governments. With this framework, you can compute and interpret a Ten Point
Test score for virtually city or county government.

There are several versions of the Ten Point Test. The version presented here is based on the version recommended by Dean Mead, Research
Manager at the Governmental Accounting Standards Board. A few of the ratios have been changed slightly to reflect the data available to
compute national trends. For the original version, see Dean Mead's "A Manageable System of Economic Condition Analysis for Governments"
in Public Financial Management, ed. Howard Frank (Boca Raton, FL: Taylor and Francis, 2006); pp.383-419.

Download Bothell Ten-Point Test: https://bit.ly/4684Kcj

132 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
CREDIT RATINGS

A credit rating is an independent assessment by a nationally recognized statistical rating organization (NRSRO) of the issuer's
ability to make payments on time and in full. Currently, there are four NRSROs in the municipal bond market. They include
Moody's Investor Service (or Moody's), Standard and Poor's (or S&P), Fitch Ratings (or Fitch), and Kroll Bond Rating Agency (or
Kroll).
Ratings range from Aaa (highest possible rating) to D (lowest rating, typically in default). The municipal sector is highly rated. The
median rating in the U.S. municipal securities market was Aa3 - with more than 98 percent of municipalities rated Baa3 or above.
This is in sharp contrast to global corporates - the median rating is Baa3, and more than 49 percent of global corporate credits
have a rating below investment grade. Defaults in the municipal securities market are exceedingly rare. The 10-year average of
default rates is 0.18 percent. The 10-year average default rate for global corporates is 1.78 percent.

Source: Moody's (2018) "US Municipal Bond Defaults and Recoveries 1970 - 2018."
For a fee paid by the issuer, NRSROs gather and process information about the issuer - or in the case of revenue bonds,
individually issue and provide investors with an assessment of the risk of default associated with an issuer or a specific bond
issue. In assigning ratings for general obligation bonds, NRSROs focus on the following key criteria:

        The economic base, including per capita income or median household income (relative to the U.S. average), the total

              taxable value of property and full value per capita, and diversity of economic activity (e.g., regional economic centers
              with a diversified taxpayer base and the presence of large institutional actors like universities or military bases).

        The government's operating budget, including revenue or taxing authority, whether the operating budget is

              structurally balanced, expenditure reduction flexibility, and five-year trends in changes in cash or fund balances. Fund
              balances are a proxy measure of budget outcomes - any growth (reduction) in fund balances means revenues in prior
              budget periods were greater (lower) than expenses. Cash balances are equally important. They are a proxy measure of
              the government's ability to pay obligations as they come due.

        Management and governance structures, including legal and constitutional restrictions (e.g., tax limits and legislative

              supermajority requirements) or the adoption of prudent financial management practices into law (e.g., balanced
              budget requirements, mandatory contributions to pension programs, mandatory contributions to rainy-day or similar
              reserve funds, executive authority to make mid-year budget adjustments)

        Outstanding debt and pension obligations, including total outstanding debt (as a percentage of full value or revenue)

              and the three-year average net pension liability (as a percentage of full value or revenue)
In assigning a rating for a revenue bond, NRSROs focus on the net operating revenues of the issuer (e.g., utility revenues, tuition
fees, or patient revenues - net of operating expenses) or pledged revenues (e.g., gasoline taxes, toll revenues). The issuer's
economic base, management and governance structures, and outstanding long-term obligations remain equally relevant.
For a detailed history of defaults in the U.S., see Moody's (2018) "US Municipal Bond Defaults and Recoveries 1970 - 2018."

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 133
FINANCIAL STRATEGY
Financial statement analysis can tell us a lot about an organization's financial position. The question,
then, is what to do about it. As mentioned, sometimes financial statement analysis offers clear follow-
up questions about an organization's financial operations and overall performance. Ideally, it also
suggests some steps management can take to improve that financial position and performance.
The table below identifies some of those potential steps. It is organized around liquidity, profitability,
and solvency. "+" signs identify that part of the organization's financial position that is strong. "-" signs
suggest a potential weakness. There is no "textbook" definition of financial strength or weakness.
However, most public sector analysts define ratios above the benchmark rule of thumb or the median
within a peer group as strong and ratios below the rule of thumb or the median within a peer group
as weak. This is not a comprehensive list. That said, it illustrates some strategies management can
initiate to address the organization's financial challenges.
For example, non-profits reporting positive trends in liquidity, solvency, and profitability should
prioritize reviewing and amending finance policies, invest in process improvements and innovation,
and engage in a strategic planning process (including financial self-assessment). This is especially
important to recognize the organization's resiliency to future threats in operations. Those threats
could be the result of an economic crisis or changes in policy or technology that fundamentally alter
the organization's business model.

134 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Non-profits that are liquid and profitable but not solvent need only consider strategies that alter
the makeup of their long-term obligations. That said, changes in long-term obligations will impact
liquidity and profitability. Refinancing existing long-term debt obligations has the benefit of lowering
interest expenses, thereby increasing profitability and improving liquidity. However, refinancing
long-term debt should not extend the loan's maturity beyond the asset's useful life. Refinancing
strategies should prioritize savings due to lower interest rates over savings due to a longer maturity
period, especially if the organization does not have a capital improvement planning process.

Non-profits that are profitable and solvent but not liquid would likely prioritize moving investments
from their diversified equity mutual fund accounts to a money-market mutual fund. While this has the
benefit of providing access to cash, the returns from the money-market mutual fund are significantly
lower. So, while improving the organization's liquidity position is necessary, that strategy would likely
result in a lower profit margin due to changes in investment income. The organization will therefore
need to weigh the cost associated with using a line of credit with foregone revenues from long-term
investments.

We must also recognize that there are strategies that the non-profit has little or no control over. The
sale of surplus property and equipment could take a long time - a reason why we do not suggest
this strategy to address liquidity and do not prioritize this strategy if the organization is not liquid or

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 135
solvent. Funders may not be willing to renegotiate indirect cost recovery rates on existing contracts.
We also know governments are more likely to delay payments in an economic downturn, as they delay
payments to suppliers and vendors as a strategy to manage their cash flows.
Of course, organizations with concerns about all three aspects of financial position might consider
more drastic measures like a merger with another non-profit.

136 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 137
        "SCRUBBING" YOUR EXPENSES

           To "scrub" expenses is to carefully review all current major spending items for potential cost savings. Some contemporary
           examples include:

                 Transition bills to online payments, saving on transaction costs and timing delays associated with processing paper

                         bills.

                 Move employee reimbursements from checks to direct payroll deposits.
                 Renegotiate premiums with your health insurance provider. Bundle different insurance policies with one carrier to

                         improve economies of scale.

                 Hire a human resources consultant to identify appropriate salary ranges for future salary negotiations and collective

                         bargaining.

                 Shift from traditional phone service to a "voice over internet" (VOI) system. VOI generally offers more lines and better

                         reliability at a lower cost.

                 Move to a "multi-platform" plan with your wireless/cellular communications provider. Save money by running phones,

                         iPads, and other wireless devices on one plan.

                 Negotiate with credit card providers for lower annual percentage rates and transaction fees.
                 Consider opening a line of credit with your existing financial institution. Some institutions offer discounts for bundling

                         banking with credit services.

                 Negotiate better terms with your credit card payment processing company. Consider investing in an online processing

                         system that does not require you to lease or purchase credit card terminals.

                 Move from local servers to a cloud-based, server-less computing environment.
                 Explore "software as a service" for typical business applications.

In short, these strategies are some of the most typical for organizations with different financial
position profiles.

138 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
CHAPTER 4.

ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING

                                       ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING: GETTING TO THE NUMBERS

   Information from financial statements helps managers answer many crucial strategic questions:

           How have this organization's past decisions about fundraising, investing in new property and
              equipment, and launching new programs shaped its current financial position?

           How might the timing of a key management decision - such as selling a building or hiring a new
              staff member - affect this organization's financial position?

           How do accounting policy choices regarding depreciation methods, allowances for uncollectable,
              expense recognition, and other areas affect this organization's financial position?

           How should this organization recognize in-kind contributions of goods and services and volunteer
              time?

           Why is a government's government-wide financial position different from the position in its
              governmental funds? Or its enterprise funds?

           Why are this organization's long-term liabilities portrayed differently in its financial statements
              compared to its fund statements?

The City of Rochester, NY, is like most "Rust Belt" cities. It was once a global center of manufacturing,
but since the mid-1980s, it has shed thousands of manufacturing jobs. Tax revenues have lagged,
and the City's overall financial position has slowly eroded. The mayor and other local leaders have
invested substantial public resources in local programs for the past two decades to promote economic
and community development.

Communities like Rochester face a financial dilemma. Some local leaders believe the city should
do much more to promote economic and community development. Despite its financial problems,
Rochester does have one key financial strength: a comparatively low debt burden ($775/capita).
Unlike many of its peers, it has not issued a lot of bonds or other long-term debt that it will need to
repay over time. Some leaders believe it could borrow money to invest in infrastructure projects that
would spur economic growth, grow the tax base and, in effect, pay for themselves. Or at least that's
the theory.

Others disagree. They concur that the city has carefully managed its borrowing and does not owe
investors much money. However, they point out that Rochester has an enormous amount of "other"
long-term debts ($3,927/capita). Principal among them is "other post-employment benefits" or OPEB.
Like many of its peers, Rochester allows its retired city workers to remain on its health insurance

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 139
plan. Moreover, it pays most of the insurance premiums for those retirees and their families. Many
thousands of retired City workers are expected to take advantage of this benefit for years to come.

Under governmental accounting rules, the money Rochester expects to spend on OPEB benefits over
the next 30 years must be recognized as a long-term liability today. Those rules follow from the
idea that employees earn OPEB benefits as part of their salary. Once earned, those benefits become a
liability that appears on the City's balance sheet. Rochester can change those benefits at any time, but
until they do, they remain a long-term obligation of the government.

This anecdote highlights one of the key points of this chapter: How we account for - or "recognize"
- financial activity can have a major impact on how an organization perceives its financial strengths
and weaknesses and how it might choose to manage its finances in response. That is why all public
managers must not only know how to analyze financial statements but also understand the origins of
the numbers that appear in those statements. In other words, they need to know a bit of accounting.
That is the focus of this chapter.

                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

           Understand how typical financial transactions affect the fundamental equation of accounting.
           Recognize revenues and expenses on the accrual basis of accounting.
           Contrast an organization's assets and liabilities with its revenues and expenses.
           Prepare rudimentary versions of the three basic financial statements.
           Understand how routine financial transactions shape an organization's basic financial statements.
           Contrast the recognition concepts in accrual accounting with cash accounting and fund

              accounting.

CORE CONCEPTS OF ACCOUNTING

Now that we've toured the basic financial statements let's take a step back and review how we produce
those statements. Financial statements are useful because they're prepared according to generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP). To understand financial statements, you must know a few of
those principles and how typical financial transactions shape the numbers you see in those statements.
This section covers both these topics.

THE ACCRUAL CONCEPT

Most of us organize our personal finances around the cash basis of accounting. When we pay for
something, we reduce our bank account balance by that amount. When we receive a paycheck, we
increase our bank account balance by that amount. In other words, we recognize financial activity
when we receive or spend cash.

Many small organizations also use cash basis accounting. Many small non-profits and governmental

140 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
entities (e.g., irrigation districts and mosquito abatement districts) keep separate books to track
revenues received and other operating expenses paid.

But for larger and more complex organizations, cash basis accounting tells an incomplete story.
For instance, imagine that Treehouse (the organization in our previous examples) plans to purchase
$20,000 of furniture for its main office. Treehouse will purchase that equipment on credit. That is,
they will order the equipment, the supplier will deliver that equipment and send an invoice requesting
payment, and a few weeks later, Treehouse will write the supplier a check and pay off that invoice.

This transaction will have an impact on Treehouse's balance sheet. It will draw down its cash and
report a fixed asset that will stay on the organization's balance sheet for several years.
Treehouse's stakeholders should know about this transaction sooner rather than later.

But on a cash basis, those stakeholders will not know about this transaction until Treehouse pays off
the invoice. That might be several weeks away. If it is toward the end of the fiscal year - and several
large purchases happen toward the end of the fiscal year - those transactions will not appear on
Treehouse's financial statements until the following year. That is a problem.

That is why most public organizations use the accrual basis of accounting. On an accrual basis, an
organization records an expense when it receives a good or service, whether or not cash changes
hands. In this case, as soon as Treehouse signs the purchase order for the equipment, that purchase
will appear as a $20,000 increase in non-current assets on its balance sheet. It will also record - or
recognize, in accounting speak - an account payable for $20,000. On the accrual basis of accounting,
we can see how this transaction will affect Treehouse's financial position now and in the future.

Keep in mind that accrual accounting assumes the organization is a going concern. That is, it assumes
the organization will continue to deliver services indefinitely. If we are not willing to make that
assumption, then accrual accounting does not add value. In some rare cases, the audit report will
suggest that the auditor believes the organization is not a going concern. In other words, the auditor
believes the organization's financial position is so tenuous that it might cease operations before the
close of the next fiscal year.

We can apply similar logic to the revenue side. Imagine that Treehouse staff run a day-long outreach
program at a local school. The program sensitizes public school teachers about the unique challenges
facing children in the foster care system. They typically charge $2,500 for this type of event. Assume
that Treehouse staff deliver the program and then send the school district a bill for their services.
Treehouse used a lot of staff time, supplies, travel, and other expenses to produce this program, but
they might not get paid for it for several weeks.

On a cash basis, it will be several weeks before we know about expenses incurred and that Treehouse
has earned $2,500 in revenue. But on an accrual basis, Treehouse would recognize expenses incurred
and the revenue earned immediately after delivering the program.

 In accrual accounting, revenues are recorded when entitled, irrespective of receipt of payment,
   and expenses are recorded when resources are used, irrespective of when payment is made.

These two simple transactions illustrate a key point: If the goal of accounting and financial reporting

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 141
is to help stakeholders understand an organization's ability to achieve its mission, then accrual
accounting is far better than cash accounting. That's why the accrual concept is a central principle
of GAAP. From this point forward, we will focus exclusively on how to apply accrual accounting to
public organizations.

THE GENERAL LEDGER AND CHART OF ACCOUNTS

A chart of accounts lists all the organization's financial accounts, along with definitions that clarify how to classify or place
financial activity within those accounts. When accountants record a transaction, they record it in the organization's general
ledger. The general ledger is a listing of all the organization's financial accounts. When the organization produces its financial
statements, it combines its general ledger into aggregated account categories. Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP)
produced by FASB and GASB do not specify a uniform chart of accounts, so account titles and definitions will vary across
organizations. Some state governments require non-profits and governments to follow such a chart, but for the most part, public
organizations are free to define their chart of accounts on their own.

RECOGNITION AND THE FUNDAMENTAL EQUATION

Accountants spend much of their time on revenue and expense recognition. When accountants
recognize a transaction, they identify how it affects the organization's financial position. We
recognize transactions relative to the fundamental equation of accounting.

The fundamental accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Net Assets, must remain balanced
following every transaction. In other words, the net effect of any transaction on the fundamental
equation must be zero. This is also known as double-entry bookkeeping. Consider the previous example:

Transaction 1a: Treehouse signs a purchase agreement with Furniture Superstores, Inc. for $20,000 in office furniture and
equipment. It agreed to pay for the purchase within 30 days.

Assets                     = Liabilities                  + Net Assets
Equipment  + $20,000 Accounts Payable     + $20,000

Here, we recognize (or "book") the purchase of furniture and equipment on the asset side of the
accounting equation. We also need to book an equivalent amount on the liability side to recognize
that we've received a good, but payment has not been made. The liability account - Accounts Payable
- recognizes monies owed to Furniture Superstores. This transaction adds to both sides of the
fundamental equation, so the net effect on the equation is zero.

The purchase of furniture and equipment results in an increase in a non-current asset (equipment).
Amounts due to Furniture Superstores are a current liability, as Treehouse expects to pay it off within
the fiscal year (in this case, 30 days). As a result of this transaction, the non-profit is less liquid.
Note that the impact of a transaction depends on the size of the organization's current or non-
current assets. The transaction will be meaningful if the organization is small but insignificant if the
organization is large.

What happens three weeks later when Treehouse pays for the equipment?

142 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Transaction 2: Treehouse pays the invoice for equipment received in Transaction 1.

Assets                     = Liabilities                                                            + Net Assets
Equipment  - $20,000 Accounts Payable                                               - $20,000

This transaction decreases both sides of the equation. The decrease in cash balances represents
payments to the supplier (accounts payable).

Organizations execute a wide variety of transactions in their day-to-day operations. For most
transactions, you can identify the correct accounting recognition by asking a few simple questions:

    1. Did the organization deliver a good or service?

    2. Did the organization receive a good or service?

    3. Did the organization make a payment?

    4. Did the organization receive a payment?

If the organization delivers or receives a service, the transaction affects revenues and expenses. Note
that revenues will increase net assets, and expenses will decrease in net assets. If the organization
delivered or received a good, the transaction likely affects assets, liabilities, or net assets (as either
revenues or expenses). More importantly, whether or not the transaction affects a liability has to do
with whether a payment was made or a payment was received.

The chart below presents these concepts as a flow chart. Take Transaction 1 as an example. Recall that
Treehouse agreed to purchase furniture and equipment and pay for it later. Has it received a good or
service? Yes, it has received a good, but it has yet to make payment; as a result, we report an increase
in equipment and a corresponding increase in accounts payable.

To reference the flow chart, identify whether the organization was receiving or delivering a good or
service and whether payment has been made. We know Treehouse received the equipment order, but
payment has yet to be made. Therefore, this transaction starts on the bottom left corner of the chart at
"Receive a Good." We know goods have been received, but payment has not been made. We, therefore,
follow the "Payment Not Delivered" line of the flow chart. We would recognize this transaction as an
increase in equipment and accounts payable since Treehouse will pay for this equipment later.

                                          FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 143
TRANSACTION FLOW CHART

With this framework, we can do accounting recognition for most basic transactions. That said,
governments and non-profit organizations have unique rules that apply just in those contexts. We will
cover nuanced accounting rules in the discussion that follows. That said, always remember:

144 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
 The fundamental accounting equation, Assets = Liabilities + Net Assets, must remain balanced
                                                following every transaction.

TRANSACTIONS THAT AFFECT THE BALANCE SHEET

Transaction 1 and Transaction 2 are good examples of financial activity that affects the balance sheet.
You should be aware of a few others. Some transactions affect only the asset side of the equation. For
instance, imagine if Treehouse had purchased the equipment with cash rather than on credit.

Transaction 1b: Treehouse pays for the purchase of $20,000 in furniture and equipment in cash.

Assets                            = Liabilities  + Net Assets
Equipment         + $20,000
Cash              - $20,000

In Transaction 1a, Treehouse purchased office furniture on credit, so we recognized in that
transaction an increase in a liability account - accounts payable. In Transaction 1b, Treehouse paid
for the purchase of equipment in cash. The transaction resulted in a decrease in cash and an increase
in equipment. As we noted earlier, the net effect of any transaction on the fundamental equation must
be zero, even when no liability account or net asset account was affected. Now assume the transaction
was as follows:

Treehouse signs a purchase agreement with Furniture Superstores, Inc. for $20,000 in office furniture and equipment. It paid
for the purchase of equipment upon delivery.

Assets                            = Liabilities                  + Net Assets
Equipment         + $20,000 Accounts Payable     + $20,000
Cash              - $20,000 Accounts Payable     - $20,000

While we report two separate transactions here - the first being the purchase of equipment on credit
and the second being the payment to the supplier - the net effect of this transaction would be an
increase in equipment and a decrease in cash - the same as what we reported in Transaction 1b.

Like most organizations, Treehouse likely purchases a wide variety of services that it uses later.
Examples include insurance, certifications, subscriptions, and professional association memberships.
Treehouse will purchase these services in advance and then use or "expense" them throughout the fiscal
year. These are known as pre-paid expenses. For example:

Transaction 3: Treehouse pays $1,500 for three of its staff to renew their annual memberships to the National Association
for Social Workers.

Assets                          = Liabilities    + Net Assets
Cash              - $1,500
Pre-paid Expense  + $1,500

Organizations like Treehouse almost always have financial assets. Assets like buildings and equipment
are tangible; they have physical substance. Intangible assets include intellectual property, copyrights,

                                                 FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 145
patents, trademarks, goodwill, and software. While rare, public organizations do report intangible
assets.

Financial assets are in between tangible assets and intangible assets. While they are not physical assets,
they are a claim of ownership or a contractual right to payment. If Treehouse holds Boeing stock,
they have a right to dividends the corporation distributes to shareholders. Treehouse can also sell
some or all of its Boeing stock, invest proceeds in the organization, or purchase alternative financial
investments. So even though Boeing stock is not a tangible asset, it is valuable.

We account for financial assets differently. If Treehouse purchases supplies or equipment, it will
record those supplies at historical cost. Supplies or the equipment purchased are valuable because they
help Treehouse deliver programs and services. They are not, however, as valuable as a financial
investment. That is, we do not purchase inventory in the hope that it would appreciate in value. That
is why the historical cost is the appropriate way to value most of Treehouse's non-financial assets.

Financial assets are different because they are, by definition, purchased to generate income. Treehouse
purchased Boeing stock because it expects Boeing to pay dividends to shareholders and the value
of the stock to increase over time. If we want to know if investments added value to Treehouse's
mission, the organization's accounting records need to reflect the market value of those investments at
the end of each financial period. If those investments became more valuable, they are contributing to
the mission. If they have lost value, they are taking resources away from the mission.

That is why we record financial assets at fair value rather than historical cost. Fair value means the
current, observed market price. Investments the organization intends to hold for less than a year that
can be converted to cash are known as marketable securities. Investments the organization plans to
hold longer than one year or those that are less liquid are known simply as investments. Marketable
securities are current assets. Investments can be classified as either a current or a non-current asset.

When an organization puts money into an investment, we record that investment at the purchase
price. In that sense, at the time of the initial investment, fair value is the same as historical cost. For
example:

Transaction 4a: Treehouse purchased 500 shares of Boeing stock on July 1, 2019, at $350.11 per share.

Assets                                 = Liabilities  + Net Assets
Cash                  - $175,055
Investments (Boeing)  + $175,055

The value of any investment portfolio will change unpredictably throughout the financial period.
Since these assets generate investment income, we need to reflect the change in the investment value
in our accounting records.

An increase in value would be reported as a gain, whereas a decrease in value would be reported as a
loss. If Treehouse decided to sell the stock, the gain or loss in the investment value would be reported
as a realized gain or loss. If Treehouse still owns its interest in the stock but the value of that stock has
changed, that gain or loss in value of the investment would be reported as an unrealized gain or loss.
The increase or decrease in value is recorded as a change in net assets. For example:

146 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Transaction 5a: Treehouse sold its 500 shares of Boeing stock on June 30, 2020, at $194.49 per share.

Assets                                 = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                       - $77,810
                       + $97,245
Cash                  - $175,055                      Net Asset
                                                      (Realized Loss)
Investments
(Boeing)

In Investments, we record the sale of these assets at historical cost ($175,055) and deposit the proceeds
from the sale in Cash ($97,245). On the Net Asset column, we report realized loss from the sale of the
stock (i.e., $175,055 - $97,245 =$77,810).

A realized loss has roughly the same effect on the organization's financial position as an unprofitable
program. Both result in a decrease in Treehouse's overall net assets and available resources or assets.
In contrast, if:

Transaction 4b: Treehouse purchased 100 shares of Amazon stock on July 1, 2019, at $1,922.19 per share.

Assets                                 = Liabilities                   + Net Assets
Cash                  - $192,219
Investments (Amazon)  + $192,219

and

Transaction 5b: Treehouse sold its 100 shares of Amazon stock on June 30, 2020, at $2,680.38 per share.

Assets                                 = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                       + $75,819
                      + $268,038
Cash                  - $192,219                      Net Asset
                                                      (Realized Gain)
Investments
(Amazon)

In Investments, we record the sale of these assets at historical cost ($192,219) and deposit the proceeds
from the sale of the asset in Cash ($268,0385). On the Net Asset column, we report realized gain from
the sale of the stock (i.e., $268,038 - $192,219=$75,810).

                                                      FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 147
DIVERSIFIED INVESTMENT PORTFOLIO

Boeing and Amazon stock are included in this discussion for illustrative purposes only. In practice, Treehouse, like most other
non-profits, does not hold individual stocks or bonds but instead invests in mutual funds. Mutual funds pool money from multiple
investors and invest in a diversified portfolio of financial instruments.

Mutual funds diversify on the basis of sector (e.g., technology, financial, retail, consumer, materials, healthcare, utilities),
geography (e.g., domestic, emerging markets, developed markets), size of firm (large - >$10 billion - versus small - <$2 billion),
and investment type (e.g., public equity, private equity, corporate bonds, municipal bonds, and treasury bonds) to name a few.
Investing in mutual funds has the benefit of maximizing returns while mitigating risk at significantly lower investment
management fees.

Fair value accounting is a bit more complex - and interesting! - than historical cost because it
requires organizations to restate the value of their financial assets at the end of every fiscal period. For
Treehouse, this means it would restate the value of all financial investments at the end of each year,
even if it did not sell these investments.

If the stock's price at the time of the re-statement is higher than the previously recorded price,
Treehouse will record an increase in investments on the balance sheet and an unrealized gain on the
income statement. If the stock's price at the time of re-statement is lower than the previously recorded
price, Treehouse will need to record a decrease in investments on the balance sheet and an unrealized
loss in the income statement.

Transaction 6: Treehouse recognizes unrealized gains and losses in Amazon and Boeing stock at the end of FY 2020.

Assets                                = Liabilities  + Net Assets       + $75,819
Investments (Amazon)  + $75,819                                         - $77,810
Investments (Boeing)  - $77,810                      Net Asset
                                                     (Unrealized Gain)

                                                     Net Asset
                                                     (Unrealized Loss)

Unrealized gains and losses do not directly affect the amount of cash reported - hence why they
are euphemistically referred to as paper gains and paper losses. Notwithstanding, unrealized gains or
losses matter, as they represent a real change in the value of financial assets and the resources in
an organization. If Treehouse's holdings of Amazon stock contribute substantial unrealized gains for
several years, management might consider selling its holdings to realize gains and invest in programs,
equipment, or facilities.

148 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
PRACTICE PROBLEM: REALIZED AND UNREALIZED GAINS ON INVESTMENTS

The National Breast Cancer Foundation (NBCF) has a large investment portfolio whose income is used to subsidize the non-profit's
operations. At the start of FY 2020 (i.e., July 1, 2019), NBCF reported $14,780,000 in investments. Over the next 12 months, NBCF
transferred $1,650,000 from cash to investments. It received $450,000 in investment income (i.e., dividend and interest income).
At the end of the year, the investment manager reported realized losses of $175,000 and unrealized gains of $1,250,000.
The investment manager invoiced NBCF $135,000 for investment management services rendered in the year. NBCF paid these in full.

Assuming there were no restrictions on investment income, how much did NBCF report in investment
income (net of expenses) at the end of FY 2020?

         = Dividend & Interest Income + Unrealized Gain (or Loss) + Realized Gain (or Loss) - Management
         Fee
         =$450,000 + $1,250,000 - $175,000 - $135,000
         =$1,390,000
How much did NBCF report in investments at the end of FY 2020?
         = Beginning Balance + Additions - Withdrawals + Unrealized Gain (Loss) + Realized Gain (Loss)
         = $14,780,000 + $1,650,000 - $0 + $1,250,000 - $175,000
         = $17,505,000

                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 149
RELIABILITY AND FAIR VALUE ESTIMATES

GAAP (specifically, FASB Statement 157) classifies investments by a three-level scheme according to the availability of market
prices. Level 1 assets have a quoted price on a public exchange. This includes stocks of public companies and money market funds,
among others. Level 2 assets are primarily sold "over-the-counter," like corporate bonds, futures contracts, stock options, etc.
Here the owner must report an estimated price based on prices of comparable assets that have traded recently. Level 3
assets are not bought and sold and therefore do not have a market price. This includes more exotic investments like venture
capital funds, hedge funds, and private equity. For Level 2 and Level 3 assets, the owner must discount the reported asset value
to account for uncertainty in that valuation.

Public organizations frequently borrow money to finance the purchase of equipment, pay for
renovations to property, purchase new property, or cover operating expenses. Loans include lines
of credit, notes payable, mortgages, and municipal bonds. A line of credit is an agreement between an
organization and a bank that allows that organization to borrow money on short notice at a pre-
determined interest rate. A line of credit can be especially useful if an organization has unpredictable
cash flows. Notes payable are short-term loans with maturities ranging from 18 months up to 60
months. A mortgage is a loan secured with real estate. Unlike mortgages, municipal bonds and notes
are unsecured or secured with pledged revenues, not property. Like mortgages, municipal bonds have
a longer maturity of up to 30 years.

Borrowers have to pay interest on the loans at a fixed rate. There are exceptions. Interest rates on lines
of credit and some municipal bonds are variable or floating rates (e.g., prime rate + 4.00%).

The initial accounting recognition of a loan is simple. The borrowed money, or loan principal, is
recognized as a liability that offsets the cash received from the loan:

Transaction 7: Treehouse borrows $30,000 from a local bank to finance the purchase of a van. The loan is for five years at
seven percent annual interest, and interest is paid annually. Treehouse purchased the van immediately after the loan closed.

Assets                     = Liabilities                         + Net Assets
Cash       + $30,000 Loan Payable (current)       + $6,000
Cash       - $30,000 Loan Payable (non-current)  + $24,000
Equipment  + $30,000

The purchase of a van results in an increase in a non-current asset (equipment). However, the full loan
amount is not a current liability - only the amount due in the next 12 months is reported as a current
liability - and the remainder is a non-current liability. As a result, the non-profit is not less liquid, as
only the current portion of the loan is considered a current liability. On the asset side, cash remains
unaffected, as all the proceeds from the loan were used to purchase the equipment.

Transactions related to repaying debt present some special accounting considerations. Consider the
previous example. Treehouse has agreed to pay interest on the loan each year the loan is active. The
$30,000 loan principal is a liability; the interest on that loan principal is not. Payment of interest on

150 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
the loan is an expense. Treehouse will be paying the bank (or lender) for access to credit, which in
essence, is a "service." For that reason:

Transaction 8: Treehouse makes its first annual principal and interest payment on the loan described in Transaction 7.

Assets                    = Liabilities                    + Net Assets  -$2,100
Cash        - $8,100 Loan Payable (current)  - $6,000 Interest Expense

Since the $30,000 loan is paid off annually over five years, the annual payment on the principal is
$6,000, or $30,000/five years). The interest rate on the loan is seven percent, so interest expense is equal
to $2,100, or $30,000 X 0.07.

In year 2, the current portion of the loan would be $6,000, and the non-current portion would be
$18,000. The total loan outstanding would be $24,000 (i.e., $30,000 - $6,000 or $6,000 + $18,000).

Treehouse would pay $7,680 to cover a $6,000 payment on the loan principal and $1,680 of interest
expense (i.e., $24,000 X 7%).

If Treehouse did not make its interest payments on time, the expense would be recognized as a
liability. The non-profit would also need to recognize as an expense (if paid) or liability (if unpaid) if
the lender imposes additional fines or penalties as a result of non-payment.

TRANSACTIONS THAT AFFECT THE INCOME STATEMENT

Treehouse's mission demands that it focus most of its efforts on delivering services. As a result, most
of its day-to-day financial activity will involve revenues and expenses. Revenues and expenses affect
the income statement.

For instance, recall from the earlier discussion that Treehouse delivers outreach programs at local
schools. When one of those programs is delivered, it records revenue.

Transaction 9a: Treehouse delivers an outreach program at a local school and sends that school district an invoice for $2,500.

Assets                    = Liabilities      + Net Assets                + $2,500
            + $2,500                         Program Revenue
Accounts
Receivable

Here Treehouse has earned revenue because it delivered a program. It recognizes those earned
revenues as "program revenue." Program revenues represent an increase in net assets "without donor
restrictions." Restrictions would apply for public support, including donations, in-kind contributions,
and foundation grants--more on this below.

Did it receive a payment? No. We, therefore, need to recognize a receivable on the asset side. The
receivable is an accounts receivable since revenue is earned. For donations, the receivable would be
pledges receivable; for grants, the receivable would be grants receivable.

Three weeks later, when Treehouse collects payment, it will convert that receivable into cash. That
transaction is as follows:

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 151
Transaction 10: Treehouse receives payment from the school district for the outreach program delivered three weeks ago.

Assets                             = Liabilities                                  + Net Assets
Cash                 + $2,500
Accounts Receivable  - $2,500

Transaction 10 does not affect the income statement but remember that the transaction that resulted
in the original accounts receivable did.

Note, if Treehouse had received payment immediately at the end of the session, then:

Transaction 9b: Treehouse delivered an outreach program at a local school and received a payment of $2,500.

Assets                             = Liabilities    + Net Assets                                + $2,500
Cash                 + $2,500
                                                    Program Revenue
                                                    (Net Assets,
                                                    Without Donor
                                                    Restrictions)

In Transaction 9, Treehouse earned revenue. Of course, that revenue did not just appear.
Treehouse incurred various expenses - staff time, travel, supplies, etc. - to deliver that service. When
should it recognize the expenses incurred to deliver that program? One of the core principles of
GAAP is the matching principle. That is, when we recognize revenue, we should recognize expenses
that were incurred to produce that revenue. This is not always clear for services. Services are driven
by personnel, and we incur personnel expenses constantly. Services also require equipment,
certifications, and other assets where it is not always clear what it means to "use" that asset.

The matching principle is more applicable when the transaction involves a good rather than a service.
When an organization sells a good, it presumably knows what it costs to produce that good. Those
costs, known generally as the cost of goods sold, are immediately netted against the revenue collected
from the transaction. That is why, in the flow chart above, you see some additional recognition related
to delivering goods.

That said, public organizations encounter a few typical transactions that account for many of their
expenses. First and most important is when Treehouse pays its staff and recognizes salary expenses.

Transaction 11: Treehouse recognizes and pays bi-weekly payroll of $15,000.

Assets                               = Liabilities                  + Net Assets                - $15,000
Cash                  + $2,500 Wages Payable        + $15,000 Wage Expense
Cash                 - $15,000 Wages Payable        - $15,000

Payroll is critical because personnel is the largest expense for most public organizations. From the
organization's perspective, payroll is an expense because it receives services from its employees.
That "service" is their day-to-day work. This is different than if the organization hired the one-
time services of, say, a plumber from another company to fix some leaky pipes. But the accounting
recognition is essentially the same.

Keep in mind that there is frequently a lag between when wage expense is recognized and when

152 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
payroll is remitted. The first transaction recognizes the expense; the second transaction recognizes
payment on an outstanding liability. The initial transaction would be reflected in the income
statement; the subsequent transaction would not.

Treehouse incurred other expenses to deliver the school outreach program. The program was held
at a school 100 miles from the non-profit's headquarters. The two staff members who delivered
that program rode together to that off-site location in their personal vehicles. They will expect to
be reimbursed. Many non-profits and government organizations follow the federal government's
guidance and reimburse mileage at a fixed rate of 57.5 cents per mile.

Transaction 12: Treehouse pays mileage expenses of 57.5 cents/mile for a 100-mile round trip for two staff members.

Assets                = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                                                                            - $115
Cash      - $115                     Mileage Expense

To deliver the outreach program, staff used up $100 of construction paper, colored pencils, and other
supplies. Recall that supplies are an asset. To account for the full cost of the outreach program, we
should also recognize that Treehouse "used up" or "expensed" these assets. For example:

Transaction 13: Treehouse expenses $100 in supplies related to its outreach program.

Assets                = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                                                                            - $100
Supplies  - $100                     Supplies Expense

        LIFO AND FIFO

        Inventory presents some unique challenges for accounting recognition. Organizations use inventory all the time, so most have to
        estimate the value of inventory assets at any moment. There are several ways to produce those estimates, including First In, First
        Out (FIFO) , and Last In, First Out (LIFO). For organizations that use a lot of inventory, small changes to inventory valuation can
        significantly change the reported value of inventory and inventory expense. That said, for most public managers, the technical
        aspects of inventory valuation fall squarely within the realm of "know what you don't know."

                                     FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 153
   PRACTICE PROBLEM: EARNED INCOME AND EXPENSES
   The Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA) operates a gift shop and coffee bar. The gift shop reported
   $1,425,000 in revenues (all cash sales). Payroll expenses for the year were $650,000. The Museum
   purchased $325,000 in inventory (for the gift shop) and $145,000 in supplies (for the coffee bar) and
   reported a balance of $45,000 in inventory and $7,000 in supplies.
   Assuming all purchases and expenses had been paid in full, how much did the gift shop report in profits or
   losses in its gift shop operations for the fiscal year?

   So, how much did MCA report in earned income from the gift shop and coffee bar? To estimate profit,
   we review transactions in the Net Asset column of the transaction sheet. As discussed in this chapter, all
   revenues are reported as an increase in net assets, and all expenses are reported as a decrease in net assets.
   Net income (or Change in Net Assets) is the difference between revenues and expenses.
   We estimate the overall profitability was $357,000 (i.e., $1,425,000 - $280,000 - $138,000 - $ 650,000). Net
   income represents an increase in MCA's net worth. If you were to estimate the balances in each asset
   account reported on the right-hand side, you would find the organization's assets also increased by
   $357,000.

154 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
*Assuming MCA reported a zero cash balance at the start of the year, year-end balances were $305,000 (i.e.,
$1,425,000 - $325,000 - $145,000 - $650,000).

Recall that Treehouse also pre-pays for many of its ongoing expenses, such as insurance and
certifications. The choice of when to expense pre-paid items is admittedly arbitrary. Most
organizations have accounting policies and assumptions that state when and how this happens. Most
will record those expenses monthly or quarterly. Recall that Treehouse pre-paid $1,500 for some
annual professional association memberships. Assume that it expenses those memberships quarterly.
At the end of the first quarter, since the membership was paid, it would record:

Transaction 14: Treehouse records quarterly professional association membership expenses. Recall that annual association
dues are $1,500.

Assets                        = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                                    - $375
Prepaid Expenses  - $375                     Membership Expense

Remember that after this first portion is expensed, $1,125 in pre-paid association membership
expenses remains on the balance sheet. In other words, this transaction expenses one-quarter of the
original $1,500 asset.

Another crucial set of accounting assumptions is around depreciation. To deliver services,
Treehouse must use up some portion of its building, vehicles, audiology equipment, and other capital
items. Like with salaries and pre-paid expenses, it's not always clear when and how those assets are
"used up." Some of that use is normal wear and tear. Some of it might happen if the asset bears a
particularly heavy workload. Some capital items might be largely out of use, but they will lose value
because, each year that goes by, they'll become harder for Treehouse to sell should they choose to
liquidate them.

Without a detailed way to measure that wear and tear, accountants typically deal with depreciation
by simplifying assumptions. One of the most common is to use straight-line depreciation, also known as
the straight-line method. Under the straight-line method, when an organization purchases a new capital
asset, it determines the length of time it can use that asset to deliver services. This is known as the
useful life. The organization must also determine the value of that asset once it is no longer useful
for delivering services. This is the salvage value, residual value, or value at write-off. If we subtract the
salvage value from the historical cost and divide it by the useful life, we get the annual depreciation
expense.

For example, let's return to Treehouse's office furniture. Recall that it purchased that furniture for
$20,000. Say that equipment has a useful life of 10 years. Also, assume that at the end of its useful
life Treehouse will be able to sell it for $2,500. To calculate the annual depreciation expense using the
straight-line method, we take the purchase price of $20,000, subtract the salvage value of $2,500, and
divide the difference by 10. The estimated depreciation expense would be $1,750 per year. Using this
assumption, we could record the following transaction:

                                             FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 155
Transaction 15: Treehouse records an annual depreciation expense of $1,750 on its equipment.

Assets                   = Liabilities  + Net Assets                                          - $1,750
Equipment  - $1,750                     Depreciation Expense

After this first recording for depreciation expense, the value of the equipment reflected in the Balance
Sheet will be $18,250 (i.e., $20,000 - $1,750). We refer to the value of assets, net of depreciation, as the
"book value."

Other methods of calculating depreciation expense include accelerated method, declining balance, and
sum-of-the-years method. Underlying assumptions in each method produce different estimates of
depreciation expenses.

PRACTICE PROBLEM: DEPRECIATION

Dorchester Home Health Services (DHHS) is a private, non-profit home health agency. At the start of FY
2020 (i.e., July 1, 2019), DHHS reported $5,900,000 in fixed assets (net of depreciation).

The non-profit sold its existing fleet of vehicles, with a book value of $12,000, for $15,000.

It paid for the new vehicles in cash on October 1, 2019, at a cost of $200,000. Assuming that these vehicles
have a useful life of five years and a salvage value of $20,000, how much should DHHS report in fixed assets
(net of depreciation) at the end of the year? You may assume DHHS uses the straight-line depreciation
method, and the estimated depreciation expense on existing equipment for FY 2020 was $195,000.

   Fixed assets, net of depreciation, at the end of FY 2020:
            = Beginning Balance + Additions - Eliminations - Deprecation
            =$5,900,000 + $200,000 -$12,000 - ($195,000+$27,000)
            =$5,866,000

This same concept of spreading out the useful life also applies to intangible assets. Say, for example,
Treehouse purchases some specialized case management software that allows it to store client records

156 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
safely. That software requires Treehouse to purchase a five-year license. That license is an intangible
asset, and the non-profit expects to utilize the software over the next five years. In this case,
Treehouse would amortize the intangible asset - i.e., recognize that the value of the intangible asset
decreases every year. The expense associated with using that intangible asset is referred to as
amortization expense. If Treehouse purchased a five-year license for $5,000, it would record a $5,000
software license as an asset at that purchase. After that, if it amortized that license in equal annual
installments, the effect on the fundamental equation is as follows:

Transaction 16: Treehouse purchased a records management software for $5,000. Assuming a useful life of five years, the
annual amortization expense is estimated to be $1,000.

Assets                          = Liabilities  + Net Assets
Cash              - $5,000
Software License  +$5,000                      Amortization Expense               - $1,000
Software License  - $1,000

Following this first amortization expense, the license would remain on Treehouse's balance sheet at
$4,000.

Finally, we must consider what happens if Treehouse is paid for a service before it delivers it. This is
known as deferred revenue or unearned revenue. Deferred revenue is a liability because it represents a
future claim on Treehouse resources. By taking payment for a service not yet delivered, Treehouse is
committing future resources to deliver that service. Once it delivers that service, it incurs expenses
and removes that liability.

For example, imagine that Treehouse arranges a $1,500 outreach program with a different school
district. That school district is nearing the end of its fiscal year, so it agrees to pay Treehouse for the
program several weeks in advance. Once it receives that payment, it would recognize that transaction
as follows:

Transaction 17: Treehouse takes a $1,500 payment for a school outreach program to be delivered in the future.

Assets                          = Liabilities  + Net Assets                       + $1,500
Cash              + $1,500                     Deferred Revenue

This initial transaction does not affect the income statement. However, when Treehouse delivers the
program a few weeks later, it records the following:

Transaction 18: Treehouse delivers the school outreach program for which it was paid previously.

Assets            = Liabilities                              + Net Assets
                  Deferred Revenue
                                                             Program Revenue      + $1,500
                                               - $1,500 (Net Assets, Without

                                                             Donor Restrictions)

The key takeaway from all these income statement transactions is simple: For Treehouse to be
profitable, it must take in more revenue from its programs and services than the total payroll and
other expenses it incurs to deliver those programs. If revenues exceed expenses, then its net assets

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 157
will increase. If expenses exceed revenues, then net assets will decrease. That is why, as previously
mentioned, change in net assets is the focal point for much of our analysis of an organization's
financial position.

RECOGNITION CONCEPTS FOR SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

PLEDGES AND DONOR REVENUES

Non-profits aren't traditionally paid for their services. In fact, large parts of the non-profit sector
exist precisely to provide services to those who cannot pay for those services. People experiencing
homelessness, foster children, and endangered species come to mind immediately. Non-profits
depend on donations and contributions to fund those services.

At the outset, it might seem like the accrual concept breaks down here. How can a non-profit
recognize revenue if the recipients of its services do not pay for those services? In non-profit
accounting, we address this problem by simply drawing a parallel between donations and payments
for service. Donors who support a non-profit are, in effect, paying that non-profit to pursue its
mission. Donors may not benefit directly from their contribution, but they benefit indirectly through
tax benefits and a feeling of generosity. Those indirect benefits are substantial enough to support the
accrual concept in this context.

Practically speaking, we address this with a category of net assets called "donor revenue" and a
category of assets called "pledges receivable." For example:

Transaction 19: Treehouse received pledges of gifts in the amount of $2,500 to be used as its Board of Directors considers
appropriate.

Assets                    = Liabilities  + Net Assets        + $2,500
            + $2,500
Pledges                                  Net Asset without
Receivable                               Donor Restrictions
                                         (Public Support)

Most donor revenues happen through the two-step process suggested here. A donor pledges to
donate which is recognized as pledges receivable. GAAP stipulates that a signed donor card or other
documented promise to give constitutes a pledge that can be recognized. Once the donor writes
Treehouse a check for the pledged amount, Treehouse will book the following:

Transaction 20: Treehouse collects the $2,500 pledge recognized in Transaction 19.

Assets                    = Liabilities  + Net Assets
            + $2,500
Cash        - $2,500

Pledges
Receivable

NET ASSETS SUBJECT TO DONOR RESTRICTIONS

One of the big financial questions for any non-profit is how much control it has over where its money
comes from and where it goes. In a perfect world, non-profit managers fund all their operations

158 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
through unrestricted program revenues and donations. It is much easier to manage an organization
when no strings are attached to its money.

Most non-profit managers aren't so lucky. Virtually all non-profits have some restrictions on when
and how their organization can spend money. Donors who want to ensure the organization
accomplishes specific goals will restrict how and when their donation can be spent. Governments do
the same with restricted grants or loans. Some resources, namely endowments, can't ever be spent.

Restricted resources usually appear as "net assets with donor restrictions." Consider this example:

Transaction 21: Treehouse receives a cash donation of $5,000. That gift was accompanied by a letter from the donor to
Treehouse's executive director requesting that the donation be used for staff development.

Assets                = Liabilities  + Net Assets          + $5,000
Cash    + $5,000
                                     Net Asset with Donor
                                     Restriction
                                     (Public Support)

This is a typical revenue subject to donor restrictions. The donor has specified how Treehouse will
use these donated resources. We'd see a similar restriction if the donor had specified that the donation
could not be spent for some period of time.

Previously, net assets with donor restrictions were reported as either temporarily or permanently
restricted net assets. Temporarily restricted net assets were restricted with respect to time or use.
Permanently restricted net assets were permanently restricted and could never be spent. Recent
changes in financial reporting altered the reporting of restricted gifts and aggregated these two
categories, now reported as "Net Assets with Donor Restrictions." While this change altered the
presentation of financial information in the audited financial statements, it did not alter donor intent.
In other words, if a donor had provided a gift to be used in perpetuity, the accounting rules do not
alter that donor's intent. They change how we report that information. The focus is now on all assets
subject to donor restrictions - irrespective of whether they are time-restricted, use-restricted, or the
corpus is restricted in perpetuity.

Our accounting recognition for net asset restrictions is not unlike other transactions that affect the
income statement. The main difference is that with restricted net assets, we have to take the additional
step of "undoing" the restriction once the donor's conditions have been satisfied. For instance:

                                     FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 159
Transaction 22: Treehouse staff attend a national training conference. Travel, lodging, and conference registration expenses
were $3,990. Staff are reimbursed from the resources donated in Transaction 21.

Assets                = Liabilities          + Net Assets

Cash         -$3,990                         Released from           - $3,990
                                             Restrictions            + $3,990
                                             (From Net Assets with   - $3,990
                                             Donor Restrictions)

                                             Released from
                                             Restrictions
                                             (To Net Assets without
                                             Donor Restrictions)

                                             Professional
                                             Development Expense

The first part of this transaction converts donations subject to restrictions to unrestricted revenue.
This is reported in the income statement as "released from restrictions." Treehouse can do this
conversion because it has met the donor's condition: staff attended a professional development
conference. The second part of the transaction recognizes the professional development expenses.
Not all expenses are reported under "Net Assets Without Donor Restriction." No expenses are
reported in the "Net Assets with Donor Restrictions" column. Why? All expenses originate within
the organization and, therefore, cannot be restricted by an external third party. Revenues, on the
other hand, are resources provided to the organization and therefore, can be restricted. After the
transaction, $1,010 of the original gift remains in Treehouse's balance sheet and income statement as
"Net Assets with Donor Restriction."

While we often think of restricted gifts as contributions, restricted gifts do include property and
equipment. Following FASB's Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-14, assets should be released
from donor restrictions when they are placed in service rather than releasing donor restrictions over
estimated useful life (unless otherwise stipulated by the donor). In other words, if the gift of a vehicle
or building is being used as intended by the donor, that asset is reported under "Net Assets without
Donor Restriction."

Net assets restricted in perpetuity (previously classified as permanently restricted net assets) most
often appear as endowment investments. Endowment investments represent a pool of resources that
exists to generate other assets to support the organization's mission. By definition, the donation that
comprises the original endowment - also known as the corpus - cannot be spent. In practice, the
accounting recognition for the formation of an endowment looks like this:

Transaction 23: An anonymous benefactor donates 3,500 shares of Vanguard's Global Equity Investor Fund (a mutual fund)
to Treehouse. The gift stipulates that the annual investment proceeds from that stock support general operations and that
Treehouse cannot, under any circumstance, liquidate the endowment. At the time of the gift, the investment had a fair market
value of $100,000.

Assets                        = Liabilities  + Net Assets            + $100,000
Investments  + $100,000
                                             Net Asset with Donor
                                             Restriction
                                             (Public Support)

Once the endowment is established, it generates investment earnings that are not subject to donor

160 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
restrictions unless otherwise stipulated by the donor. Income from endowment investments is
recorded as "distribution from endowment" or "endowment investment income."

Transaction 24: At the end of the Endowment's first fiscal year, Treehouse receives a dividend check from Vanguard (the
mutual fund manager) for $4,500.

Assets                             = Liabilities  + Net Assets          + $4,500
Cash                 + $4,500
                                                  Net Asset without
                                                  Donor Restriction
                                                  (Investment Income)

If the anonymous benefactor designated the income from the mutual fund to be used for a specific program or activity, the
investment income would be reported under "Net Asset with Restriction."

Assets                             = Liabilities  + Net Assets          + $4,500
                     + $4,500
Cash                                              Net Asset with Donor
(With Restrictions)                               Restriction
                                                  (Investment Income)

Remember, not all investments are endowment investments. The non-profit could report an
investment portfolio significantly larger than its endowment, especially if income from the
endowment exceeds distributions or the non-profit has diverted excess cash to investments over
time. While unrestricted investments are reported together with restricted investments, restricted
investments remain subject to donor restrictions.

Even though the format of the financial statements - Net Assets without Restrictions and Net Assets
with Restrictions - simplifies the presentation of financial information, non-profits must report in
detail about the nature and purpose of Net Assets with Donor Restrictions.

                                                  FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 161
PRACTICE PROBLEM: PUBLIC SUPPORT WITH DONOR RESTRICTIONS

The Museum of Contemporary Art (MCA) receives a $1,000,000 cash gift from Mr. and Mrs. Carter. The
donors have asked the museum to create an endowment for $750,000 and use all other funds to curate a
collection of contemporary music. The donors expect the MCA to create a contemporary music collection
in the summer of 2022.

IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS

In addition to donated revenue, non-profits also depend on donations of goods and services. These
are called in-kind contributions. According to GAAP, a non-profit can record as an in-kind
contribution to specialized services that it would otherwise purchase. This usually means professional
services like attorneys, counselors, accountants, or professional development coaches. We recognize
in-kind services once they've been received, and all the recognition happens in the net assets part of
the fundamental equation. For instance:

Transaction 25: A local attorney agrees to represent Treehouse "pro bono" in a lawsuit filed by the family of a former client.
The attorney's regular rate is $500/hour, and the case requires ten billable hours. Without these pro bono services,
Treehouse would have had to hire outside counsel.

Assets                               = Liabilities  + Net Assets

                                                    Net Asset without         + $5,000
                                                    Donor Restriction         - $5,000
                                                    (In-Kind Public Support)

                                                    Attorney Fees

If in-kind contributions don't result in a net increase or decrease in net assets, then why do we
bother recognizing them? Because recognizing them helps us understand the organization's capacity

162 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
to deliver its services. If it had to pay for otherwise donated goods and services, those purchases would
undoubtedly affect its financial position and its service-delivery capacity.

Some in-kind contributions produce both an in-kind contribution and a donated asset. This is
especially important for services like carpentry or plumbing. For example:

Transaction 26: A local contractor agrees to donate the labor and materials to construct a new playground at Treehouse.
Total labor expenses for the project were $3,000, and the contractor purchased the new playground equipment for $8,000.

Assets                    = Liabilities  + Net Assets              + $3,000
Equipment   + $8,000                                               - $3,000
                                         Net Asset without         + $8,000
                                         Donor Restriction
                                         (In-Kind Public Support)

                                         Contractor Fees

                                         Net Asset Without
                                         Donor Restrictions
                                         (In-Kind Public Support)

The contractor's donated labor is reported as a revenue and an expense, whereas the donated
equipment is reported as an asset and revenue. The asset would then be depreciated over its useful
life.

BAD DEBT

Unfortunately, pledges do not always materialize into contributions. Sometimes the donors' financial
situation changes after making a pledge. Sometimes they have too much wine at a gala event and
promise more than they can give. Sometimes they change their mind. For these and many other
reasons, non-profits rarely collect 100 percent of their pledged revenues.

Most non-profits re-evaluate at regular intervals - usually quarterly or semi-annually - the likelihood
they'll collect their pledges receivable. Once they determine that a pledge cannot or will not be
collected, the amount of pledges receivable must be adjusted accordingly. The accounting mechanism
to make this happen is an expense called "bad debt." Bad debt is a specific type of reconciliation entry
known as a contra-account. Like with depreciation, amortization, and other reconciliations, contra-
account entries do not affect cash flows. They are "write-off" transactions to offset the reduction of an
asset, in this case, pledges receivable. Consider this example:

Transaction 27: Treehouse determines it will not be able to collect $3,000 of pledges made earlier in the fiscal year.

Assets                    = Liabilities  + Net Assets              - $3,000
            - $3,000                     Bad Debt Expense
Pledges
Receivable

When is a pledge deemed uncollectable? That depends on the organization's policies. GAAP rules only
state that an organization must have a policy that dictates how it will determine collectability. To that
effect, non-profit policies state that a pledge is uncollectable after a certain number of days past the
close of the fiscal year or if the donor provides documentation that the pledge is canceled.

Among non-profits, pledges receivable is the most common type of asset to be offset by bad debt

                                         FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 163
expense. However, be aware that bad debt is not unique to non-profits or pledges receivable. For-
profits and governments can and often do record bad debt expenses. Those expenses can apply to
any receivable, including accounts receivable for goods and services previously delivered or grants
receivable from a donor or a government.

MINI CASE: SEATTLE COMMUNITY FOUNDATION

The Seattle Community Foundation (herein referred to as "Foundation"), a non-profit entity that
supports charitable organizations in the Puget Sound area, reported the following transactions for FY 2020
(July 1, 2019 - June 30, 2020). Use this information to prepare a Statement of Activities.

      1. The Foundation has a large portfolio of investments. At the beginning of the year, the fair value
           of the portfolio was $76,850,000. In a 12-month period, the Foundation transferred $4,250,000
           from cash to investments.

Assets                           = Liabilities      + Net Assets
Cash         - $4,250,000
Investments  + $4,250,000

      2. For the year ending June 30, 2020, the Foundation received $650,000 in interest and dividend
          payments. Investment managers reported $675,000 in realized gains and $215,000 in
          unrealized losses. The Foundation reports all investment income (interest and dividend
          payments, realized gains or losses, and unrealized gains or losses) as revenue without donor
          restrictions.

Assets                               = Liabilities  + Net Assets

Cash         - $650,000                             Net Asset without    + $650,000
                                                    Donor Restriction
                                                    (Investment Income)

Investments  + $675,000                             Net Asset without    + $675,000
                                                    Donor Restriction
                                                    (Realized Gains on
                                                    Investments)

Realized gains from investments are reported under investments - not cash - if the investments were sold and the investment manager
immediately purchased alternative investments. If investments were sold and proceeds were transferred to cash, a secondary transaction would be
reported here. For simplicity, we assume that the non-profit did not transfer funds from investments to cash.

Investments  - $215,000                             Net Asset Without    - $215,000
                                                    Donor Restriction
                                                    (Unrealized Loss on
                                                    Investments)

      3. The Foundation held its annual fundraising dinner event on February 18, 2020. The dinner
          raised $1,600,000 in unrestricted support and $3,200,000 in restricted support.

164 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Assets                                = Liabilities  + Net Assets

Pledges Receivable      + $1,600,000                 Net Asset without       + $1,600,000
(Without Donor                                       Donor Restriction
Restriction)                                         (Public Support)

Pledges Receivable      + $3,200,000                 Net Asset with Donor    + $3,200,000
(Without Donor                                       Restriction
Restriction)                                         (Public Support)

Public support with donor restrictions is reported separately from public support without donor restrictions on both the asset side (as pledges
receivable) and on the net asset column (as public support or revenue). See the Statement of Activities below.

      4. As of June 30, 2020, the Foundation had received $825,000 of the $1,600,000 in unrestricted
          support and $1,250,000 of the $3,200,000 in restricted support. Historically, 1.5 percent of all
          pledges have been uncollectable.

Assets                                = Liabilities  + Net Assets

Pledges Receivable      - $825,000
(Without Restrictions)

Cash                    + $825,000
(Without Restrictions)

Pledges Receivable      - $1,250,000
(With Restriction)

Cash                    + $1,250,000
(With Restriction)

Pledges Receivable      - $48,000                    Bad Debt Expenses       - $72,000
(With Restrictions)

Pledges Receivable      - $24,000
(Without Restrictions)

Even though the Foundation received payment on a portion of the pledges subject to donor restriction, receipt of payment does not eliminate the
donor restriction. We therefore report the funds separately as cash balances without restrictions and cash balances with restrictions. See
transaction 5 below.

The Foundation's expenses were as follows:

      5. The Foundation made $2,100,000 in cash awards to various charitable organizations. Of the
           total, $1,250,000 was funded with restricted public support. The remainder was funded with
           unrestricted revenues.

Assets                                = Liabilities  + Net Assets

Cash                    - $2,100,000                 Released from           - $1,250,000
                                                     Restrictions            +$1,250,000
                                                     (From Net Assets with   - $2,100,000
                                                     Donor Restrictions)

                                                     Released from
                                                     Restrictions
                                                     (To Net Assets without
                                                     Donor Restrictions)

                                                     Grant Expense

Public support has to be released from restrictions before it can be expended. Note all expenses are reported in the column "Without Donor
Restrictions." See the Statement of Activities below.

      6. Foundation salaries and benefits were $420,000 for the year. Of the total, $35,000 remained
          unpaid at the end of the year. Fundraising and marketing costs for the year were $150,000. All
          fundraising and marketing expenses had been paid in full by year-end. Other expenses paid in

                                                     FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 165
        full included rent and utilities ($144,000), equipment lease ($12,000), office supplies ($8,500),
        and miscellaneous expenses ($15,000).

Assets                         = Liabilities                            + Net Assets                                 - $420,000
                               Wages Payable           + $420,000 Wage Expense
Cash          - $385,000 Wages Payable                 - $385,000                                                    - $150,000
Cash          - $150,000                                                                                             - $144,000
Cash          - $144,000                                                Marketing Expense
Cash           - $12,000                                                Rent Expense                                  - $12,000
Cash             - $8,500                                               Lease Expense                                   - $8,500
Cash           - $15,000                                                Supplies Expense
                                                                        Miscellaneous Expenses                        - $15,000

      7. On June 28th, the investment manager sent the Foundation an invoice for services rendered in
          FY 2020 for $82,000. The Foundation expected to write a check for the full amount on July 15,
          2020.

Assets                               = Liabilities                                                 + Net Assets
                                     Accounts Payable                              + $82,000 Investment Manager Fee
                                                                                                                     - $82,000

      8. The Foundation purchased $21,000 in computing equipment in cash. The new equipment is
          expected to have a useful life of three years and zero salvage value. Depreciation expenses on
          existing equipment for FY 2020 were expected to be $32,500.

Assets                               = Liabilities                                 + Net Assets

Fixed Assets  + $21,000                                                            Depreciation Expense
                                                                                   Depreciation Expense
Cash          - $21,000

Fixed Assets  - $7,000                                                                                               - $7,000
                                                                                                                     - $7,000
Fixed Assets  - $32,500

Depreciation expense for the new equipment = ($21,000 - $0)/three years = $7,000.

      9. For FY 2020, the Foundation reported $25,000 in interest expense on its long-term debt. The
          Foundation had also made $75,000 in principal payments for the year.

Assets                         = Liabilities                                                       + Net Assets      - $25,000
Cash          - $100,000 Loan Payable                                              - $75,000 Interest Expense

166 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
How much did the Foundation report as Investments on June 30, 2020?
         = Beginning Balance + Additions - Withdrawals + Unrealized Gain (Loss) + Realized Gain (Loss)
         = $76,850,000 + $4,250,000 + $675,000 - $215,000
         = $81,560,000
         (Note: Investment income of $650,000 was reported under Cash, not Investments, so it is not included in the
         balance here)

How much was reported as pledges receivable on June 30, 2020?
         =Public Support - Payment Received - Bad Debt Expense
         =$4,800,000 - $825,000 - $1,250,000 - $24,000 - $48,000
         =$2,653,000

                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 167
        DEBITS AND CREDITS

           You've probably heard accountants talk about debits and credits. They are the basis for a system of accounting shorthand. In this
           system, every transaction has a debit and a credit.
           A debit increases an asset, decreases a liability, or decreases net assets. Debits are always on the left of the account entry. A
           credit decreases an asset account, increases a liability, or increases net assets. Credits are always on the right of the account
           entry.
           Debits and credits must always balance.
           To illustrate, let's say Treehouse delivers a service for $1,000 and is paid in cash. Here, we would debit cash and credit services
           revenue. That entry is as follows:

           For another illustration, imagine that Treehouse receives $500 cash in payment of an account receivable. That entry is:

           If Treehouse purchased $750 of supplies on credit, we would debit supplies and credit accounts payable:

           This system is popular because it's fast, easy to present, and appeals to our desire for symmetry. However, it also assumes you're
           familiar with the fundamental equation and how different types of transactions affect it. If you're new to accounting, this can be a
           big conceptual leap. That's why throughout this text, we present transactions relative to the fundamental equation of accounting
           rather than as debits and credits. We encourage you to try out debits and credits as you work the practice problems throughout
           this text.

168 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
MINI CASE CONTINUED, DEBITS AND CREDITS: SEATTLE COMMUNITY FOUNDATION

      1. The Foundation has a large portfolio of investments. At the beginning of the year, the fair value
           of the portfolio was $76,850,000. In the 12-month period, the Foundation transferred
           $4,250,000 from cash to investments.

      2. For the year ending June 30, 2020, the Foundation received $650,000 in interest and dividend
           payments. Investment managers reported $675,000 in realized gains and $215,000 in
           unrealized losses. The Foundation reports all investment income (interest and dividend
           payments, realized gains or losses, and unrealized gains or losses) as revenue without donor
           restrictions.

      3. The Foundation held its annual fundraising dinner event on February 18, 2020. The dinner
           raised $1,600,000 in unrestricted support and $3,200,000 in restricted support.

      4. As of June 30, 2020, the Foundation had received $825,000 of the $1,600,000 in unrestricted
           support and $1,250,000 of the $3,200,000 in restricted support. Historically, 1.5 percent of all
           pledges have been uncollectable.

The Foundation's expenses were as follows:
      5. The Foundation made $2,100,000 in cash awards to various charitable organizations. Of the

                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 169
              total, $1,250,000 was funded with restricted public support. The remainder were funded with
              unrestricted revenues.

         6. Foundation salaries and benefits were $420,000 for the year. Of the total, $35,000 remained
              unpaid at the end of the year. Fundraising and marketing costs for the year were $150,000. All
              fundraising and marketing expenses had been paid in full by year-end. Other expenses paid in
              full included rent and utilities ($144,000), equipment lease ($12,000), office supplies ($8,500),
              and miscellaneous expenses ($15,000).

         7. On June 28th, the investment manager sent the Foundation an invoice for services rendered in
              FY 2020 of $82,000. The Foundation expected to write a check for the full amount on July 15,
              2020.

         8. The Foundation purchased $21,000 in computing equipment in cash. The new equipment is
              expected to have a useful life of three years and zero salvage value. Depreciation expenses on
              existing equipment for FY 2020 were expected to be $32,500.

         9. For FY 2020, the Foundation reported $25,000 in interest expense on its long-term debt. The

170 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
              Foundation had also made $75,000 in principal payments for the year.

RECOGNITION CONCEPTS FOR MODIFIED ACCRUAL ACCOUNTING

Governmental funds, and the modified accrual basis of accounting on which they are prepared,
focus on expendable financial resources. Taxpayers want to know that their government used its
current financial resources to meet its current financial needs. This is, once again, a core part of how
accountants think about inter-period equity. If a government pushes costs into future fiscal periods,
future taxpayers will have to pay more taxes or expect fewer services.

For this reason, when thinking about the fund financial statements, we need to re-think how we
recognize certain revenues. Instead of focusing recognition on when a government "earns" revenue,
we focus instead on when the government has an inflow of financial resources. As a corollary, this
focus on financial resource inflows means we naturally focus on resources that are available to pay
for obligations or will become available soon. Specifically, GAAP for governments requires that for
revenue to be recognized in the current fiscal period, it must be measurable and available.

      Measurable means the government can reasonably estimate how much it will collect. For taxes
         like property taxes, this is easy. They're measurable because the government determines what
         a taxpayer owes and then sends a bill. But for sales taxes, income taxes, or other revenues,
         measurable might require some reasonable estimates.

      According to GAAP, available means revenue is recognized during the fiscal period for which
         it's intended to pay liabilities or up to 60 days after the close of that fiscal period. Again, this is
         not always clear. For instance, when does an intergovernmental grant become available if it
         requires the government to perform certain services or incur certain expenditures?

These adaptations to GAAP are collectively known as modified accrual accounting or euphemistically
as fund accounting.

Here are a few hypothetical transactions to illustrate those concepts. We'll recognize all these
transactions in the fund financial statements and, thus, on the modified accrual basis. If we recognized
these transactions in the government-wide statements, the normal accrual concepts would apply. To
simplify, we restate the fundamental equation as

                                           Assets = Liabilities + Fund Balance.

In Chapter 1, we said the property tax is the local revenue workhorse. So, let's start there. Let's
assume Bothell sends out its annual property tax bills in January. Those bills are based on the City's
assessed value, property tax rates, and applicable tax preferences. After running calculations, Bothell

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 171
determines it will send out $515 million in property tax bills. From past experience, it also knows it
will only collect a portion of those bills.

Property taxes are imposed non-exchange revenues, meaning they are not related to a specific
transaction. As such, they become measurable and available when the government imposes them. As
soon as property taxes are imposed, Bothell has a legal claim to them and can expect to receive a
payment within 60 days. In this case, to impose them means to levy them or to send out property tax
bills.

Transaction 28: In January 2019, Bothell levies property taxes of $515 million for the year. It is estimated that $15 million
will be uncollectible.

Assets                          = Liabilities                           + Net Assets
              + $515MM Deferred Property Tax Revenue
Property Tax                                          + $500MM
Receivable
                                                                        Allowance for Uncollectable
                                                                        Property Taxes               + $15MM

This recognition records Bothell's property tax levy. What happens then when Bothell collects these
property taxes?

Transaction 29: Throughout 2019, Bothell collected $410 million in property taxes. It collects $30 million of the remaining
2019 taxes during each of the first two months of 2020 and estimates that the $15 million balance will be uncollectable.

Assets                          = Liabilities         + Net Assets
Part a
Cash          + $470MM                                - $410MM Property Tax Revenue                  + $410MM
Property Tax  - $470MM                                 - $60MM Property Tax Revenue                   + $60MM
Receivable
Part b                          Deferred              Delinquent Property                            - $15MM
                                Property Tax          Tax
Part c                          Revenue
Property Tax                    Deferred
Receivable                      Property Tax
                                Revenue

               - $15MM

Note of the $515 million in property tax revenue, $410 million is collected in the year and $60 million
will be collected in the first 60 days (i.e., $30 million/month x two months).

We recognize these collections in four different parts. Part a) recognizes the collection of property
taxes throughout 2019 and during the first two months of 2020. Bothell collected $30 million in each
of the first three months, but according to GAAP, only the first 60 days are available. Part b) converts
deferred revenues into property tax revenues for the taxes collected during 2019 and does the same
for the taxes collected during the first two months of 2020. Part c) recognizes a write-down of the
uncollectable property taxes.

172 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Note that this recognition approach would also apply to the other non-exchange revenues, including
fines and fees. Those revenues are also recognized when they are levied or imposed.

Sales and income taxes are the most common type of derived taxes, meaning the taxes collected are
derived from another transaction. For derived taxes, the revenues become measurable and available
when the underlying transaction occurs. For sales taxes, those transactions are taxable retail sales. For
income taxes, it's a bit more abstract. The "transaction" in question is when an employer pays wages
to an employee, and that transaction denotes the earnings on which the income tax is based.

Let's look at a hypothetical sales tax recognition in Bothell:

Transaction 30: In December 2019, merchants in Bothell collected $20 million in local sales taxes; $12 million was collected
prior to December 15 and must be remitted by February 15, 2020, and the remaining $8 million must be remitted by March
15, 2020. How should Bothell recognize these December 2019 sales?

Assets                      = Liabilities                 + Net Assets
                                            + $8MM Sales Tax Revenue
Sales Tax   + $20MM
Receivable
                            Deferred Sales
                            Tax Revenue                                 + $12 MM

According to GAAP, Bothell should recognize the assets from derived revenues during the period
when the underlying transaction takes place. That's why it records all $20 million as sales taxes
receivable. At the same time, it will only collect $12 million within 60 days of the end of the fiscal
year, so only that portion is considered available and should be recognized now. The remaining $8
million will become available later, so for now, it's considered deferred revenue. We would see a
similar pattern with income taxes and other derived revenues.

A government recognizes an inter-governmental grant when it has satisfied all the eligibility
requirements. Only then are grants considered measurable and available.

Transaction 31: In October 2019, Bothell was notified that it would receive a $15 million grant from the state's Clean Water
Revolving Fund. The funds, transmitted by the state in December 2015, must be used for stormwater infrastructure upgrades
but may be spent at any time.

Assets                      = Liabilities   + Net Assets
Cash        - $15MM                         Grant Revenue

                                                                        - $15 MM

The State has placed a purpose restriction on this grant. Purpose restrictions do not affect the
measurability or availability of the grant revenues. That said, because they are subject to a purpose
restriction, Bothell should recognize these revenues in a special revenue fund.

Many intergovernmental grants take the form of reimbursements. In this case, the revenues are not
available until the government incurs the allowable costs stipulated by the grant.

Transaction 32: In December 2019, Bothell was awarded a grant of $400,000 to train community police officers. During the
year, it spends $300,000 in allowable costs, for which it is reimbursed $250,000. It expects to be reimbursed for the
$50,000 balance in January 2020 and to expend - and be reimbursed - for the remaining $100,000 of its grant throughout

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 173
2020. It must incur allowable costs to remain eligible for the grant.

Assets                             = Liabilities                       + Net Assets            - $300,000
Cash              - $300,000                                                                   + $300,000
Grant Receivable  + $300,000                                           Training Expenditures
Cash              + $250,000
Grant Receivable  - $250,000                                           Grant Revenue
                                                                       (Community Policing)

We recognize police officer training expenditures first, as the grant is on a reimbursement basis. The
second transaction recognizes reimbursement on the grant. Note the reimbursement falls short of
total expenditures, so the balance on the grant receivable is $50,000.

For this grant, Bothell must first incur the requisite expenditures before it recognizes the grant
revenues. In part a) it incurs those expenditures. In part b) it recognizes that it was reimbursed
$250,000 cash. The city records grants receivable for the portion it expects to collect within 60 days
of the end of the fiscal year and records the $300,000 in grant revenue (Community Policing Special
Revenue Fund) - the amount of the grant it expects to be reimbursed.

And finally, let's look at another unique revenue recognition treatment: sales of fixed assets. It's not
uncommon for governments to sell buildings and other fixed assets. In the fund financial statements,
the value of such a sale is equal to the sale proceeds. This seems simple, but it's quite different from
the government-wide statements, where we'd recognize the difference between the sale proceeds and
historical cost plus accumulated depreciation.

Transaction 33: On December 31, 2019, Bothell purchased a new police car for $40,000. On January 2, 2020, the vehicle
was damaged in an accident. The city is able to sell the nearly demolished vehicle for $5,000.

Assets                          = Liabilities                          + Net Assets
Cash              + $5,000
                                                                       Other Financing
                                                                       Sources                 + $5,000
                                                                       (Proceeds from Sale of
                                                                       Assets)

It might seem strange that $35,000 worth of a $40,000 vehicle was lost, but the only impact on
Bothell's governmental fund statements is an increase in cash. And yet, that's precisely how we would
recognize this transaction on the modified accrual basis. Why? Recall that we do not recognize fixed
assets in the governmental fund statements because those funds are focused on near-term financial
resources. Fixed assets are, of course, a long-term financial resource.

Fortunately for the readers of Bothell's financial statements, Bothell would recognize the sale of the
$35,000 of asset value in the Statement of Net Position.

174 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
EXPENDITURE RECOGNITION CONCEPTS

Expenditures in the governmental funds, according to GAAP, result in a decrease in the net financial resources. An expense is, on
an accrual basis, a reduction of overall net assets. How are they different? Or, to put it more practically, when are expenses, not
expenditures?
For most governments, major expense items are expenditures because they result in a reduction of financial resources. When a
government pays salaries, it has less cash and, in turn, fewer current financial resources to use to apply to other spending needs
in the immediate future. So practically speaking, expenditures and expenses are not that different.
There are, however, a few instances where expenses are not expenditures. If a government agrees to pay a legal settlement, it
will recognize an expenditure only if that settlement is paid out of current financial resources. If that payment is paid by the
government's insurance company or is paid out of long-term financial reserves, then no expenditure is recognized. Another is
repayments of long-term debt. Here a government reports an expenditure as payments are made, but unlike on the accrual basis,
interest on the debt is not accrued. This also applies to other occasional transactions in areas like inventory and pre-paid items.
But in general, most expenditures are recognized much the same as expenses.

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 175
CHAPTER 5.

COST ANALYSIS

                                               COST ANALYSIS: WHAT DOES THIS COST?

   Cost analysis is useful for addressing several key questions that managers ask:
           Will the revenue from a new grant opportunity cover the costs of expanding a program?
           Will a program or service benefit from economies of scale? If not, why not?
           How much should we budget for a new staff member? To add a new shift or another group of new
              staff?
           How much "overhead" or "indirect costs" should we negotiate into a contract with a government?
           What price should we set for a new fee-based service?
           When will we need to add more staff, and how will adding staff affect our cost structure?
           What's the best way to share costs between departments within an organization? Between
              organizations? Between units of government?

In February 2016, a federal judge in Albuquerque, NM, approved a $1 billion settlement between the
Obama administration and nearly 700 Native American tribes. This settlement ended a decades-long
class action lawsuit over how the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) had distributed aid to tribes since the
mid-1970s.

This case came about because of some disagreements over how to measure costs. For over 150
years, the BIA was directly responsible for most of the health care, education, economic development,
and other core services delivered on Native American reservations. But then, starting in the
mid-1970s, it shifted its focus from direct service provision to helping tribes become self-sufficient.
Instead of managing services, it redirected its resources toward training, technical assistance, and
other efforts to help tribes launch and maintain their own services.

To make that transition, BIA re-classified many of its activities as "contract support costs." This
change was not just semantic. Funding for direct BIA-administered services is part of a regular federal
budget appropriation. That appropriation was stable and predictable. By contrast, funding for support
costs on federal government contracts is variable and is often subject to renegotiation. Perhaps not
surprisingly, BIA spending declined steadily under this new capacity-building model.

Tribes across the US argued that by re-classifying many of BIA's costs, the federal government gave
itself permission to slash BIA's budget without Congressional approval. The tribes alleged that this
simple cost measurement maneuver allowed BIA to operate well outside its authority and inflict

176 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
substantial harm on Native Americans around the country. BIA argued that the cost reclassification
was a standard accounting change that had been happening across the federal government for
decades. The case was ultimately settled for far less than the tribes requested. Still, the federal
government did agree to re-classify contract support costs as direct service costs, for which federal
funding is far more transparent and predictable.

This case illustrates the central point of this chapter. How we define and measure costs matters
tremendously. In this instance, cost measurement is not just a technical exercise; it had real impacts
on the lives of hundreds of thousands of Native Americans. The same is true for virtually all public
services. How we define, measure, and plan for costs affects which services we deliver and how we
deliver them.

                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:

           Define the cost objective and relevant range for the goods and services that public organizations
              deliver.

           Contrast fixed costs with variable costs.
           Contrast direct costs with indirect costs.
           Allocate costs across departments, organizations, and jurisdictions.
           Determine the full (or total) cost of a good or service.
           Prepare a flexible budget for a program or service.
           Calculate the break-even price and break-even quantity for a good or service.
           Contrast cost-based pricing with price-based costing.
           Recommend management strategies and policies informed by analysis of costs "at the margin."
           Analyze budget variances, both positive and negative.

WHAT IS COST ANALYSIS?

If you've ever flown on an airplane, there's a good chance you know Boeing. The Boeing Company
generates around $90 billion each year from selling thousands of airplanes to commercial and military
customers around the world. It employs around 200,000 people, and it's indirectly responsible for
more than a million jobs through its suppliers, contractors, regulators, and others. Its main assembly
line in Everett, WA, is housed in the largest building in the world, a colossal facility that covers nearly
a half-trillion cubic feet. Boeing is, simply put, a massive enterprise.

And yet, Boeing's managers know the exact cost of everything the company uses to produce its
airplanes, every propeller, flap, seat belt, welder, computer programmer, and so forth. Moreover, they
know how those costs would change if they produced more or fewer airplanes. They also know the
price at which they sold that plane and the profit the company made on that sale. Boeing's executives
expect their managers to know this information in real time if the company is to remain profitable.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 177
Cost accounting (also known as managerial accounting) is the process of creating information
about costs to inform management decisions.

Managers need good information about costs to set prices, determine how much of a good or service
to deliver, and manage costs in ways that make their organization more likely to achieve its mission.
Managers in for-profit entities like Boeing have instant access to sophisticated cost information that
would assist with those types of decisions. But managers in the public and non-profit sectors usually
don't. There are many reasons for this:

      Large parts of the public sector do not produce a "product," but they deliver services like
         counseling juvenile offenders, protecting the environment, or housing people experiencing
         homelessness. Sometimes, we know the "unit" of production and can measure costs relative to
         that unit. In the case of counseling juvenile offenders, we might think about the cost per
         offender to provide those services. But for services without a clear "end user," like
         environmental protection, this analysis is much more difficult.

      Most (usually around 80 percent) of the costs incurred by a typical public sector organization
         are related to people. A parole officer will see many different types of parolees. Some will
         demand a lot of attention and follow-up. Some will need next to none. Some parole officers
         are comfortable giving each case equal time and attention. Others are not. This type of
         variability in how and where people spend their time, and as a result, where labor costs are
         incurred, can make cost analysis quite difficult.

      Employees often work across multiple programs. A program manager at a non-profit
         organization might work across two programs funded by two different grants from two
         funding agencies. Unless that program manager allocates their time exactly equally across
         both programs - and that's unlikely - we can't know the exact cost of each program without a
         careful study of how and where that employee spends their time.

      Public services often share buildings, equipment, vehicles, and other costs. It isn't easy to
         know the full cost of services without a system to track which staff and programs use exactly
         which resources.

      Good cost analysis has no natural political constituency. Careful cost analysis requires
         substantial investments in information technology, staff capacity, accounting information
         systems, and other resources. Most taxpayers and funders would rather see that money is
         spent on programs and services to help people in the short term rather than on information
         systems to analyze and plan for future costs.

These are just a few of the many barriers that prevent public organizations from acting more like
Boeing, at least with respect to cost analysis.

And yet, good cost analysis is critical to public organizations. Public financial resources are finite,
scarce, and becoming scarcer. Public managers must understand how and where they incur costs,
how those costs will differ under different service delivery models, and whether that pattern of costs
is consistent with their organization's mission and objective. In this chapter, we introduce the core
concepts of cost accounting and show how to apply those concepts to real management decisions.

178 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
At the outset, it is essential to distinguish between full-cost accounting and differential-cost accounting.
Full cost accounting is the process of identifying the full cost of a good or service. Differential cost
accounting - sometimes called marginal cost analysis - is the process of determining how the full cost
of a good or service changes when we deliver more or less of it. Sound financial management requires
careful attention to both.

Let us start with a simple example. Imagine a copying machine that is shared among three
departments within the Environmental Health Department of a county government. Those three
departments are:

    1. Food Protection. This includes inspection and licensing of restaurants and other
         establishments that serve food. This program is designed to prevent outbreaks of food-borne
         diseases like E. coli, botulism, and Hepatitis A. Staff in this division make around 500 copies
         each day, mostly related to documenting restaurant inspections.

    2. Animals and Pests. This includes animal control, rodent testing and control, and educational
         programs to promote pet safety and neutering/spaying. These programs are designed to
         prevent communicable diseases, including rabies, that vagrant animals most often spread.
         Staff in this division make around 250 copies each day, but that number can increase in the
         event of an outbreak of avian flu or other communicable disease.

    3. Wastewater. The Wastewater Department is responsible for treating wastewater. Staff in this
         division issue water discharge permits to businesses and industrial operations and test water
         quality near wastewater discharge sites. These programs are necessary to prevent waterborne
         communicable diseases like cryptosporidium. Wastewater staff typically make around 100
         copies daily but make up to 1,000 per day when processing complex industrial building
         permits. They process around six such permits each year.

As a manager, you would want to know what it costs to operate the copier and how those costs should
be spread across the three departments. To put this question in the language of cost accounting, we
want to know:

    a. What is the full cost of operating the copier?
    b. How should we allocate the costs of operating the copier across the three departments?

To answer these questions, we first need to know all of the different ways the copier incurs costs. A
few come to mind immediately: paper and toner to make the copies, a lease or rental payment to take
possession of the copier, and the occasional maintenance and repairs. A few might be less obvious:
electricity to run the machine, space within a building to house the copier, and an office manager's
time to coordinate maintenance and repairs. We can observe many of these costs, but we'll need to
estimate or impute others.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 179
        COST VS. PRICE

           It's important at the outset to distinguish between cost and price. Cost is what you give up. Costs include money, time,
           uncertainty, and, most importantly, the opportunity to invest time or money in another project. In public financial management,
           we usually talk about cost in terms of the measurable, direct, and indirect financial expenses required to produce or acquire a
           good or service. Price is the market rate, or "sticker price," of a good or service.

           Most public services are delivered "at cost," meaning they are priced to generate enough revenue to cover the full cost to deliver
           them, but not more. The late management guru Peter Drucker called this cost-based pricing. By contrast, many for-profit goods
           and services are sold at prices well in excess of cost. For instance, most wines are priced at 100-200% above the full cost to
           produce them. A box of popcorn at the movies is usually priced at 700-800% above cost. And so forth. Wine retailers and
           cinemas will sell these products at whatever price consumers are willing to pay, regardless of what they cost to produce. Drucker
           called this price-based costing. Virtually all highly profitable businesses design the cost structure of their products and services
           around what consumers will pay. The opposite is also true. For-profits often sell goods and services at prices well below cost - a
           so-called "loss leader" - to attract customers. Most public organizations cannot engage in price-based costing tactics and expect
           to accomplish their missions and remain financially sound.

The next question is how the departments should share these costs. Imagine, for instance, that they
split those costs one-third for each department. This approach is simple, easy, and transparent. But
what's wrong with it? Each department makes a different number of copies, and each has a different
workflow related to the copier. These departments also have different potential "economies of scale"
for copying. Also, keep in mind that the Animals and Pests department will need "emergency" or
"surge" capacity while the other two departments may not. So, if an even distribution is not the most
appropriate, what is? With careful attention to cost accounting methods, we can begin to address these
and other questions.

FULL COST ACCOUNTING

MEASURING FULL COST: THE SIX-STEP METHOD

To answer the question "what does this service cost?" cost accountants follow a six-step process.
Each step of this process is driven by policies and procedures that are defined by an organization's
management:

To answer the question "what does this service cost?" cost accountants follow a six-step process. Each
step of this process is driven by policies and procedures defined by an organization's management.

    1. Define the cost object. The cost object is the product or deliverable for which costs are
         measured. Service-oriented public organizations typically define cost objects in terms of the
         end user or recipient of a service. Examples include the cost to shelter a person experiencing
         housing insecurity for an evening, the cost per counseling session delivered to recovering
         substance abusers, the cost to place a family in affordable housing, and so forth.

    2. Determine cost centers. A cost center is a part of an organization that incurs costs. It could be
         a program, a unit within a department, a department, a grant, a contract, or any other entity
         defined for cost accounting purposes. Generally, cost centers work best for homogeneous
         groupings of activities.

180 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
    3. Distinguish between direct and indirect costs. Direct costs are connected to a specific cost
         center. In fact, they are often called "traceable costs." Examples include salaries for staff who
         work entirely within a cost center, facilities and supplies used only by that cost center,
         training for cost center-specific staff, etc. Many public organizations further stipulate that a
         cost is direct to a cost center only if that center's management can control it. Indirect costs
         apply to more than one cost center. They include shared facilities, general administration,
         payroll processing services, and information technology support. Some managers call them
         service center costs, internal service costs, or overhead costs because they are usually for support
         services provided within an organization.

    4. Choose allocation bases for indirect costs. One of the main goals of full-cost accounting is
         to distribute indirect costs to cost centers. This follows from the logic that all direct costs
         require support from within the organization. An allocation basis is an observable metric we
         can use to measure the relationship between direct and indirect costs within a cost center. For
         example, a non-profit might allocate indirect costs according to the number of full-time
         equivalent (FTE) employees within a cost center or the percentage of the organization's
         overall payroll earned by employees within that cost center. The full cost of any service is
         the sum of direct costs plus the unit's share of indirect costs.

    5. Select an allocation method. There are two main methods to allocate or apportion indirect
         costs to cost centers. One simply calls indirect costs their own cost centers and
         plans accordingly. For instance, a non-profit could choose to call the executive director its
         own cost center. In that case, it would plan for and report the executive director's salary,
         benefits, and other costs as a stand-alone entity rather than allocate those costs as an indirect
         cost to other direct service cost centers. A more common approach is to allocate by a
         denominator that is common to all the cost centers that incur a particular indirect cost (see
         below).

    6. Attach costs to cost objects. One of the biggest challenges for public organizations is that cost
         objects are usually people, and no two people are alike. For instance, a parole officer might
         have 30 clients, but each requires a different amount of time, attention, and counseling. When
         the cost per client varies a lot, the cost accounting system should reflect those differences,
         usually by applying different overhead rates or percentages to different types of clients.

Let's illustrate some of these concepts with the copier example. To begin, assume that the copier is a
cost center. Services like copying, information technology, and payroll exist to serve clients within the
organization, so they are called service centers. One of the goals of cost accounting is to allocate service
center costs to mission centers that are more directly connected to the organization's core programs
and services. In this case, we can assume Food Inspection, Animals and Pests, and Wastewater are
mission centers that will ultimately receive costs allocated from the copier service center. Given those
assumptions about cost centers, we can assume the cost object for the copier service center is the cost
per copy.

With those assumptions established, we can define direct and indirect costs for the copier
service center. Direct costs include paper, toner, rental/lease fees for the copier, and machine
maintenance. These costs are incurred exclusively by the copier. Electricity, building space, and the

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 181
office manager's time are indirect costs. They are incurred by the copier cost center and by other cost
centers.
To illustrate, the table below lists some details on the copier's costs.

        THE GAP IN COST ACCOUNTING STANDARDS

           Keep in mind that there are no national or international standards for how public organizations measure and define their cost
           structures, also known as their cost accounting practices. Governments employ a variety of state- and local-specific cost
           accounting methods. Non-profits tend to follow the cost accounting conventions prescribed by federal and state grants or major
           foundations, but those conventions do not equate to national standards. By contrast, financial accounting - or accounting
           designed to report financial results to outside stakeholders - is dictated by GAAP. That's why it's possible to compare a
           government's financial statements to that of another government and a non-profit's financial statements to that of another
           non-profit, but not necessarily possible to compare different organizations' budgets or internal cost accounting systems.

INDIRECT COST ALLOCATION: COST DRIVERS AND ALLOCATION BASES
To find the full cost of the copier cost center, we'll need to find some way to allocate its share
of indirect costs to it. A good cost allocation scheme follows from a clear understanding of an
organization's cost drivers. A cost driver is a factor that affects the cost of an activity. A good cost driver
is a reliably observable quantity that shares a consistent relationship with the indirect cost in question.
Fortunately, we have an intuitive cost driver for the copier cost center: the number of copies.
Ideally, we can allocate indirect costs according to their key cost driver(s). An allocation basis is a cost
driver common to all the cost centers that incur an indirect cost. For building space, for example,
we might find the portion of the total building space that is occupied by the copier and allocate a
proportionate share of the building space costs to the copier copy center.
For example, this county government allocates electricity costs to different cost centers per kilowatt

182 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
hour (kWh). Sometimes it is feasible to measure electricity use with this level of precision, and
sometimes it is not. Assume that the copier has an individualized meter measuring its electricity use.
This government allocates building space costs per square foot. This assumes it has a reasonably
sophisticated way to measure how much space each cost center uses. Allocations by space can be
contentious because not every unit uses space in quite the same way to accomplish its mission. For
instance, most Food Protection staff spend most of their time in the field inspecting restaurants. They
report to the office at the beginning and end of the day but infrequently during the day. This is quite
different from the Animals and Pets center, where most of the staff spend most of their time in the
office.
These figures also assume that the government allocates the office manager's time to individual cost
centers. The office manager can do this if they track the amount of time they spend on work related
to each cost center. Some public organizations have systems, often based on a billable hours concept,
similar to those used by professionals like lawyers or accountants. Many do not.

        MORE ON COST DRIVERS

           One of the big challenges in cost accounting is identifying appropriate cost drivers and allocation bases. Each indirect cost item is
           a bit different and requires a slightly different concept to support an allocation basis. In fact, many public organizations do not
           allocate indirect costs precisely because they cannot agree on allocation bases that make sense across an entire organization.
           That said, many of the most common indirect costs can be allocated using simple metrics that can be computed with existing
           administrative data.
           Here are a few examples:

Also, note that the copier cost center does not receive overhead from other service centers. We don't
see, for example, that the copier center is allocated a portion of the county administrator's salary,
insurance expenses, or other organization-wide indirect costs. This is a policy choice. Some public
organizations do not require service centers to receive overhead costs, mostly to keep down the rates

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 183
they must charge their internal clients. Many state and local governments have budgeting rules that
state programs - if independently financed or paid for with specific fees or charges rather than general
fund resources - do not need to allocate their indirect costs or receive an indirect cost allocation.

That said, many public organizations allocate overhead to internal cost centers. In fact, when they do,
they typically use the step-down method of allocating indirect costs. That is, they allocate organization-
wide indirect costs to all cost centers first, then allocate service center costs, including their portion
of the organization-wide indirect costs, to the mission centers.

With those assumptions in place, recall that:

      The Food Protection mission center averages 500 copies each day. Assuming 260 workdays/
         year, that is 130,000 copies (i.e., 500 copies x 260 days). In this case, the 130,000 copies are the
         relevant range or the amount of activity upon which our cost analysis is based. Assuming the
         Food Protection mission center would require twice as many copies, our per-unit costs and
         cost allocations would look quite different. Good cost analysis follows from clear, defensible
         assumptions about the relevant range of activity that will drive costs.

      The Animals and Pests mission center makes 250 copies each day but makes many more in the
         event of a communicable disease outbreak. Assuming no outbreak, that is 65,000 copies (i.e.,
         250 copies x 260 days).

      The Wastewater division makes 100 copies daily and up to 1,000 copies around six times
         yearly when processing complex permits. Let's assume a typical surge in copies for a complex
         permit will last for five days. That would mean 230 typical days and 30 "surge days" (i.e., six
         permits x 5 days/permit). So total number of copies would be around 53,000 (i.e., typical day
         copies of 100 copies X 230 days + and surge days copies of 1,000 copies X 30 days).

From these figures, we can determine that the copier will make 248,000 copies each year (i.e., 130,000
copies + 65,000 copies + 53,000 copies).

If we divide the full annual cost of the copier by the number of copies ($21,380/248,000 copies), we
arrive at a unit cost of $0.0862/copy (i.e., 8.62 cents per copy).

With those full costs established, we must ask how the Environmental Health Department should
allocate the full costs of the copier cost center across the three mission center departments.
Fortunately, this is easy to do because the copier cost center has a clear cost object (cost per copy), and
each department/cost center measures the number of copies it makes. As a result, each department
would be assigned copier center indirect costs at a rate of 8.62 cents/copy.

      Food protection would be assigned $11,206 (i.e., 130,000 copies X $.0862/copy).

      Animals and Pests would be assigned $5,603 (i.e., 65,000 copies X $.0862/copy).

      Wastewater would be assigned $4,569 (i.e., 53,000 copies X $.0862/copy).
         Due to a rounding difference, the total adds up to $21,378.

With an appropriate allocation basis, it is possible to allocate any indirect costs in a similar way.

This copier example also shows why the cost center and cost object are essential to the cost allocation

184 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
process. For instance, imagine that the copier was defined not as one cost center but as separate cost
centers for large copying jobs (say, more than 500 copies) and small copying jobs, or for color copies
vs. black and white copies. This would also require different cost objects, such as the "cost per black
and white copy" or "cost per color copy." The cost per black and white copy would presumably be less
than the cost per color copy, and the cost per copy for large print jobs would presumably be less than
that for small jobs. Different cost centers, cost objects, and allocation methods can mean substantially
different answers to the question, "What does a copy cost?"

One potential drawback of the step-down method is that it allows "double counting" or "cross-
allocation" of service center costs to service centers already allocated to mission centers. For example,
recall that the annual full cost of the copier service center was $21,380. That full cost incorporated the
indirect costs of the office manager's time to manage the copier. Under the step-down method, the
cost of the office manager's time is allocated to the copier cost center, and the copier cost center costs
are then allocated across the mission centers. But what happens if the office manager makes copies?
Under this indirect cost allocation scheme, the office manager's copies would not be reflected in the
total volume of copies made, and the office manager would not receive any of the copy center's costs.
As a result, the mission centers subsidize the office manager's copying by absorbing a larger share of
the copy center's costs.

In this particular example, those subsidies are a negligible amount. But in many other scenarios,
cross-allocation of service center costs can significantly impact the full cost of a good or service.
For instance, imagine a non-profit organization with three mission centers, a service center for the
executive director, and a human resources service center. The human resources service center spends
most of its time interacting with the executive director, as is often the case in small non-profits. If
this organization uses the typical step-down approach, and it first allocates the executive director's
costs to the other service centers, then the full costs of the three mission centers will include a sizable
subsidy for the costs of the executive director-human resource center's interactions.

To address this problem, many public organizations instead use the double-step-down method. After
each service center/department's costs have been allocated once, each center/department's cost not
included in the original allocation is totaled and allocated again. To illustrate, let's return to the
copy center-office manager example above. If this allocation were done with the double-step-down
method, the office manager's copies would be included in the total copy figure. The copy center
would first allocate its costs to the mission centers, excluding the office manager's copies. Then in
a second step, the office manager's share of the copying costs would be allocated to the mission
centers separately. This double-step method minimizes the cross-allocation of service center costs.
For more on cost allocation methods for governments, see several chapters in Zach Mohr, ed. (2016),
Cost Accounting in Government: Theory and Applications (New York: Routledge); also see the
chapter "Cost Accounting and Indirect Costs" in Dittenhoffer and Stepnick, eds. (2007), Applying
Government Accounting Principles (Lexis-Nexus Publishing).

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 185
        DOUBLE STEP-DOWN COST ALLOCATION

           The Iron River Transportation Agency (IRTA) has two mission departments - Rapid Transit and Para-Transit. Rapid transit uses
           high-speed trains and is highly equipment-intensive, while Para-Transit uses mopeds and is far more labor-intensive.
           IRTA has two service departments: maintenance and administration. Management has decided to allocate maintenance costs on
           the basis of depreciation dollars in each department and administration costs on the basis of labor hours worked by the
           employees in each department.
           The following data appear in the agency's records for the current period. Allocate the service center costs to production centers
           using the step-down method and determine the relevant total costs. Begin with the maintenance department.

           We need to allocate two different service centers: Maintenance and Administration. It makes sense to allocate maintenance by
           depreciation dollars because depreciation is a proxy measure of each cost center's scale of capital assets.
           Depreciation costs, excluding maintenance, are $5,800,000 (i.e., $3,000,000 + $800,000 + $2,000,000). If we divide total
           maintenance costs by the total depreciation dollars excluding maintenance, we get $0.20 per depreciation dollar (i.e.,
           $1,160,000/$5,800,000).
           The Administration service center had $2,000,000 in depreciation, so we allocated it $400,000 in maintenance costs (i.e., $0.20 x
           $2,000,000). The Rapid Transit mission center had $3,000,000 of depreciation, so we allocated $600,000 (i.e., $0.20 x
           3,000,000). Finally, the Para-Transit mission center had $800,000 of depreciation, so we allocated $160,000 (i.e. $0.20 x
           800,000).
           We then allocate administration by labor hours. This makes sense because supervising staff is the administration's most
           significant cost driver. Since we've already allocated maintenance costs, let's allocate the $2,800,000 costs from Administration
           (i.e., $2,000,000 in direct costs + $800,000 in indirect maintenance costs) to the mission centers based on the number of labor
           hours. There are 50,000 labor hours each at $56 per labor hour (i.e., $2,800,000/50,000). To Rapid Transit, we allocate $560,000
           ($56 x 10,000 hours), and to Para-Transit, we allocate $2,240,000 ($56 x 40,000 labor hours). As the table shows below, we
           exclude Maintenance from this step since we've already assigned those costs to Rapid-Transit, Para-Transit, and Administration.

186 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
           The total cost of the Rapid Transit program is $9,160,000 and the total cost of the Para-Transit program is $6,400,000.
           Note, if we change the order of cost allocation to administration first followed by maintenance, total costs in the mission centers
           will be different. Recall that administration costs are allocated based on labor hours ($34.28 per labor hour, i.e., $2,400,000/
           70,000 hours). Maintenance costs will be allocated by depreciation costs ($0.49 per dollar of depreciation costs, i.e.,
           $1,845,714/$3,800,000).

           The order of cost allocation affects the full costs in the mission center. Rapid-Transit costs are higher (lower) if administration
           (maintenance) costs are allocated first. Irrespective of the order of "steps," Total Costs for the department do not change.

INDIRECT COST ALLOCATION: INDIRECT COST RATES
Cost drivers and allocation bases work well when the service has a clear cost objective and a
measurable unit of service. Most public organizations, as described above, don't have this luxury.
Many don't deliver services with measurable outcomes. Most public organizations' costs relate to
personnel, and personnel costs are not distributed evenly across clients or cases. Moreover, a growing
number of public services are delivered through partnerships and collaborations where it's often
unclear how costs are incurred and murkier how those costs ought to be allocated across the partner
organizations. Traditional cost allocation methods often don't work in the public sector for these and
many other reasons. And yet, it's still critically important to measure and properly account for full
costs, especially indirect costs that can be difficult to measure.
To address these problems, many public organizations rely on indirect cost rates. An indirect cost rate
is a ratio of indirect costs to direct costs. For instance, a city police department might determine that
its indirect cost rate is 15 percent. That means that for every dollar of direct costs like police officer
salaries and squad cars, it will incur 15 cents of payroll processing, insurance, procurement expenses,
and other indirect costs.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 187
        TAKING STOCK OF COSTS

           Public organizations rarely have sophisticated cost tracking and measurement systems that you might find at manufacturers like
           Boeing, logistics companies like FedEx, or retail entities like Amazon. So how do budgeting and finance staff understand what a
           public organization's services cost? There are three basic methods:

                 Time in Motion. Public organizations occasionally send analysts to see where and how employees spend their time.

                         For instance, a city planning department might allow analysts into their office to watch how much time staff spend on
                         different types of permits, appeals, and other activities. After observing the department's activities for a sample of
                         days over weeks or months, cost analysts can estimate how much time staff spends on each of their different activities
                         and then build out cost estimates.

                 Self-reported Allocations. Some organizations ask staff to keep track of their own time, much like the billable hours

                         method used by attorneys, accountants, and other professionals. Some of these tracking schemes are pretty detailed,
                         requiring time reported in 15-minute intervals. Others are more general and allow for estimates on larger intervals
                         like days or weeks.

                 Statistical Analysis. Cost accountants occasionally use regression analysis and other statistical tools to estimate the

                         relationship between costs and services delivered. One of the most common is to determine the linear trend, if any,
                         between total expenses and the volume of service delivered over time. Variation around that trend (i.e., the residuals
                         from the regression analysis) suggests a potential pattern of variable costs.

Let's illustrate this with a more detailed example. Surveys show that many local public health
departments would like to offer more services related to hypertension outreach and management.
Chronic health conditions like heart disease and diabetes are known to be related to high blood
pressure, so better management of high blood pressure can affect public health in a substantial,
positive way. However many citizens, especially those without health insurance, cannot access regular
blood pressure screening and other services needed to identify and manage hypertension.

Say, for example, that Smallville County and Riverdale County would like to launch a new, shared
hypertension prevention and management (HPM) program. Neither currently has a formal program
in this area, but both offer services through a patchwork of partnerships with local non-profits.
Smallville County has roughly twice the population of Riverdale County, and Riverdale's per capita
income and property values are 30 to 40 percent higher than Smallville's.

What does it cost to deliver this service? As with most public health programs, the main costs will
be related to personnel, namely public health nurses, outreach counselors, and nutritionists. The
program will also require space and other overhead costs. The outreach and education components
will require advertising, travel, and other costs. For a service-sharing arrangement to work, the two
counties must decide how to share these costs.

Suppose the counties also agree in advance to share costs evenly. This approach is simple and
straightforward. However, it ignores many of the program's underlying cost drivers. Smallville has
a much larger population than Riverdale, so more participants will probably come from Smallville.
Simply splitting these costs "50-50 means Riverdale will likely subsidize Smallville, an arrangement
Riverdale's leaders might find unacceptable.

188 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
So, what's the alternative? Smallville could bill Riverdale for each Riverdale resident who participates
in the program. They could use an allocation basis like population or assessed property values. A more
cutting-edge scheme might be to share the costs according to the incidence of the chronic diseases
the HPM program is designed to prevent. Each of these strategies demands a trade-off. Some are
simpler but at the expense of fairness. Some require additional data that might result in an expensive
cost measurement process or one that is not feasible. Others are more feasible but might place costs
disproportionately on the population the program is designed to serve.

To begin, let's assume Smallville will structure the new HPM as a cost center within the Health
Behaviors division of its Public Health department. Let's also assume that since HPM's main
"deliverable" will be blood pressure screening, it will define its unit cost as the cost per blood pressure
screening performed.

Given those assumptions, Smallville's budget analysts estimate that for the first year of operations, the
HPM program will serve 400 clients, and its costs will include:

      Direct Labor. This includes seven full-time and one half-time licensed nurse practitioners who
         can administer blood pressure screening. The annual salary for each nurse practitioner is
         $67,500. The program will also employ a health counselor to guide clients on managing
         hypertension through healthier eating and fitness. The counselor's annual salary is $74,500.

      Direct Non-Labor. Nurses and the health counselor will need to travel to visit clients and
         deliver outreach programs. Staff estimates total travel of 20,400 miles at $0.40/mile. The
         HPM program will also require medical supplies, office supplies, and a few capital items.
         Budget staff estimates $6,142 of annual direct non-labor costs for each nurse and $7,566 for
         the health counselor. This difference is due to a heavier expected travel schedule for the
         counselor. The program will also execute an annual contract, valued at $15,725, with a
         communications consultant who will develop and deliver a healthy eating outreach marketing
         effort in both counties. Even though most of these costs are related to labor, they're
         considered non-labor "contractual" costs.

      Indirect Labor. Smallville County's Health Behaviors Manager will supervise the HPM staff,
         and Smallville County's Executive will provide policy direction and other leadership. A
         portion of both administrators' salaries is allocated to HPM as indirect labor costs. HPM staff
         will also incur indirect labor costs like payroll support, accounting and auditing services, and
         procurement support. Budget staff estimates $10,456 of annual indirect labor costs for each
         nurse and $8,519 for the health counselor.

      Indirect Non-Labor. HPM staff must also have access to office space, liability insurance,
         association memberships, and other indirect non-labor costs. Budget staff estimates annual
         indirect non-labor costs of $4,799 for each nurse and counselor.

With that information and a few additional assumptions, we can begin to detail HPM's cost structure
and compute some indirect cost rates. The table below lists HPM's direct, "observable" costs. We
know the program will employ nurses and counselors, and we know it will demand mileage and the
communications contract as direct, non-labor costs. These "observable" direct costs total $604,635,
or $1,512 per client given the estimated 400 clients.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 189
        IS IT ALLOWABLE?

           One of the key questions when computing indirect cost rates is which indirect costs are allowable or reasonable. For example, in
           some cases, it's unclear whether staff who contribute marginally to a program's operations - such as development directors,
           general outreach coordinators, and others - should be included as an indirect cost. Certain types of training might be helpful, but
           not essential, for staff to understand their jobs and deliver the service. And of course, there's always a reason to define indirect
           costs as broadly as possible, especially if you can recover those costs through some external funding source.
           There are no national standards, per se, for what constitutes a relevant indirect cost. Each project, program, and funder is
           different. That said, the federal government has guidelines on what types of indirect costs it will reimburse. Many states and local
           governments also use these standards - or some adaptation of these standards - for their internal cost accounting. You can find
           more information on those guidelines in OMB Circular a-87: Cost Principles for State, Local, and Indian Tribal Governments. This
           publication is available at http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/circulars_a087_2004.

But the much more important question is how we account for the indirect costs and for the direct
costs that are more difficult to observe. The lower part of this table outlines those costs. When we
include the indirect labor and indirect non-labor costs, we see the full cost of the program increases
to $785,997, or $1,965/client. Or, put differently, the full cost of the program increases by more than
30 percent if we include all the indirect costs in our estimate of the full costs. Recall that Smallville
County plans to bill Riverdale County for its share of program costs. If Smallville bills only for the
direct costs, it undercharges Riverdale by nearly 30 percent. That is why it is important to measure
full costs, especially when pricing services or requesting reimbursements for expenses incurred.

190 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
What about potential indirect cost rates? According to these figures, 74 percent of the full cost to
employ a nurse is direct labor costs, and 10 percent is direct non-labor costs (i.e., mileage, outreach,
and other direct non-labor). It follows that the remaining 16 percent is indirect costs related, in a
predictable way, to those direct costs. Each nurse and health counselor will be insured, have their
payroll processed by the payroll office, occupy space, and so on. If those figures are predictable, we
can assume the current indirect cost rate for nurses is 16 percent. For the health counselor, the direct
costs are a bit higher at 76 percent. Direct non-labor costs are 11 percent, and indirect costs are 14
percent.

In practice, this means that in future budgets, the HPM program could assume that for every dollar
it will spend on nurse salaries, it can expect to incur 16 cents of indirect costs, and for every dollar it
will spend on health counselor salaries, it can expect to incur 14 cents of indirect costs (i.e., indirect
cost rate).

Some organizations compute indirect cost rates based only on direct labor costs. In that case, the rate
for nurses would be the indirect cost rate would be 22.6 percent - i.e., $10,456+$4,799)/$67,500. For
healthcare counselors, the indirect cost rate would be 22.8 percent.

We can also consider an indirect cost rate for the entire HPM program. For that, we compare the
total indirect costs to the total direct costs. Total indirect costs for the nurses are $114,413; for the
counselor, $13,318. That means total indirect costs are $127,731. Total direct costs are $573,390 for
the nurses and $84,876 for the counselor, for total direct costs of $658,266. The indirect cost rate
would be 19.4 percent (i.e., $127,731/$658,266). Again, all these figures assume the HPM program
serves 400 clients.

Information about indirect cost rates is relevant to many types of decisions. For instance:

      HPM staff might compare their indirect cost rate to the rates of other programs within

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 191
         Smallville County. If its rates are noticeably higher or lower, it might more carefully review its
         cost structure and how it manages its costs. If its rates seem grossly out of line with other
         units, it might request an additional review by Smallville County's budget staff.
      The counties might use these rates when applying for federal or state grants or for support
         from philanthropic foundations to support the HPM program.
      The counties might eventually decide to contract out some or all of HPM's operations to a
         non-profit healthcare provider. In that case, these rates would be a focal point for negotiating
         the per-client rate at which the counties would reimburse a prospective contractor.
      Other governments might review these rates as an initial indicator of whether they can afford
         their own HPM program.

        EASY AS ABC?

           Some governments - and many private sector organizations - try to address this problem through activity-based costing (ABC).
           ABC identifies the full cost of different activities within organizations that drive costs, regardless of the original cost center to
           which those costs were assigned. It then allocates those full costs according to changes in those underlying cost drivers.
           If Smallville County followed an ABC model in the HPM example, the information services staff might have identified the unit
           costs of different types of information service requests. More complex activities, like the information-gathering about Riverdale
           County residents, would incur costs at a different rate than simpler activities. To the earlier point, this sort of small discrepancy
           could easily dissuade Smallville from continuing to participate in this sharing arrangement. A better alternative might have been
           to measure the number of hours or percentage of total time on this project attributable to gathering information specifically on
           Riverdale residents. And yet, the additional time and effort to gather that information might far outweigh the benefit of more
           precise cost allocation. This is a small-scale example, but it illustrates that every cost allocation basis comes with trade-offs that
           all the parties involved must understand and agree to upfront.

COST SHARING ALTERNATIVES

Traditional cost allocation works best when it's possible to observe when and where all the costs are
incurred. When that information is unavailable, as is often the case for partnership arrangements
that span multiple organizations, there are several alternative ways to organize a cost allocation plan.
To illustrate, assume the full annual cost of HPM was $800,000 and that Smallville County must bill
Riverdale County for Riverdale County's share of those costs.

      Equal share. Total costs are divided equally across all participating partners. This is more
         typical for informal arrangements. It's also common for services where it is unclear who
         "receives" or "uses" the service or to observe all the relevant indirect costs predictably and
         consistently. In equal share approaches, one partner often subsidizes the other, sometimes
         unknowingly. In the HPM example, Smallville would keep $400,000 of the costs and bill
         Riverdale its equal share of $400,000.

      Per capita. Total costs are divided by the population proportion in each partner jurisdiction.
         This approach is good for services without an observable "client" or discrete individual
         services. It's less useful when population size is not the best cost driver or when the

192 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
   populations involved are different on some key characteristic that might affect the utilization
   of the service in question. Per capita sharing is often the most transparent way to share costs.
   In the case of HPM, recall that Smallville's population is 240,000 and Riverdale's population is
   160,000. In other words, 60 percent of the population served resides in Smallville and 40
   percent resides in Riverdale. Under a per capita model, Smallville would bill Riverdale
   $320,000.

 Cost Plus Fixed Fee. Personnel costs are often step-fixed costs, and it can be challenging to
   know when those costs will "step up" at higher levels of service (more on step-fixed costs
   below). To account for that uncertainty, some cost allocation strategies call for non-weighted
   cost sharing plus some fixed periodic fees. The fee part of the plan is designed to buffer the
   sharing arrangement against the uncertainty surrounding step-fixed costs. For HPM, one
   potential application of this method would be for the counties to share costs per capita but for
   Smallville to receive an annual payment of $35,000 at the start of its fiscal year to compensate
   in advance should it need to hire an additional nurse during the year. The cost-plus fixed fee
   model can also be used where overhead costs (e.g., space, utilities, administration, and
   accounting) would be shared one way, and incremental costs (e.g., costs for lab work or
   medical supplies) are charged based on volume.

 Ability to Pay. Some cost allocation arrangements are designed to make a service available
   where citizens and clients are otherwise unable to pay for it. In these cases, allocating costs
   according to the ability to pay makes sense. We can approximate the ability to pay through
   assessed property values, median household income, or other measures of income or wealth.
   In the HPM example, consider the following scenario: Riverdale's median household income
   is $50,000, and Smallville's is $40,000. Riverdale has a smaller population but is wealthier. In
   this case, Riverdale's median household income ratio to Smallville's is 1.25 ($50,000/$40,000).
   This is commonly known as a wealth factor. Recall that an equal share allocation is $400,000
   for each jurisdiction. If 50-50 share is adjusted by a wealth factor, Riverdale's share of costs
   would be $400,000 X 1.25, or $500,000, while Smallville's share would be $300,000.

 Prevalence. In this method, the parties share costs according to the prevalence of the public
   health problem the service is designed to address. In the HPM example, the partners could
   share the total program costs according to observed instances of diabetes or heart disease. The
   logic here is simple: diabetes and heart disease tell us something about the expected number of
   people with hypertension. If the prevalence of the disease is not known, the partners can use a
   proxy, like socioeconomic status, to project the anticipated need for services in each
   population. In the HPM example, Riverdale's higher overall wealth suggests its residents are at
   lower risk for hypertension compared to Smallville residents. Sharing by prevalence adds
   substantial complexity because cost sharing is now based on data from a series of
   measurements unrelated to costs. In this case, those measurements are the incidence of
   disease or an indicator of socioeconomic status, which can be difficult to measure reliably, and
   other health-related behaviors like smoking or medication adherence. That said, this
   approach is especially good where population, property values, income, and other measures
   vary too much among sharing jurisdictions to offer meaningful comparisons. In this instance,
   we assume Smallville will have an estimated 12,740 cases of type 2 diabetes during the coming
   year, and Riverdale County will have an estimated 5,460 cases. This strategy considers each

                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 193
         county's share of the total incidence across both counties. According to that logic, 70 percent
         of the cases will be found in Smallville and 30 percent in Riverdale. Allocating costs this way
         leads to a share of $560,000 for Smallville and $240,000 for Riverdale. Some versions of
         prevalence also incorporate a moving average so that one community does not incur huge
         costs in a single year, and costs are recovered over time.

      Weighted formula. This plan addresses some of the big problems with the per capita sharing
         approach. For example, in a weighted formula approach, the participants might agree to share
         total costs according to a combination of population, median household income, usage, and
         other factors. By incorporating these other factors, the cost apportionment method will better
         reflect differences in fixed costs in urban vs. rural areas, differences in travel distances within
         each county, and a wide variety of other factors that may affect service delivery. For HPM,
         assume that Smallville and Riverdale decide to share costs according to a three-factor formula
         that incorporates population, ability to pay, and prevalence of type 2 diabetes. This formula
         reflects both counties' shared understanding of the cost structure and cost drivers of the HPM
         program. The counties, realizing the difference in the prevalence of type 2 diabetes, agree to
         weigh that difference in prevalence more heavily in the cost-sharing formula. They agree to a
         three-factor formula where population accounts for 25 percent, prevalence is 50 percent, and
         ability to pay is 25 percent of the total costs allocated to each county. Recall that
         Smallville accounts for 60 percent of the population served by HPM, and Riverdale accounts
         for 40 percent. At the same time, Smallville accounts for 70 percent of the prevalence factor
         and Riverdale for 30 percent. We would apply that formula as follows:
               Cheng County: $800,000 X ((.6 X .25) + (.7 X .5) + (.44 X .25)) = $488,000;
               Duncombe County: $800,000 - $488,000 = $312,000

        DIFFERENTIAL COST ACCOUNTING

           In the previous section, we explained how to measure the full cost of a service. Those techniques assume we're measuring the
           cost of the service for a given level or volume of the service. Until now, for instance, we've assumed our hypothetical HPM
           program will serve 400 clients a year. But sometimes, the more interesting question is: How do a program's costs change if we
           deliver more or less of it? For instance, how does HPM's cost per client change if we expand it to 500 clients? Or restrict it to 300
           clients? These questions sound simple, but they require careful attention to different concepts. We turn to differential cost
           accounting when we want to know how costs change in space and time. Differential cost accounting is, simply put, comparing
           how costs change at different levels of output.

COST BEHAVIOR

We know that what a service costs largely depends on how much of it we deliver. This is broadly
known as cost behavior. Every cost type falls into one of three different cost behavior categories:

      Fixed costs do not change in response to the amount of service provided. In the HPM case,
         Smallville County owns some of its own blood pressure screening equipment, so the costs of
         acquiring equipment costs won't change even if the HPM program delivers a lot more blood

194 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
         pressure screenings. There, however, is a caveat to this. It is reasonable to assume that fixed
         costs will not change within a relevant range. Relevant range frequently refers to capacity. If
         current demand exceeds capacity, we'll need to incur additional costs to expand capacity (e.g.,
         room size, equipment that is available, etc.).
      Step-Fixed Costs are fixed costs within a relevant range. Step-fixed costs are frequently
         personnel costs. A nurse, for example, can see eight patients per day, and a counselor can see
         five patients per day. They are paid a fixed rate, regardless of number of patients they see.
         That said, they will likely not have the time to see more patients than the current workload.
         Therefore, we need to hire an additional nurse if we expect to see more than eight patients
         daily and an additional counselor if we expect to see more than five patients daily. So, if nurse
         visits per day were 20, we would need to hire three nurses and have the excess capacity to see
         an additional four patients (i.e., three nurses x a maximum of eight patient visits = 24 visits per
         day).
      Variable Costs change directly in response to the amount of service provided. For the HPM
         program, this might include copies and other office supplies needed to process physician
         referrals and mileage required to travel to outreach sessions, among others.
      Mixed Costs (or Semi-Variable Costs) have both a fixed and variable component. Utilities and
         equipment lease agreements are frequently semi-variable, with a fixed monthly charge
         irrespective of use and rate per unit of service consumed. Returning to our example of the
         copier, the monthly rate is fixed and the per-page service fee would be variable.

The figure below illustrates the cost behavior concepts for a generic, hypothetical service. The
horizontal axis is the quantity of service provided, and the vertical axis is the total cost. The horizontal
line at $50 represents a fixed cost. It does not change, regardless of the level of service provided. The
triangle-marked line identifies a variable cost. Here we see each additional unit of service increases
the total cost by $10, and that change is constant from zero to three units of service. The line marked
with squares shows a step-fixed cost. Here, the cost is fixed at $20 from zero to three units of service.
Once we reach four units of service, that total cost steps up to $40, where it stays fixed until seven
units of service.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 195
        FIXED COSTS DEFINED DIFFERENTLY

           "Fixed Cost" can mean different things in different settings. For our purposes, it means a cost that does not change in response to
           the volume of service delivered. By contrast, cost accountants sometimes use fixed cost to describe a cost that does not change
           during a given time period. This is an important difference.

It's useful to think about a program or service with reference to these main cost behaviors. In fact, we
can place most programs/services/organization units into one of six cost behavior categories. Those
categories are outlined below, along with examples of each from typical non-profit organizations and
government programs.

196 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
It's immensely helpful to think about cost behavior when we have to make decisions about how to
design and fund programs. Consider this simple example based on the previously mentioned HPM
program.

HPM staff have some rough budget projections. Their program is expected to incur fixed costs of
$800,000 and variable costs of $400 per client. The program has expanded a lot since it launched, and
it now expects to serve 550 clients but could serve up to 600 with current staffing levels. Meanwhile,
nearby Emerald County has offered to pay $750 per client to expand the program to include an
additional 50 Emerald County residents. Should Smallville and Riverdale counties agree to partner
with Emerald County on these terms?

HPM's cost behavior is outlined in the table below. Given its projected fixed and variable costs, at 550
clients, the average per-client cost is $1,855. If HPM scales up to serve 600 clients, its average cost will
decrease to $1,734 per client. However, that average cost of $1,734 is still much higher than the $750
per client that Emerald County offering. On the basis of "average" unit costs, this proposal is a definite
"no-go" for Smallville and Riverdale.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 197
However, keep in mind the relationship between fixed and variable costs. Recall that HPM staff have
said they can add 50 more clients without taking on additional fixed costs. If that is true, then the new
cost to add a client is only the additional variable cost. Put differently, the average cost of each client is
$1,734, but the marginal cost, or the cost of a new client, is $400. If HPM is reimbursed $750 per client,
the additional "profit" is $350. If HPM makes this decision "at the margin" or with reference only to
the marginal cost, it should take the deal with Emerald County. This is a good example of a service
with positive economies of scale; the marginal cost of each unit of service decreases as the volume of
service delivered increases.
Of course, there are trade-offs here. At 600 clients, the HPM program will operate at full capacity.
HPM staff will almost certainly have to spend less time with clients. This could lead to a decline in
the quality of service and could even increase staff burnout and turnover. But if we look just at the
marginal cost, it makes sense for Emerald County to join the program.
This example also illustrates the key concept of sunk costs. Many fixed costs are for capital items
like equipment, land, and buildings that can be bought and sold. A public health department can, in
concept at least, recover some of those costs by selling those capital items. However, HPM's spending
on employee salaries, training, insurance, and many other costs cannot be recovered. Those costs are
sunk.
Some economists argue that sunk costs ought to be irrelevant to future decisions. In other words,
at the margin, all that matters are the future, measurable, variable costs. Of course, this is difficult
in practice. In the HPM case, scaling up to full capacity will mean additional stress on staff, and
perhaps more importantly, it would mean giving up the opportunity to take on additional clients
without taking on additional fixed costs. These costs are much harder to measure, but they are
key components of decisions about cost sharing. The key takeaway here is that when considering a
service-sharing arrangement, be sure to consider both the marginal costs and the opportunity costs.

198 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
DIFFERENTIAL COST ANALYSIS

You are the director of the Department of Human Services for Algonquin Bay. One of your public health programs provides
services to senior citizens and children. The full-time direct staff includes licensed nurses and drivers (senior citizen program
only). The department has also hired a program administrator and a secretary to manage the 20 full-time program staff (17
nurses and 3 drivers). Total costs for the two cost centers are expected to be $1,459,620. The program expects to receive
$829,400 in reimbursements from Medicaid. A family foundation has pledged to support your efforts with an unrestricted grant
($100,000).

The Department recently received an unsolicited bid from a local non-profit. The non-profit has proposed to take on the
senior citizen program if the city agreed to reimburse the non-profit at a rate of $65 per patient visit. Should the department
accept this proposal? What are the policy tradeoffs of delivering this service via a third party?
Assuming the non-profit provides services to the projected clients (9,360), the direct cost of the contract would be $608,400
(=$65 x 9,360). The direct costs of the contract would be significantly lower than the agency's direct costs ($713,520/9,360 =
$76.23. Assuming the average costs do not change significantly as the number of clients increases (for the department and the
non-profit), the department would be better off contracting out with the non-profit.
Before the department accepts the non-profit proposal, they should consider the ramifications of having a third party provide
services to their clients. That includes the quality of service provided to the senior citizens, as well as the capacity of the
non-profit to deliver services. Accepting the bid at a cost lower than the department average could be an indicator of efficiency. It
could also be the case that the non-profit has understaffed its program, resulting in lower average costs per visit. An inspection of
the non-profit facility and a review of the home-visit practices should be considered in the bid review process.
The budget analyst assigned to your agency has recommended that you eliminate the senior citizen program since its costs far
exceed revenues. Should the Department accept this proposal? What are the policy tradeoffs of dropping a cost center (i.e.,

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 199
           senior citizens)?

           Dropping the senior program would eliminate direct costs only! The total costs for the children's program would increase by
           $161,547 to $746,100 (i.e., $584,553 + $161,547 or $436,100 + $310,000). Assuming there are no changes to unrestricted
           grants received, the children's center would receive $555,00 in revenues (i.e., 455,000 + $100,000), and the deficit would
           decrease from $530,200 to $191,100 (i.e., $555,000 - $746,100). The analyst's recommendation would result in a smaller deficit
           if laying off the nurses and drivers in the senior citizen program is at no cost to the department.

           While eliminating the senior citizen cost center cuts the deficit by more than $339,000, the program will no longer serve clients
           in need of outreach and support. There would likely be unanticipated costs associated with eliminating the program. For
           example, failure to monitor the health and well-being of senior citizens could lead to these clients being hospitalized. Costs
           associated with their hospital visits and inpatient care would more than likely exceed the savings projected here. Thus, the
           strategy would be short-sighted.

           The budget analyst assigned to your agency has recommended that the program eliminate off-site visits (i.e., lay off all
           drivers). In other words, nurses will no longer make site visits but rather, their clients will come to one central location for all
           their appointments. What are the financial benefits of this proposal? What are the policy tradeoffs of pursuing this strategy?

           Laying off the drivers in the senior program would cut costs for the program from $875,067 to $732,947 - the costs associated
           with the nurses (keep in mind eliminating the drivers would also eliminate the indirect costs for the program (i.e., depreciation of
           $10,000)). The cuts to the program would shrink the budget deficit from $425,667 to $283,547.

           While eliminating drivers in the senior citizen program would shrink the budget deficit for the cost center and the program, the
           strategy assumes that senior citizens would be able to make the trip to see the nurses at the program office. We could therefore
           see the workload for the department drop significantly and nurses be underutilized. The clients would likely turn to alternatives
           like relying on emergency services, which could end up costing the city even more over the long run (e.g., the nurses would be
           underutilized if visits fall below current levels), and use of emergency services (in-patient or out-patient hospital visits) would
           likely cost the city more than the costs associated with having the drivers.

COST-VOLUME-PROFIT ANALYSIS

So far, we have reviewed how public managers can identify the full cost of their services and how that
full cost changes as they deliver more or less of a service. Those are crucial questions that all good
managers can answer.

However, public managers must often confront a different question: What should we charge for
this service? They are also routinely asked a corollary question: What volume of service should we
deliver, given that service's cost structure? To answer these questions, we turn to a particular set of
concepts within differential cost accounting known as cost-volume-profit analysis (CVP). CVP is how
an organization determines the volume of activity needed to achieve its profit or mission goal. It is the
price it needs to charge to break even or make a profit or the cost limits that it must manage to achieve
its profit or mission goal. CVP analysis is usually done for a particular program or service within an
organization. The basic equation is:

                                           Profit = Total Revenue - Total Costs

From this discussion so far, we also know that Total costs = Fixed costs + Variable costs. And since
fixed costs are fixed, we can represent the cost equation as:

                                                            TC = a + bx

200 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Where TC = total costs, a = fixed costs, and b = variable costs. We also know that total revenue is
simply the price of service (p) times the volume of service delivered (x). That said, we can show the
fundamental profit equation as:

                                                      Profit = px - (a + bx)
For any service, the break-even volume is the point at which total revenue (px) equals total costs (a +
bx). To illustrate how we use this formula, let's go back to the Environmental Health Department's
copier. Assume for the moment that the county government's leadership wants to make copying more
affordable, so it caps the price of copying at 7 cents per copy. At that price, how many copies must the
copier center deliver each year to break even? In other words, what's its annual break-even volume?
We know that the copier cost center's fixed costs (a) include $6,000 for the machine rental, $900 for
machine maintenance, and $1,500 for its space allocation. Let's also assume electricity and the office
manager's time allocation are fixed costs of $180 and $100, respectively. So total annual fixed costs
are $6,000 + $900 + $1,500 + $180 + $100, or $8,680.
Variable costs (b) are the largest cost items. Recall that last year the copier made 248,000 copies.
Total paper costs were $10,000, so the per-copy cost for paper is ($10,000/248,000), or $.04/copy.
Total printing cartridge costs were $2,700, so the per-copy cost for printing cartridges was ($2,700/
248,000), or $.011/copy. These two variable costs together give us total variable costs of $.051/copy.
At break-even, profit = 0, so we can re-arrange the fundamental profit equation to px = a + bx. Since
the price per copy is capped, per management's policy, at $.07, we can then express this equation as:

                                                  $0.07x = $8,680 + $0.051x
To solve, we first subtract $0.051x from both sides, leaving us with $0.019x = $8,680. To solve for x,
we divide both sides by $0.019, and we're left with x = 456,842. In other words, at 7 cents per copy,
the copier cost center's break-even quantity is 456,842 copies. That's nearly twice as many copies as it
produced so far. Management might want to rethink this decision.
We can also express break-even quantity as a/(p-b). Arranged this way, the previous quantity is
$8,680/($0.07 - $0.051), or $8,680/$0.019 = 456,842. The price minus variable costs is known as the
contribution margin. In some ways, break-even quantity is finding how many units of volume we need
to spread the contribution margin to arrive at break-even quantity.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 201
        BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS

           The fixed costs of running a fund-raising gala for the Wenatchee Symphony are $10,000, and the variable costs are $75 per
           attendee. The facility where the event is being held can accommodate 400 people.
           What minimum amount can the Wenatchee Symphony charge for a ticket and still break even?

                                                                                        Px = a + bx
                                                                                       P= (a+ bx)/x
                                                                          P = ($10,000 + $75 X 400)/400

                                                                                          P=$100
           Assuming 400 people attend the gala, how much does the Wenatchee Symphony have to charge for each ticket for the
           Symphony to earn $20,000?

                                                                    P = (($10,000 +20,000) + $75 X 400)/400
                                                                                          P=$150

           If the Symphony received a donation of $2,000, would its breakeven ticket price for the gala would increase, decrease, or stay
           the same?

                                                                   P = (($10,000 - $2,000) + $75 X 400)/400
                                                             P=$95 -- $5 less than the break-even point of $100

Let's ask a different question. Assume that the copier technician says the current copier is aging and
will likely break down if asked to make more than 150,000 copies per year. At that volume, how
should the copier cost center adjust its prices, so it continues to break even?

Here we re-arrange the formula as p = (a/x) + b. In other words, the break-even price is the fixed
costs divided by the volume plus the variable cost per unit. For the copier cost center, this is ($8,680/
150,000) + $0.051, or ($0.0579 + .051) = $0.1089. Put differently, if capped at 150,000 copies, the
copier cost center would need to charge 10.89 cents per copy to break even. Once again, management
should take a careful look before implementing this policy.

The copier cost center is a useful illustration but is also an outlier because most of its costs are
variable. This is typical in for-profit manufacturing, logistics, and other industries but atypical among
public organizations. For a more typical public organization example, let's return to the HPM
program.

Recall from earlier that HPM has estimated fixed costs (a) of $800,000 and variable costs (b) of $400/
client. Say HPM's management wants to keep the program relatively small to ensure a quality service,
so it decides to limit its enrollment to 400 clients. At that volume (x), its break-even price is ($800,000/
400) + $400, or $2,400/client. If management is willing to expand enrollment to 500 clients, the
break-even price becomes ($800,000/500) + $400, or $2,000/client.

In another CVP scenario, management reports that governments and philanthropies will pay a
maximum of $1,800 per client to participate in the HPM program. At that price, what is HPM's break-
even quantity? Once again, the formula is a/(p-b), or $800,000/ ($1,800-$400), or 571 clients. To break

202 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
even at that comparatively low price and contribution margin ($1,800-$400, or $1,400), the program
will need to serve substantially more clients than it has served recently.

The table below summarizes these various cost-volume-profit calculations.

CVP is a powerful tool that can directly illuminate many important management decisions. Most
CVP today is done in spreadsheets to allow for maximum flexibility when exploring alternative cost
scenarios, especially when analyzing services with step-fixed costs. That said, it's still important to
understand the basic concepts.

COST ANALYSIS AND FLEXIBLE BUDGETING

Once we've identified a program or service's cost structure, we can take our first steps toward
preparing a budget. A budget is simply a plan for what an organization wants to accomplish and the
resources it will use to accomplish it. Budgets are important - for governments, an adopted budget
is the law. It describes taxes and other resources the government intends to collect. Since taxpayers
must pay those taxes, the government must spend those resources per the adopted or amended
budget. Recall from the earlier discussion that the budget is one of citizens' most important tools to
hold the government accountable. Non-profits' budgets don't have the force of law, but they're also
critically important. Why? Because if a non-profit deviates substantially from its budget, its funders,
and donors will question its ability to make good on its promises and accomplish its mission.

Budgets are made and organized in many ways (see the next chapter). Regardless of an organization's
overall budget process, effective cost accounting is paramount to effective budgeting and
management, particularly at the program or service level. Public managers must know what portion
of the costs they're responsible for are fixed, variable, and step-fixed. They must also understand how
different cost items connect to service delivery outputs and how their cost center is assigned indirect
costs. And perhaps most important, they must understand how their program's cost structure and cost
behavior will change under different performance scenarios. That is why the best budgets are flexible
budgets.

A flexible budget allows a manager to quickly and easily perform sensitivity analysis to explore
how changes in key cost assumptions affect a program's unit costs, total costs, and service-
delivery volume.

Flexible budgeting follows a basic four-step process:

    1. Identify types of output or activity. Sometimes those levels of activity correspond to cost
         centers. Sometimes they relate to programs or "lines of business" within cost centers.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 203
           Sometimes they correspond to entire departments or divisions, especially if that department
           or division delivers a single good or service.

       2. Collect cost and price data. For most budget-making, last year's budget is the best source of
           data on costs and prices. Pay careful attention to past budget trends unless you're tasked with
           developing a budget for a new service (and someday you will be!). Two basic types of costs are
           reflected in most public organizations' budgets: operating and capital costs. Operating costs
           are incurred through the organization's regular, year-to-year activities, like salaries, benefits,
           and training. Capital costs are related to capital assets like property, equipment, and buildings.
           Recall that the portion of a capital asset that is "used up" each year is reflected in the
           organization's operating costs as depreciation expense.

       3. Classify inputs. Every organization classifies its cost inputs a bit differently. For a simple
           budget, it's appropriate to classify the spending inputs in broad objects of expenditure like
           "salaries" or "commodities" and to call the revenue inputs "service revenues," "fees," or some
           other appropriate broad label. Some organizations prepare budgets using the same chart of
           accounts used to prepare the basic financial statements. Others have much more detailed
           budget item codes to identify specific types of budget inputs. The key to a classification scheme
           is that it's as consistent as possible. Once you make a budget with it, make every budget with
           it.

       4. Develop a cost rate or unit cost for each key budget input. A cost rate measures the resources
           needed to staff a service, usually expressed as a unit of output. A unit cost is the cost to acquire
           or produce a unit of a good or service.

  Personnel costs are the largest and most visible budget inputs for most public organizations. That's
  why effective budgeting for public organizations starts and often ends, with careful attention to
  budgeting for personnel.

  So, let's illustrate this four-step process with a personnel budgeting example.

  PERSONNEL COST ESTIMATION1

  You are the director of a non-profit organization that delivers meals to elderly persons in their homes.
  The state reimburses you a flat rate per person. Your non-profit provides three meals a day per person,
  seven days per week, 365 days per year. You hire two types of direct program staff: cooks and drivers
  - all of whom are full-time employees working eight hours per day, five days a week, and are eligible
  for 10 days of paid vacation.

  Cooks get paid $17 per hour and drivers $14 per hour. Staff are eligible for a 25 percent salary
  bonus if they work on weekends. Your organization contributes $100 per employee per month in
  health insurance, contributes five percent of wages to a state-run pension plan, and pays regular
  rates for Social Security and Hospital Insurance (7.65 percent) and Workers' Compensation and
  Unemployment Insurance (five percent).
  Cooks can prepare three meals per day for a maximum of 50 clients per day and drivers can deliver

1. This example was developed by William Duncombe, a beloved member of the faculty at the Maxwell School - Syracuse
   University. It is included here with minor modifications.

   204 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
three meals per day for a maximum of 35 clients per day. How many cooks and drivers do you need
to hire and what are the related personnel costs for providing three meals per day to 200 clients?

What about a scenario where most of the key input items are variable costs? Here we would use the
unit cost method. The steps for that method are as follows:

    1. Project the demand for the service

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 205
    2. Estimate the resources consumed per unit of output
    3. Determine the average cost per unit of output
    4. Multiply these three items together to determine the appropriate budgeted amounts

To illustrate, let's return to the HPM program and focus on the counselor's travel costs. Recall that
the counselor travels to deliver outreach programs on healthy eating and active lifestyles designed
to prevent hypertension among Smallville and Riverdale County residents. Let's assume that for the
coming fiscal year, the number of programs will be a bit lower than in previous years but robust
nonetheless:

                                        HPM staff project 175 outreach programs

           The average mileage per outreach program is 75 miles, and the rate per mile is $0.40.

                          175 programs X 75 miles per program X $0.40/mile = $5,250

In this case, the "unit cost" and the "object of expenditure" are the same- individual outreach
programs. And once again, we'd ideally set this analysis up in a flexible spreadsheet-based budget.

   PRACTICE PROBLEM: UNIT COST TABLE AND PROGRAM BUDGET

   You are a new budget analyst working in the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV). Your first task at the
   DMV is to analyze costs for the Driver's License Unit (herein Unit). The Unit processes two types of
   transactions: new license applications and license renewal applications. You have been asked to provide
   unit cost estimates if the Unit were to review 30,000 new license applications and 270,000 license renewal
   applications. Operational information is as follows:

           The Unit is open five days a week (Monday through Friday), 52 weeks a year. It employs clerks to
              process license applications. Because of the specialized requirements, clerks are assigned to work
              on either new license applications or license renewal applications, but not both. On average, it
              takes a clerk two hours to process a new license application and 30 minutes to process a license
              renewal.

           Clerks are full-time employees (FTE). They work eight hours per day and are paid $17.50 per hour.
              They are entitled to two 15-minute breaks and one 30-minute lunch break. As a result, clerks are
              only able to process applications seven hours a day. As FTEs, the clerks receive three weeks of paid
              vacation and one week of paid sick leave. Their benefits are estimated to be 25 percent of their
              wages.

           Clerks are required to copy and scan application materials to a central processing system. Clerks
              working on new license applications can use one of three workstations to copy, print, and scan
              application materials. Clerks working on license renewals can use one of the seven workstations to
              copy, print, and scan renewal application materials. The Unit estimates that each new license
              application would require 15 pages of printed material, and each license renewal application would
              require 10 pages of printed material. The Unit has leased these workstations from a local vendor at
              $250 per month and $0.05 per page of printed material.

206 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        Once all application materials are received, and the application for either a renewal or new license
           is approved, the clerks in the respective centers are required to process a state-valid driver's
           license. The license, regardless of type, is at a cost of $3.00 per license.

        Administration and maintenance costs for the Unit are expected to be $750,000 and $400,000,
           respectively. The DMV requires administration costs to be allocated on the basis of direct services
           staff and maintenance costs on the basis of output.

Estimate the required operating personnel and non-personnel costs and estimate the operating budget
for the Unit.

Begin the process by identifying the unit or units of activity or output produced by the organization and
the mission centers. The mission centers are "New License" and "License Renewal." You want to organize the
cost data around these mission centers.
Step 1: Cost Center Workload

A renewal license clerk can process an application in 30 minutes or 0.5 hrs.
The workload for "License Renewal "for the year is 135,000 hrs. = 0.5 hrs. x 270,000 applications.

A new license application clerk can process an application in 2 hrs.
The workload for "New License" for the year is 60,000 hrs. = 2 hrs. x 30,000 applications.
Step 2: Hours per Employee

Estimate the number of hours each employee can work in any single year. This is an intermediate step in
the process of determining the number of employees.

Work hours = (52 - 3 vacation - 1 sick) weeks x 5 days a week x 7 hrs. per day = 1,680 hrs.

Recall that full-time employees are eligible for three weeks of vacation and one week of paid sick leave. Moreover, even
though they work eight hours per day, they are eligible for two 15-minute breaks and one 30-minute lunch break.
They, therefore, only process applications for seven hours per day.
Step 3: # of Employees

        # of Clerks "New License" = 60,000 hrs/1,680 hrs = 35.71, round up to 36 full-time employees.
        # of Clerks "License Renewal" = 135,000 hrs/1,680 hrs = 80.35, round up to 81 full-time employees.
Step 4: Cost per Employee

Paid hours = 52 weeks x 5 days a week x 8 hrs. per day = 2,080 hrs.

The annual wage for clerks in both mission centers = 2,080 hrs. x $17.50 = $36,400.

Fringe benefits are 25 percent of base wages = $36,400 x .25 = $9,100

Direct personnel costs for Renewals = ($36,400 x 81 FTE) = $2,948,400
Direct benefit costs for Renewals = ($9,100 x 81 FTE) = $737,100

Direct personnel costs for New License = ($36,400 x 36 FTE) = $1,310,400
Direct benefit costs for New License = ($9,100 x 36 FTE) = $327,600

                                                                                                                            FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 207
   Step 5: Estimate all other direct costs.
   For renewals, workstation costs are = ($250 x 12 months x 7 workstations) + ($0.05 x 10 pages x 270,000) =
   $156,000. Printing costs are = $3 x 270,000 =$810,000
   For new applications, workstation costs are = ($250 x 12 months x 3 workstations) + ($0.05 x 15 pages x
   30,000) =$31,500. Printing costs are = $3 x 30,000 =$90,000
   Step 6: Estimate indirect costs.
   Indirect costs include administration costs ($750,000) to be allocated on the basis of personnel.
   Maintenance costs ($400,000) are to be allocated on the basis of the number of applications processed.
   Administration costs (Direct Staff): 81 clerks in renewals + 36 clerks in new applications = 117 clerks.
   Allocation of administration costs (in %).

            Renewals administration cost share = (81/117) = 69.2%, in dollar terms = .692 x $750,000 =
            $519,000
            New License administration cost share = (36/117) = 30.8%, in dollar terms = .308 x $750,000 =
            $231,000
   Maintenance costs (# of Licenses processed): 270,000 renewals+ 30,000 new applications = 300,000
   applications. Allocation of administration costs (in %)
            Renewals = (270,000/300,000) = 90%, in dollar terms = .9 x $400,000 = $360,000
            New License = (30,000/300,000) = 10%, in dollar terms = .1 x $400,000 = $40,000
   Step 7: Estimate Revenues.
   For renewals, the Unit will charge $15 per renewal application. For new licenses, the Unit will charge $60
   per application. Revenues =
   Renewals = $15 x 270,000 = $4,050,000
   New License = $60 x 30,000 = $1,800,000

208 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
   Step 8: Prepare a Unit Cost Table for Driver's License Unit

BUDGET VARIANCE
The difference between actual results and budgeted results is known as a budget variance. Effective
public managers understand when, where, and why variances happen. They also use insights from
variances to identify inefficiencies and other current management concerns and how they make
future budgets.
The simplest variance analysis approach is to compare budgeted expenses to actual expenses. For
example, suppose the HPM program budgeted $759,000 for FY15, but actual spending for the year
was $789,000. This would be a total variance of ($759,000/$789,000) = .962, or 96.2 percent. In
other words, budgeted spending was only 96.2 percent of actual spending. This is a negative variance
or unfavorable variance of 3.8 percent, and it directs HPM's management toward a few important
questions about HPM's operations. Did HPM serve more clients than expected? Did it spend more
than expected on variable costs like mileage or supplies? Was the contract for communications and
outreach properly structured? Are its indirect cost allocations fair and consistent with its actual

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 209
operations? To address these questions, of course, it would help to compute variances on individual
line items (known as line-item variances). Larger organizations often compute department variances.

Revenue-side variances demand a different type of interpretation. Imagine, for instance, that HPM
budgeted for revenues of $800,000 but collected $750,000. The variance here would be
($800,000/$750,000) = 1.0667, for a negative variance of 6.667 percent. Here, Smallville County's
HPM management should ask a different set of questions. For instance, is HPM collecting all its
revenues? Is Riverdale County slow in reimbursing Smallville County?

Positive variances beg a different set of questions. For example, say HPM's total spending was just
$700,000, compared to its budgeted spending of $759,000. This variance is ($759,000/$700,000) =
1.084, for a positive variance of 8.4 percent. But what does positive mean here? Was management able
to drive down costs and deliver the expected volume of service at lower overall costs? Or did it not
deliver as much of the service as expected?

        BUDGET VARIANCE ANALYSIS
        TerraWorks is a social enterprise based in Tanzania that manufactures premium kitchen goods
        from sustainable bamboo. During the recent quarter, the company manufactured 4,000 chopping
        blocks using 11,000 board feet of bamboo. TerraWorks paid $18,700 for that 11,000 board feet of
        bamboo. Its budget assumes that each chopping block requires 2.5 board feet of bamboo at a cost
        of $1.80 per board foot.

        What was TerraWorks' spending variance for chopping block production during the most
        recent quarter? Is this a favorable or unfavorable variance?

                  If Actual Price = $18,700/11,000 = $1.70, then

                  Price Variance = (Actual Volume x (Actual Price - Budgeted Price))

                  = 11,000 chopping blocks x ($1.70 - $1.80) = -$1,100.

                  This is a positive/favorable variance. TerraWorks produced the chopping blocks at $1,100
                  under budget because they paid less than expected for bamboo.

                  In alternative analysis

                  The budgeted value of the chopping block was = $1.80 x 11,000 board feet = $19,800. The
                  actual cost was $18,700. Price Variance then is $18,700 - $19,800 = -$1,100

        What was TerraWorks' volume variance for chopping block production during the most
        recent quarter?

                  Volume Variance = Budgeted Price (Actual Volume - Budgeted Volume) = $1.80
                  (11,000-10,000) = $1,800.
                  Note that the budgeted volume was = 2.5 board feet x 4,000 chopping blocks.

210 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
                  This is an unfavorable variance. Producing these units required more bamboo than
                  expected.

        What was TerraWorks' total variance for the month? How much of that variance was
        attributable to price variance rather than volume variance?

                  $1,800 unfavorable volume variance - $1,100 favorable price variance = $700 unfavorable
                  total variance.

                  In alternative analysis
                  The budget for the project was $18,000 (i.e., 2.5 board feet x 4,000 units x $1.80 per board
                  foot).
                  The actual cost for the project was $18,700.

COST STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT STRATEGY

By now, it should be clear that the principles of cost behavior, differential cost analysis, and cost-
sharing suggest various management strategies. One of the best approaches to manage costs and
bolster profitability for organizations with mostly fixed costs is to "scale up." Since fixed costs are
fixed, one way to manage them is to spread them across the largest possible volume of service.
However, for organizations with mostly variable costs, scaling up will simply increase variable costs.
The better approach in that circumstance is to invest in new technology, procurement processes,
or other strategies that can drive down variable costs. With the core principles of cost analysis
established, it becomes clear how a public organization's cost behavior might be most effectively
managed.

It is also essential to consider how an organization's financial management strategy is contingent on
the parts of its cost structure it can control. In other words, how much of its costs are direct and
under the control of its management, and how much of its costs are indirect and assigned to it by
management? For example, organizations with mostly direct costs often find themselves "scrubbing
expenses" because they have the authority and ability to affect those costs. However, organizations
with mostly indirect costs are more likely to partner with other organizations to leverage economies
of scale, diversify their potential customer/client base, or access new technologies or processes they
might not have the authority to pursue on their own.

When we consider these two main parts of an organization's cost structure - direct vs. indirect and
fixed vs. variable vs. step-fixed - we begin to see a set of attenuated management strategies. The table
below lists some of those strategies.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 211
For example, in the bottom left section, we see financial management strategies commonly employed
by organizations with primarily direct, step-fixed costs. For these organizations, the key is managing
workflow. As their volume increases, so do their fixed costs. In turn, many organizations of this
type work to spread their fixed costs within whichever step their fixed costs currently stand. That
means maximizing staff-to-client ratios at all times, including queuing up clients with waiting lists or
staggered enrollments before hiring new staff. Since most of those costs are direct, organizations have
the latitude to employ these strategies.
By contrast, organizations with mostly indirect costs may not have the ability to enact new enrollment
management policies. They must also "manage the step," but for them, the better strategy is to narrow
or limit the scope of services or to find new clients that can lead to more predictable enrollment
patterns. In short, managing direct step-fixed costs is quite different from managing indirect step-
fixed costs.
This table is by no means a comprehensive list of strategies, but it does orient you toward the
interesting and nuanced relationship between cost structure and financial management strategy.

212 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
CHAPTER 6.

BUDGET STRATEGY

                                            BUDGET STRATEGY: GETTING THE DEAL DONE

   With a more sophisticated understanding of budget-making processes, public managers can answer a
   variety of questions and management concerns:

           How is "managing costs" different from "managing a budget"?
           What's the best way - financially and politically - to respond to a potential budget cut? To respond

              to a possible budget increase or expansion?
           How can we structure budget processes to minimize conflict and maximize employee engagement?
           How does the budget timeline, namely when new information is introduced to budget decision-

              makers, affect how the budget is made?
           What are decision-makers' key concerns throughout the budget process? How do loss aversion,

              incrementalism, and parochialism affect budget-making?
           How does the format and presentation of a budget document affect how staff, clients, and other

              stakeholders perceive it?
           Why do governments' actual budget processes regularly deviate from their statutory or legal

              budget processes?
           What are the most and least effective ways to engage citizens and other stakeholders in the budget-

              making process?

In the late 1990s, several dozen people died in major house fires throughout the City of Seattle. Critics
blamed the Seattle Fire Department for its slow and insufficient response to those fires. The Fire
Chief accepted that criticism and urged the City's leaders to invest in significantly upgrading the Fire
Department's facilities, equipment, and training. Then-Mayor Greg Nickels proposed a new, 10-year,
$197 million property tax levy to pay for that upgrade, and voters approved that levy in 2003. The
centerpiece of that levy was a plan to rebuild or refurbish 33 fire stations.

In 2015, the City announced it had spent $306 million on those fire station projects. Of the 33
projects included in the plan, 32 had exceeded their original budgets. Many had cost twice their initial
estimate. And the program is not yet complete. The City expected to spend at least $50 million more
from other resources to complete those projects over the next five years.

How did this happen? How can a major city program staffed with many sophisticated budget and
finance staff over-run its budget by more than 50 percent?

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 213
The problem is best captured by the late, great Yogi Berra's adage that "Predictions are hard, especially
about the future." Costs of basic materials and labor change all the time, so it's difficult to forecast
those costs seven to 10 years into the future. Indeed, basic construction costs increased by around
one-third from early 2005 until late 2007. Moreover, during the ten years of the program,
professional standards for firefighters changed. Under the new standards, fire stations must now have
better training and fitness facilities, better information technology, and other upgrades that added
costs to the project.

To others, the problem is politics. According to some accounts, Mayor Nickels' staff estimated the
fire station program would cost around $300 million. The Mayor, however, did not believe voters
would approve that large a tax increase. So instead, he proposed the highest possible levy he believed
would pass, and he assumed the fire stations could be built at lower costs or that additional money for
the program would come from future city budgets. Whether you believe the problem is forecasting,
politics, or something else, it is clear that the legacy of the fire station levy is two-fold: better fire
protection and, presumably, closer scrutiny of future long-term capital projects.

This story illustrates the central point of this chapter: How we make a budget is just as important
as the revenues and spending proposed within it. Consider, for instance, how changes to the City's
budget process might have produced a different outcome for the fire station levy:

      If the program had not required voter approval, Mayor Nickels might have proposed a much
         larger levy that better reflected the full cost of the program.

      At the same time, if the City had paid for the full cost of fire stations out of general fund
         resources that did not require voter approval, those projects might have crowded out the
         Mayor's other high-priority projects in areas like economic development and affordable
         housing.

      If the City Council had better access to more sophisticated cost estimates earlier in the
         approval process for the new levy, they might have supported a higher requested amount or
         been willing to spend additional city resources.

      If the City Council members were elected by districts (as they are today) rather than at-large
         (as they were then), then specific members would have had a stronger incentive to monitor the
         costs and timing of fire station projects within their districts. That might have produced more
         substantial changes to the program at both the planning and implementation stages.

      If the City's capital budgeting process had more stringent accountability features, then the
         mayor might have reduced the budget for projects scheduled later in the program once it was
         clear that the first few projects had run over budget.

214 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
                                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVES

   After reading this chapter, you should be able to:
           Recognize the key components of a public organization's budget timeline/calendar and formal/
              legal budget process.
           Recognize the different ways that we define "budget balance" and the implications of those various
              definitions.
           Recognize that budgets ensure fiscal accountability but do not guarantee financial solvency.
           Know the typical sources of conflict and compromise in the budgeting process.
           Know managers' basic strategies to expand their budget authority or respond to potential cuts.
           Acknowledge the effectiveness of "doing nothing" as a budget-cutting strategy.
           Recognize when and why an organization's budget for a service might be quite different from what
              that service costs.

                                  "Don't tell me what you value, show me your budget, and I'll tell you what you value."
                                                                         President Joe Biden

BUDGETS ARE A STATEMENT OF OUR VALUES
Budgets frame values that permeate society. They translate those values into policies and programs
and communicate priorities to stakeholders. Budgets provide information for policymaking, public
scrutiny, and accountability. Budgets must speak to multiple audiences, including legislative body
members, taxpayers, employees, and oversight agencies.
A government's budget is a prospective document that shows policy priorities and how it plans to
pay for them. It facilitates the stewardship of resources - that expenses are reasonable, necessary, and
incurred in the pursuit of the organization's mission. It identifies proposed spending and the means
of financing proposed expenditures for the budget year (or multiple years). To that end, budgets must
present a summary of revenues by source, expenditures (or expenses) by policy area, and any other
source of funds (e.g., bond proceeds or proceeds from the sale of assets).
Budgets guide policy implementation and assess performance (program and financial performance).
To that end, budget documents should include a statement of objectives for each unit within the
organization (e.g., department, divisions, offices, or programs) and provide objective measures of
performance and outcomes.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 215
        OPERATING VS. CAPITAL BUDGET

           Most state and local governments have two different budgets: the operating budget for recurring expenditures and a capital
           budget for non-recurring capital expenditures (e.g., land acquisition and improvement costs). All day-to-day expenses of
           operating core programs are reported in the operating budget. However, capital expenditures may be included in the operating
           budget if they are recurring expenditures (e.g., purchase of computing equipment). Operating budgets frequently include
           spending on existing capital investments, including maintenance costs and principal and interest payments on outstanding debt
           obligations that finance infrastructure improvements.
           Capital budgets typically include a capital improvement plan (CIP) that identifies long-term capital spending needs over a five- or
           10-year period. The capital budget will identify funding sources over multiple years, including General Fund revenues, special
           taxes, user charges or fees, federal grants, reserve funds, and long-term debt (proposed or approved).
           Creating and justifying capital expenditures is far more challenging for most state and local governments because these
           investments are not visible but considerably more expensive. Consider, for instance, that 70 percent of infrastructure assets are
           underground, but it costs $140,000/mile/year to maintain roads.
           In some instances, spending on capital improvements may require voter approval, as related expenditures are paid for using
           special tax revenues (e.g., capital projects property tax levy) or general obligation bonds. Borrowing is an acceptable form of
           financing capital improvements so long as the repayment period does not exceed the asset's useful life. Borrowing should not be
           used to balance the operating budget. Given the significant costs associated with capital improvements and their potential
           impact on operating costs, operating budgets, and capital budgets are inextricably linked, as substantive changes in one will
           impact the other and vice versa.

Most people believe--incorrectly - that governments adopt a single budget. In reality, governments
adopt multiple budgets, known as appropriation bills (or spending bills). Up to 13 different
appropriation bills must pass both houses of Congress before they go to the President. Appropriation
bills may be combined into an omnibus appropriations bill. State and local governments pass fewer
bills. The Washington legislature, for example, approves three separate appropriation bills - operating
budget bill, capital budget bill, and transportation budget bill.

Governments adopt separate budgets for off-budget entities that are reported in a separate stand-
alone budget. While the Federal Reserve System (the Fed) is part of the federal government, the
agency has autonomy over its finances with interest on U.S. government securities, foreign currency
investments, fees for services provided to depository institutions (e.g., automated clearinghouse
operations), and interest earned on loans to banks covering its operating expenses with remittance of
any excess funds to the U.S. Treasury. Government-sponsored enterprises, such as the Federal Home
Loan Banks, also fall outside the federal budget processes as they are privately owned, and their debt
does not bear the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.

216 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        ANNUAL VS. BIENNIAL BUDGET

           A vast majority of states prepare and present an annual budget. Several states prepare a biennial budget with an annual session.
           In other words, the state prepares and presents a two-year budget and adjusts the biennial budget at the end of the first year.

           Biennial budgeting states generally enact separate budgets for each fiscal year at once. They include Arkansas, Connecticut,
           Hawaii, Indiana, Kentucky, Maine, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Carolina, Ohio, Oregon, Virginia, Washington,
           and Wisconsin. True biennial budgeting--enacting a single two-year budget--is rare, although still practiced in North Dakota and
           Wyoming. States with biennial budgets and biennial sessions are some of the smallest in the nation -- Montana, Nevada, and
           North Dakota. The exception here is Texas.
           Source: National Association of State Budget Officers and Tax Policy Center

INCREMENTALISM AND BUDGET REFORMS
Budgeting is many things to public organizations. It's a mechanism to plan and develop a strategy
for the coming year. It's a tool to evaluate how well managers manage. It's a way to evaluate if and
how an organization's resources are connected to its priorities. It's a tool to get feedback from key
stakeholders about an organization's successes and failures. For governments, the budget is a legally
binding document that commits it to a spending plan for the coming year(s). But fundamentally,
budgeting is a form of politics. Resources are scarce, and budgeting is the process by which
organizations allocate those scarce resources. As such, budgeting is about managing conflict.
Budgeting in governments, and most large bureaucratic institutions, is an incremental process. That
is, the focal point for each year's budget is an incremental increase or decrease over last year's
budget. Put differently, there's an old adage: "Most budgets are last year's budget plus three percent."

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 217
Since the Great Recession, most budgets have been last year's minus three, five, or 10 percent. For
budget policymakers, conflicts and compromises are often around that annual percentage change or
increment. This assumes that last year's budget - or base budget - fairly represented the organization's
goals and priorities. If this is not true, then debating on incremental change will amplify the
disconnect between resources and priorities. In fact, for most public organizations, that disconnect is
persistent and pervasive.

Historically, governments have prepared line-item budgets that place significant emphasis on inputs.
Unfortunately, line-item budgets do not present information in a format that connects the mission
to the organization's resources. Most have experimented with various budgeting models designed
to "reform" the line-item format and incrementalistic tendency. One of the most popular reform
strategies is to allocate resources not through political bargaining but in a more mechanical or
formula-driven way driven by priorities or goals. For roughly 50 years, one of the most popular
strategies has been performance budgeting. In this format, the organization allocates resources not
according to inputs or line items like salaries or supplies but rather according to the level of overall
resources, regardless of inputs needed to achieve some desired goal or outcome. Some governments
extend this model into a Price of Government or Priorities of Government approach. Under this model,
citizens identify the levels and outcomes of government services most important to them, and the
government allocates packages of resources to achieve those outcomes.

Performance budgeting and the "Priorities of Government" approach are not mutually exclusive.
Cities like Redmond, WA, and Somerville, MA, have implemented performance-based budgeting
programs that are tightly connected to strategic priorities. In the Somerville model, departments
orient their budget requests around outcomes rather than budget inputs or line items. For example, the
library system requests its budget in terms of the cost per library patron served, not just in terms of
payroll, commodities, equipment, and other line items.

A few state and local governments have experimented with versions of zero-based budgeting (ZBB).
Under ZBB, the organization assumes there is no such thing as a base budget. Each year, departments
and programs must justify everything in their budget. Much of the money state and local government
spend is "required by law" or "necessary for public safety," so a large portion of a government's
budget cannot be cut through a ZBB process. Some versions of ZBB require departments or programs
to connect their non-required spending to the organization's strategic goals or priorities. Proposed
spending most closely connected to those goals will likely make its way into the final budget and
vice versa. In some ZBB models, departments and programs must present decision-makers with
"scenarios" or "decision packages" that identify what will happen if their department or program does
not receive a portion of its base budget. All these innovations are designed to remove some or all of
the pure political bargaining from budgeting.

That said, most governments and non-profit organizations continue to practice traditional,
incremental, line-item budgeting.

218 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
        OPERATIONALIZING EQUITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICE IN STATE AND LOCAL
        BUDGETS

           City of Seattle Race and Social Justice Initiative (RSJI) is a citywide effort to end institutionalized racism and race-based
           disparities in government. The Race and Social Justice Initiative leads with racism because race has shaped institutions and
           policies in the U.S. in ways that have prevented racial equity. When the City of Seattle launched RSJI in 2005, no other
           government had ever undertaken an effort that focused explicitly on institutional racism. Over the years, several city and county
           governments have initiated equity and social justice initiatives in their budget processes, including King County (WA),
           Minneapolis (MN), Madison (WI), Portland (OR), and San Antonio (TX), to name a few.

           To be effective, race and social justice initiatives will require concerted efforts in every department in every state or local
           government. The Seattle Office for Civil Rights leads equity and social justice initiatives in the City and supports the City's
           departments and staff. Every department has a "Change Team" - i.e., teams facilitating discussions on race, racism, and strategies
           to overcome institutional barriers to racial and social equity. Departments develop processes that explicitly guide the
           development, implementation, and evaluation of policies, programs, or initiatives to promote racial equity. The City of Seattle's
           Racial Equity Toolkit guides the process and requires departments to

                 define racially equitable community outcomes associated with their program or initiative, focusing on key

                         opportunity areas (e.g., education, community development, public health, environment, criminal justice, and
                         affordable housing)

                 analyze qualitative and quantitative data, and engage community partners. Conversations with community

                         stakeholders and comparative data would help identify the root causes or factors that can be used to explain racial
                         inequities (e.g., lack of access, bias in processes, lack of racially inclusive engagement)

                 use data to design programs, policies, or initiatives. They must also outline the expected outcomes (benefits) and

                         unintended consequences (burdens). Recognizing that not all policies will have equitable results, departments must
                         identify strategies that would lead to a long-term positive change or re-align the department's work to achieve racially
                         equitable outcomes

                 evaluate programs to raise awareness and be accountable. Evaluations would then be used to track impact and

                         identify issues initiatives or programs could not address.

           Social justice initiatives face significant challenges, the largest being existing mandatory expenditures, the incremental nature of
           budgets, and the pervasiveness of restricted revenues, making it extremely challenging to shift resources to under-resourced
           programs or policy priorities where racial inequities are prevalent. Without new revenues, preferably from progressive taxes,
           social justice initiatives will have to compete for limited resources.

THE BUDGET PROCESS

Public managers can't control many of the factors that affect their budgets. Managers in government
can't control the broader economy. Non-profit managers can't do much to affect the financial health
of the foundations that grant them money or individuals who support them through donations.
Managers across the public sector can do little to affect rising costs for employee health care, new
technology, wages and salaries, and other factors that drive growth in expenses. The best we can do
is understand these trends, forecast them to the best of our ability, and help policymakers understand
the trade-offs these trends put in play.

But public managers can control how they make their budgets, also known as the budget process. In fact,
the process is the only part of budgeting that public managers can control. In particular, you alone can
answer many of the key questions surrounding each of the three main budget process concerns:

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 219
      Who proposes the budget? Do you develop and propose your budget on your own? When
         developing your initial assumptions, do you solicit input from program managers or other
         subordinates, your board, council or other policy leaders, outside funders, or other key
         stakeholders? Do you ask department heads or other subordinates to develop and submit their
         budgets?

      What information is introduced into the budget process, and when? Do you share the key
         budget assumptions with program managers, line staff, and other stakeholders? Do you
         connect budgeted spending with key performance targets? If so, do you make those targets
         available to other stakeholders? If your budget calls for cuts, do you share when and how
         those cuts will happen? Do you explain why you chose the cuts you chose? Do you share that
         information with the entire organization at once or through meetings with individual
         program managers/department heads/etc.?

      Who decides on final budgeted revenues and spending? Do you afford program managers/
         department heads/etc., the latitude to propose their own final budget? Does your council/
         board approve the budget in one action or in stages? If you have the authority to make budget
         amendments or re-appropriations? Do you use it, and when? Does your budget include both
         operations and capital projects, or just operations?

For this and many other reasons, it is important to understand some of the main features of public
organizations' budget processes. This discussion is focused on governments' budget processes, mostly
because those processes are comparable and are often prescribed by law. That said, many of the basic
features of those processes can also apply to non-profits. Moreover, non-profit managers need to
understand how government budgets are made, given the centrality of government funding to many
non-profit organizations.

BUDGET PROCESS
STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS

The budget processes of state and local governments share some common characteristics. Most
governments follow these basic steps:

    1. Strategic and Department-Level Planning: This process often begins five to six months
         before the start of the next fiscal year. The chief executive (governor, mayor, city manager,
         county administrator, etc.) will issue a budget call highlighting their policy priorities.
         Department heads and program managers must prepare budgets based on the executive's
         priorities and their own spending needs. The budget call will include information about
         expected revenue changes - based on the prevailing economic environment and detailed
         instructions and assumptions that must be used to prepare the budget (e.g., cost of living
         adjustments, and mileage rates). The call will also contain detailed instructions on how
         agencies and departments are expected to prepare budget proposals (e.g., format) and budget
         calendars to ensure program and departmental budgets are prepared in a timely fashion.

    2. Revenue Forecasting: For most state and local governments, revenue forecasting begins with
         national and region-specific forecasts of economic activity. For this, governments frequently
         use proprietary and national data to predict changes in population, wages, employment/
         unemployment, income, consumer confidence, market performance, and assess changes in

220 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
    key sectors in the state or region. Regression models are frequently used to forecast tax
    revenues. These models incorporate historical data and inputs on expected changes in policy
    (e.g., changes in marginal income tax rates). Most states and large local governments have a
    consensus revenue forecast group comprising executive and legislative staff. In seven states,
    the governor's office alone prepares the estimates (Arkansas, Georgia, Minnesota, New Jersey,
    Oklahoma, South Carolina, and West Virginia). Others hire consulting firms that prepare,
    present, and revise multi-year revenue forecasts (Hawaii, Nebraska, Nevada, and Washington).
    Revenue forecasting is an ongoing process that is revised throughout the preparation,
    approval, and execution phases of the budget cycle. Revenue officials (treasurer, chief financial
    officer, finance director, etc.) frequently track economic trends, compare revenue projections
    to actuals, and use that information to recommend changes during the budget year or the
    following fiscal year. Some governments' revenues are so volatile that within-year budget
    changes are frequently required. Volatility in revenues is a function of the volatility of the
    revenue stream and the share that the stream represents. For example, increased reliance on
    taxes on oil and minerals (also known as severance taxes) means states like Alaska, North
    Dakota, and Wyoming have higher volatility scores compared to states like Texas and
    Pennsylvania, as the latter report a smaller share of revenues from severance taxes. Personal
    income and sales taxes are typically more stable, while corporate income taxes, like severance
    taxes, are significantly more volatile.

   REVENUE FORECAST VS. CASH FLOW FORECAST

    Forecasting has increasingly become an important fiscal planning tool. As the name suggests, to forecast is to "predict or
    estimate future events." This is often challenging in volatile economic environments. Finance officers will forecast revenues and
    incorporate estimates in the proposed and approved budget. Proposed and approved budgets are the basis for preparing cash
    flow forecasts (also known as cash budgets). Unlike revenue forecasts, which are multi-year projections, cash flow forecasts are
    frequently on a monthly basis. They translate an adopted budget to monthly cash inflows (receipts) and cash outflows
    (expenditures). This exercise is especially important if cash flows are lumpy. For example, cash inflows from sales taxes or cash
    outflows for salaries and benefits are monthly and more or less predictable. However, cash inflows from property tax or cash
    outflows on debt service are lumpy, with payments on a quarterly or semi-annual basis. Similarly, non-profits will receive sizeable
    cash donations at the end of the year or following a capital campaign/fundraising event. They will frequently be awarded grants
    and contracts but on a reimbursement basis. That means they'll incur costs - and make payments - before reimbursement is
    received. Therefore, managers need to plan when and to what extent they'll draw on existing cash reserves, liquidate
    investments, tap their line of credit, or issue short-term notes. Conversely, they'll use the cash flow forecast to plan how they will
    restore reserves, invest in safe money-market instruments, or pay off short-term debt.

3. Executive Preparation: Once budgets are submitted to the executive office, budget staff will
    review departmental and program budget requests and use these requests to prepare the
    proposed budget. That's not to say that departmental and program budget requests are
    adopted as is. In fact, department heads and program directors are often asked to present and
    defend their budgets, especially if budgets are not consistent with the executive's priorities or
    exceed budgeted allocations.

4. Legislative Review and Adoption: The legislative review process, which often integrates
    public hearings, begins one to two months before the start of the fiscal year. Legislators will

                                                                                                                          FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 221
         review the executive's proposed budget, question department and agency heads about their
         spending plans, and recommend changes that would be included in the final appropriations
         bill or approved budget. A vast majority of legislative bodies in government will hold public
         hearings. For states, hearings are part of the regular budget legislative session. For local
         governments, budget hearings are typically stand-alone public meetings. Budgets are often
         adopted two to three weeks before the start of the fiscal year, though, in some instances,
         budget adoption may be delayed. Once legislators pass a budget, the chief executive (governor,
         mayor, city manager, county administrator, etc.) will sign it. Governors in 44 states can use
         their line-item veto powers to reject parts of the legislative budget even though doing so
         would infringe on the legislature's appropriation authority. (i.e., power of the purse). Vetoes
         can be overridden, typically with a legislative super-majority vote (three-fifths or two-thirds);
         otherwise, vetoed items do not become part of the approved appropriation, and the deletions
         or deductions stand.

222 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
   BALANCED OPERATING BUDGET AND BALANCED BUDGET REQUIREMENTS

    Balanced Budget Requirements (BBRs) are constitutional or statutory rules that prohibit states from spending more than they
    collect. For some governments, this means budgeted revenues must equal or exceed budgeted expenditures when the budget is
    passed. This is also known as balance "at adoption." For others, it means budgeted revenues and expenditures must equal actual
    revenues and expenditures, also known as balance "at conclusion."
    In most states, the BBRs apply to just the General Fund; in others, the requirement applies to other governmental funds. In some
    governments, budgeted revenues and expenditures must equal or exceed actual revenues and expenditures at periodic intervals
    throughout the fiscal year.

    Strong balanced budget requirement meets one or more of the following criteria: 1) requires the governor to sign a balanced
    budget; 2) prohibits the state from carrying over the deficit into the following year or biennium; or 3) requires the legislature to
    pass a balanced budget, accompanied by within fiscal-year fiscal controls or limits on supplemental appropriations. A statutory
    designation indicates that all balanced budget rules in that state are statutory, otherwise, the balanced budget rules are in the
    state's constitution.
    Research shows stricter BBRs - particularly those that prohibit states from carrying over deficits into the following fiscal year -
    are associated with rapid spending adjustments resulting in greater spending volatility as governments cut spending to meet the
    balanced budget requirement. In some states, BBRs have incentivized unsound budgeting and accounting practices, including
    frequent use of inter-fund transfers, underestimations of long-term obligations, and the frequent use of asset sales. That said,
    states that have strict BBRs are more likely to maintain higher reserve balances. The presence of balanced budget laws and
    higher-than-average reserves means that these governments are more likely to have a higher credit rating and as a result, their
    borrowing costs are lower.
    Source: Tax Policy Center Briefing Book

5. Implementation: Once the budget is approved, department heads and program managers will
    implement the approved budget over the next 12 months. Most organizations anticipate
    changes in forecasted revenues and budgeted spending. They'll plan for mid-year adjustments,
    some of which may require formal modifications to the adopted budget. The central budget

                                                                                                                          FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 223
         office will closely monitor the execution processes and adjust next year's budget instructions
         accordingly.

    6. Audit and Evaluation: This stage starts at the end of the fiscal year. It can take many months,
         depending on the organization's size, the complexity of the jurisdiction's chart of accounts,
         the size, and the professional skills of budget staff and treasury officers, to name a few. Every
         organization must "close its books" and prepare financial statements before a financial audit.
         They will also engage in evaluation processes on program effectiveness. The Governmental
         Accountability Office (GAO) is the audit and evaluation arm of the federal government. Two
         tasks include "auditing agency operations to determine whether federal funds are spent
         efficiently and effectively" and "reporting on how well government programs and policies are
         meeting their objectives."At the state level, the state auditor's office would prepare the
         government's financial statements and act as watchdogs over state agencies performing
         internal financial and performance audits. In 24 states, auditors are elected (therefore
         partisan). Appointed auditors serve as nonpartisan officials.

Even though the stages of the budget cycle are presented here as separate and distinct, they overlap a
great deal in practice. For example, the budget's preparation typically begins six to 18 months before
the start of the fiscal year, depending on whether the budget is annual or biennial. Thus, when the
government is preparing next year's budget request, it is implementing the current year's budget and,
in some instances, completing audit reviews, performance evaluations, and financial reporting of the
prior year's budget.

Cities, counties, schools, and special districts generally follow the same basic process. In Washington
State, most local governments follow a January 1 fiscal year. The mayor/executive/superintendent's
staff review departments' budget proposals throughout the late summer and early fall and propose a
budget in early September. The Council/Board debates the budget and revises it in late fall and early
winter. At the City of Seattle, those proposed changes are articulated in Green Sheets that suggest a
change to the Mayor's proposed budget. State law requires a passed budget by December 2. Most local
governments do not have the same executive-legislative tensions as the state and federal governments,
and local budget processes are rarely as formal. Still, the same basic processes, institutions, and
incentives are at play.

        BALANCING STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT BUDGETS AMID THE COVID-19
        RECESSION

           Unlike the federal government, state and local governments must balance their budgets within the budget period or in the next
           budget period (see Balanced Budget Requirements). Additionally, existing laws prohibit state and local governments from using
           borrowed funds to pay for operating expenditures.

           Practically every economic forecast predicts that the fiscal shock from the COVID-19 recession will be greater than the Great
           Recession. A prolonged recession and sluggish recovery would likely mean state and local governments must make significant
           budget cuts. We know from prior recessions that these cuts are more likely to occur in core public services, including healthcare,
           assistance to older people, and education, as these programs make up more than three-quarters of state or local government

224 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
spending.
What will these governments do in the near term? Immediate expenditure responses will include hiring freezes, salary, and cost
of living adjustment freezes, limits on the use of overtime, improved productivity by streamlining program delivery,
cost-effective partnerships with other governments, non-profit organizations, and the private sector, audits of routine
expenditures for savings, budget savings following reduced hours of operations, and data-driven targeted cuts in key programs
and services. That said, balanced budget requirements frequently necessitate across-the-board (ATB) cuts - and practically
every state and local government will use ATB cuts to address projected deficits. In the medium term, governments will likely
eliminate programs and close facilities. In the long term, they'll lean on layoffs, furloughs, cuts to employee benefits, and delayed
payments to vendors and other governments.
On the revenue side, they'll tap into reserve funds (e.g., Budget Stabilization Funds or unassigned General Funds balances) and
rely on inter-fund (internal) loans to ease the cash flow crunch. They'll raise selected fees and taxes (e.g., vehicle registration fees,
college tuition, fees for state parks, taxes on gambling (casinos, sports betting, and lotteries), tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana),
improve revenue collection (including implementing tax amnesty programs), and mitigate fraud risk loss in government benefit
programs (especially in benefit programs). Some will refinance outstanding debt obligations, especially in a low-interest
environment. Over the long term, they will finance essential capital expenditures with debt to free up cash for the operating
budget. They'll raise rates on major taxes (personal income, sales, and property) and revise their tax codes to reduce or eliminate
deductions and exclusions - thereby expanding the taxable base.

                                                                                                                    FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 225
        SAVING FOR A RAINY DAY

           Practically every state government (including the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands) has created a
           budget stabilization fund (BSF, also known as a rainy-day fund (or RDF)). They represent resources explicitly set aside to meet
           future needs. Many states maintain additional stabilization funds earmarked for specific expenses such as K-12 education (e.g.,
           Idaho's Public Education Stabilization fund) or disaster relief (e.g., California Special Fund for Economic Uncertainties).
           Budget Stabilization Funds (as a Percent of General Fund Revenues)

           Source: National Association of State Budget Officers (NASBO)
           Most local governments do not have formal rainy-day funds in the same way states do. According to recent research, only 11 of
           the 30 largest U.S. cities have an actual rainy-day fund. Instead, most localities use unassigned fund balances as informal
           reserves. However, unlike BSF, unassigned fund balances do not have formal constraints. These informal practices are not
           necessarily bad, but they're not as transparent and funds can be drawn down without setting limits or priorities on the use of
           these funds.
           Funding mechanisms for BSF vary from state to state. Most states allow some or all year-end surpluses to flow to their BSFs.
           Others mandate deposits to the BSF based on a pre-determined formula. Others set aside funds each year through an annual
           appropriation process until the fund reaches its mandated cap. Research has shown that for governments to accumulate
           sufficient reserves, they must identify the source of funding using a pre-determined deposit formula and use approval
           procedures to withdraw funds from the BSF (e.g., meet the definition of emergency or deficit shortfall or require a super-majority
           vote). There are benefits to having BSFs. Not only do they provide budget flexibility - the reserves can prevent the need for
           mid-year budget cuts. Additionally, governments with strict deposit and withdrawal rules are more likely to have a higher credit
           rating and, as a result, incur lower borrowing costs.

226 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
BUDGET PROCESS
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

The federal government's budget process is three processes in one. The president develops and
proposes the executive budget, also known as the budget request. In Congress, the House Budget
Committee and the Senate Budget Committee pass a budget resolution that identifies the main spending
policies and targets for the Congressional side of the budget. The budget resolution allocates budget
authority, or the power to incur spending obligations, and budget outlays, or the amount of cash that
will flow from the Treasury to a federal agency. The budget authority must be re-authorized each
year, even though many programs and services call for budget outlays that will span multiple years.
It's not uncommon for a project to receive budget authority but not receive adequate budget outlays.

The third part of the process is that the House Ways and Means and Senate appropriations
committees must pass a series of appropriations bills allowing the rest of the government to spend
money. Once the appropriations bills are passed - usually following a lengthy conference committee
process - and the President signs them, they become the federal budget.

The basic timeline for the federal budget process was outlined in the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
That process, with the goal of passing the new budget before the end of the federal fiscal year on
September 30, is as follows:

The President's Budget

      October (or shortly after passage of the current fiscal year's budget): The President's Office of
         Management and Budget (OMB) works with executive agencies to develop their budget requests
         for the coming fiscal year. Executive agencies include all the cabinet-level agencies like the
         Departments of State, Treasury, Justice, and Education, as well as the federal judiciary,
         independent regulatory agencies, and several other parts of the federal government. OMB
         reviews the requests and makes changes, subject to the President's guidance, before
         combining those requests into the President's budget.

      February: President submits the budget request, usually concurrent with the State of the
         Union address. The House and Senate Budget Committees and House and Senate
         Appropriation Committees, working through their subcommittees, hold hearings and develop
         appropriation bills that provide funds for agency operations.

Congressional Budget Process - Budget Resolution and Appropriations Process

      March-April: No later than April 15th of each year, the House and Senate Budget Committees
         draft and manage the passage of their respective budget resolutions. The congressional budget
         resolution establishes overall revenue and spending totals, allocates spending among major
         government functions (e.g., national defense, transportation, health, and agriculture), sets
         limits on resources for discretionary spending programs, and establishes target levels for
         mandatory spending. Once Budget Committees pass their respective budget resolutions, they
         go to the House and Senate floors, where they can be amended by majority vote.
         Representatives from the House and Senate meet in conference to reconcile differences in the
         House and Senate budget resolutions. The House and Senate then vote on the conference

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 227
         agreement, which, when passed, becomes the congressional budget resolution. Since the
         congressional budget resolution is an act of Congress, it does not require the President's
         signature. Since it does not go to the President, it cannot enact spending or tax law. The
         congressional budget resolution, therefore, serves as a blueprint for the actual appropriation
         process and sets targets for other congressional committees that can propose legislation
         directly.

      May-September: The adopted budget resolution includes a table called the "302(a) allocation"
         that sets the cap on spending for the appropriations bills. The House and Senate
         Appropriations Committees each have 12 subcommittees, and each subcommittee crafts an
         appropriations bill determining the spending authority for the programs under its
         jurisdiction. The House and Senate pass their appropriations and reconciliation bills.
         Conference committees resolve differences in the final appropriations and reconciliation bills.
         The President signs those bills.

      June-July: House and Senate committees prepare reconciliation bills. Reconciliation occurs if
         Congress needs to legislate policy changes in mandatory spending or tax laws to meet the
         annual targets laid out in the budget resolution. Said differently, the reconciliation bills
         implement changes in authorizing legislation, or the laws determining spending on entitlement
         programs, required by the budget resolution. Most resolution measures are related to
         entitlement spending like Medicare or to changes in tax law, namely tax cuts.

      October 1: Fiscal year begins.

The Congressional Budget Act of 1974 established the formal rules of the federal budgeting game.
However, in the last few decades, the formal budgeting process explains less and less how the federal
government spends money. Consider the following:

      If the appropriations bills are not signed into law by October 1, Congress must pass a
         continuing resolution. This is a temporary measure that extends the existing appropriations bills
         for a short time, usually 30 to 60 days. Missing the October 1 deadline to enact all 12
         appropriation bills is not unusual; in fact, that deadline has not been fully met since FY 1997,
         and Congress has passed at least one continuing resolution in 16 of the last 20 years. In some
         years, the government operated on continuing resolutions for most of the next fiscal year.

      For most of the past 20 years, Congress has not passed a budget resolution. Without a
         resolution, the House and Senate usually pass different substitute versions of the budget
         targets that would otherwise appear in the budget resolution. Those substitutes or deeming
         authorization bills are advisory, rather than binding, on the appropriations committees. Said
         differently, the budget resolution mechanism has not been an effective tool for imposing fiscal
         discipline.

      At any point during the fiscal year, Congress can impose a rescission that cancels existing
         budget authority. The Impoundment Control Act of 1974 specifies that the president may
         propose to Congress that those funds be rescinded. If both Houses have not approved a
         rescission proposal (by passing legislation) within 45 days of continuous session, any funds
         being withheld must be made available for obligation. The threat of rescission, and in some
         cases the actual use of it, has become a way to enforce de facto budget priorities that were

228 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
   never written into the budget resolution or appropriations bills. The best recent example is
   Congress's persistent attempts to strip funding for the Affordable Care Act (ACA, more
   commonly referred to as "Obamacare").

 In 2011, Congress passed the Budget Control Act (BCA). This law established that unless
   Congress can reduce the annual budget deficit by a predetermined target, automatic cuts in
   discretionary and selected entitlement - known broadly as the sequester- will take effect.
   Unless amended, BCA extends the sequester through 2021. Neither the Budget Act nor any
   other piece of federal budget legislation makes mention of anything like the sequester. BCA
   was the latest of many statutory budget caps designed to limit federal government spending
   automatically. Those caps are not part of the existing budget process framework laid out in
   the Congressional Budget Act.

 Many of the federal government's most expensive activities are now paid for outside the
   budget process. The best recent example is the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. By some
   estimates, the two wars cost $1-3 trillion or somewhere between $2,000 and $10,000 for
   every US taxpayer. Congress appropriated around $50 billion for "The Surge" of US troops
   into Iraq as part of the FY2006 Defense Department Appropriations bill. The remainder of the
   funding was allocated through supplemental appropriations and budget amendments.
   Supplemental appropriations are appropriations bills that add to an existing appropriation.
   They are designed to provide resources for unexpected emergencies, such as disaster relief
   after a hurricane or earthquake. Budget amendments are changes to budget outlays to that
   same effect. Most of these supplemental/emergency appropriations were financed with debt.

  SUPPLEMENTAL APPROPRIATIONS AND THE CORONAVIRUS PANDEMIC

   Since March 6, 2020, lawmakers have enacted four laws in response to the pandemic - The Families First Coronavirus Act
   (March 18, 2020 - $192 billion), The Coronavirus Aid Relief and Economic Security Act (March 27, 2020 - $1.7 trillion), the
   Paycheck Protection Program and Healthcare Enhancement Act (April 24, 2020 - $483 billion), the Consolidated Appropriations
   Act (December 27, 2020 - $900 billion), and the American Rescue Plan (March 11, 2021 - $1.9 trillion). The five appropriation
   bills increased federal government outlays by $5.2 trillion.

   For context, following the start of the Great Recession, Congress approved three major pieces of legislation, including the
   Economic Stimulus Act (February 2008 - $151.7 billion), the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act that created the Troubled
   Asset Relief Program (October 2008 - $700 billion; TARP recovered $443 billion), and the American Recovery and
   Reinvestment Act (February 2009 - $840 billion).

 Since roughly 1990, Congress has used budget reconciliation to pass several major pieces of
   legislation, including the "Bush tax cuts," the Medicare prescription drug benefit ("Part D"),
   and the Affordable Care Act. Reconciliation is a powerful tool because, by Senate rules,
   reconciliation bills are not subject to filibuster. A filibuster is when an individual Senator kills a
   proposed bill by "talking it to death," taking advantage of Senate rules allowing unlimited
   debate. To end a filibuster, the Senate must invoke cloture with a two-thirds majority vote of
   all Senators. Given the highly partisan character of the Senate throughout the past few
   decades, the threat of a filibuster is always present, which imposes a de facto two-thirds

                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 229
         majority to approve virtually every piece of legislation proposed in the Senate.

BUDGET PROCESS
NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS

Unlike governments, non-profits are not required to prepare or adopt a budget prior to the start of
the fiscal year (they are required to prepare audited financial statements and file with the Internal
Revenue Service tax form 990 at the end of the fiscal year or tax year). Non-profits must therefore
be internally motivated to prepare, review, and adopt a balanced operating budget - even though
no requirements exist in law. Moreover, the adopted budget should become an unwavering policy
guiding the organization throughout the budget period.

Non-profits' budgets should reflect the organization's priorities as outlined in their strategic plan.
The non-profit board serves as the organization's governing body with responsibility and oversight
of mission, leadership, and finances. While budgets are prepared by program managers together with
finance officers and the chief executive, the non-profit board retains the ultimate responsibility of not
only setting the organization's strategic direction but also ensuring that there are adequate resources
to execute the strategic plan.

The chief executive, together with the finance director, will outline priorities as stated in the
organization's strategic plan and given the uncertainty in the external operating environment (e.g.,
changes in federal or state laws or funding priorities, volatility in the market, and changes in
contributions). Having prepared their program budgets, program managers must defend their
proposals in a budget review meeting with the chief executive and the finance director. Following an
amendment process, the finance director will merge the program budgets, incorporate administrative
and overhead costs, and prepare a complete budget proposal for the board to consider.

Most non-profits prepare their operating budgets on a cash basis. Budgets prepared on a cash basis
emphasize when cash is received or paid. Budgets prepared on an accrual basis shift the focus away
from cash inflows instead of focusing on when revenues are earned and expenses accrued. Does this
matter? Absolutely! If the organization is budgeting on a cash basis, expenses that do not result in
a cash outflow (e.g., depreciation) would not be included in the budget - even though the expenses
represent a real cost for the organization.

While the operating budget represents the organization's priorities for the budget period, non-
profits that require capital investments to execute their business model (e.g., universities, museums,
and hospitals) frequently consider their capital spending priorities separately from their operating
budget. Why? Well, a couple of considerations are important. First, most non-profits finance capital
expenditures with non-operating revenues (e.g., proceeds from a capital campaign, accumulated
unrestricted reserves, or long-term debt). Second, an assessment of project viability is necessary,
as capital investments should provide a return (or, at the very least, cover initial investment costs).
Therefore, an assessment of project viability would be prudent. This process requires a different set
of analytical tools (e.g., net present value analysis and annual cash flow forecast). Finally, the budget
period for capital expenditures is irrelevant, as the focus shifts towards the asset's useful life (e.g., 30
years for buildings).

230 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
The (operating and capital) budget review and approval process will be contingent upon the size of
the organization's budget, the number of board members, and the board committee structure. The
review process frequently begins with a budget presentation to a finance committee. The finance
committee pays special attention to the long-term fiscal implications of the proposed spending
priorities given current revenue streams. Having approved the budget, an executive committee (made
up of board officers and chairs of various committees) reviews and approves the budget, after which
it is presented to the entire board for final approval. Once approved, the finance director should
report, on a quarterly (or monthly) basis, year-to-date spending, budget versus actual reports (with
variance analysis), working capital cash balances, and key changes in programs or policies that affect
the operating budget.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 231
        "CREATING" BUDGET BALANCE

           One of the main criticisms of state and local budgets is that "balanced budgets" might actually hide structural deficits. There are
           two reasons for this. First, most governments prepare their budgets on a cash basis rather than an accrual basis. Differences in
           timing and recognition of revenues or expenses mask the long-term effects of budget decisions. Second, managers and
           policymakers can employ various tactics to create a "phantom" balanced budget.

           The pressure to present a balanced budget results in the frequent use of budget gimmicks. Gimmickry can be defined as a
           practice that intentionally violates accounting rules, budgeting norms, or legal requirements meant to ensure fiscal prudence.
           They are used to hide program costs, revenue shortfalls, projected deficits, or bypass formal budget process requirements (e.g.,
           adopt a balanced budget).

           The temptation of the quick fix has seduced just about every lawmaker. They include:

                 Use of unrealistic budget assumptions. Use of overly optimistic assumptions that result in revenue projections far

                         exceeding the economic reality, masking the size and magnitude of the government's structural deficit and growth in
                         long-term obligations (e.g., federal debt or unfunded pension obligations).

                 Inter-fund transfers and fund sweeps. The transfer of resources in and out of funds just before or after budget

                         approval to present a balanced budget.

                 Use of one-time revenues. State and local governments have used proceeds from asset sales, privatizations, and

                         contract arrangements to balance the current period budget - even though budgets for the out-years remain
                         unbalanced.

                 Accelerating revenue collection. This changes when revenues are recognized, which can change the budget balance's

                         complexion in a given fiscal period.

                 Putting off payments or ignoring known costs. Preparing budgets on a cash basis means costs incurred in the current

                         year that are due in a future period are not included in the current budget. When governments offer pension and
                         OPEB benefits but fail to make the contributions necessary to meet future costs, they are essentially borrowing from
                         their future taxpayers.

                 Keeping off the record. Shift spending to off-budget entities (OBEs) that issue non-guaranteed debt backed primarily

                         with non-tax revenues and are beyond the control and scrutiny of taxpayers.

                 Delaying intergovernmental payments. This is a common tactic because governments have limited ability to collect

                         revenues from each other.

                 Counting on revenues or savings that are unlikely to materialize - the "Magic Asterisk." Resources to cover the new

                         spending would come from vaguely described efficiency gains in existing programs. Programs expected to produce
                         those new resources were identified with an asterisk in President Reagan's budgets, hence the name "Magic Asterisk."

 "Using proceeds from the sale of government assets as revenues to cover operating costs and thinking you have made the public better off is
   about the same as burning pieces of your house for heat and thinking that you are better off because you haven't had to buy firewood. "

                              John Mikesell (2011) "Fiscal Administration: Analysis and Application for the Public Sector"

BUDGET POLITICS

Within the formal budget process, there are budget politics. For most public managers, the politics
and strategy of making a budget are just as important, if not more important, than the formal budget
process. Here we briefly discuss some of the most common budget-making strategies. Some of these
strategies are more appropriate if the goal is to limit spending, while others are more appropriate if

232 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
a department or agency wants to expand programs, or at the very least maintain the status quo. They
include:

      Cultivate a clientele. Effective public managers understand who "uses" and who "benefits"
         from their programs and services. They also understand that those users are the best
         advocates for a program. This is especially true for programs that benefit children, the
         disabled, and other vulnerable populations. A simple anecdote about a program from one of
         its clients can be exponentially more powerful than a well-done differential cost analysis.

      Make friends with legislators. Legislators are much more likely to support a program when
         they understand that program and who benefits from it. This is particularly true when that
         program benefits its constituents, and when the legislators played a role in creating,
         expanding, or protecting it. Of course, this strategy comes with risks. Governors, mayors, and
         other executives often try to limit department heads' and program managers' access to
         legislators to prevent staff relationships with legislators that might undermine their own
         budget priorities.

      "Round it Up." This is especially true on the spending side. Rounding up caseloads, spending
         estimates, interest expenses, and other costs will expand the budget authority and, if actual
         spending falls short of budgeted spending, create an end-of-year "surplus." The risk is that
         persistent over-budgeting for spending can undermine a budget maker's credibility.

      "We have a crisis." Some managers like to project that major revenue shortfalls or spending
         cuts are imminent, even if they aren't. Staff who believe they might face difficult budget cuts
         are more likely to manage their programs with careful attention to spending discipline and
         timely collection of revenues. Of course, this can also lead to staff burn-out and ruin a
         manager's credibility if said crisis never happens.

A few strategies are most effective when a manager is asked to trim their budget.

      "Across-the-Board." Some managers prefer to respond to budget cuts by cutting all their
         programs equally, or "across the board" (ATB). To staff, ATB cuts appear fair, transparent, and
         simple. Cutting all programs equally assumes those programs have identical cost structures,
         current staff openings, and the capacity to generate revenues. That's rarely true. The result is
         that ATB often affects different programs and services in quite different ways, even though
         the intent is to bring about a uniform impact. Sometimes those differential effects can
         themselves be valuable to managers.

      "Do Nothing." An unchanged budget is, in effect, a budget cut. If a program is given no new
         resources it must find other ways to address cost inflation, growth in caseloads, staff cost of
         living adjustments, and other growth in spending. Sophisticated managers argue, often
         successfully, that a "steady state" budget (i.e., no new resources, but no cuts) is a fair way to
         take a budget cut.

      Lean on precedent. In a cutback environment, what happened in the past can be a powerful
         tool for managers. No manager wants to have to choose how to cut his or her program. But if
         they can say, "I didn't really choose these cuts; we're just following past precedent," they're
         afforded some degree of political cover. Whether past precedent really dictated those cuts, or
         whether there even is a past precedent, is often debatable.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 233
      "It's essential for public safety." Managers can try to position their program as vital to public
         health or safety. Sometimes these connections are obtuse, at best. For instance, during the
         Great Recession, many local libraries protested cuts to library hours by pointing out that
         libraries are a safe and supportive gathering place for teenagers. Unsupervised teenagers
         roaming the streets would create, they argued, a serious public safety concern.

      Propose a study. Public organizations can rarely predict - or so they say - exactly how a
         budget cut will affect their clients, staff, and overall mission. So, in response to a cut, managers
         routinely propose to "study the issue." A study allows for more time to either identify potential
         cuts or for the political or economic environment to shift in ways that will obviate the need
         for a cut at all.

      "Cut the main artery." One way to respond to a requested cut is to cut the largest program
         that's most central to your mission (i.e. the "main artery"). Cutting that program is, in effect,
         threatening to cripple your program. Some policymakers will respond with a request for a
         smaller cut or a cut to a less mission-centric program. The danger here is what happens if
         policymakers agree to allow a manager to cut the main artery.

      "Just take the whole thing." If a program was cut recently, managers can take the request for an
         additional cut as an opportunity to offer to end the program. They'll ask: "We've already been
         cut to the bone, so what's the point of staying open?" or something to that effect. Whether
         additional cuts would really harm the program is often incidental to the argument.

      "You pick." Instead of proposing cuts, offer policymakers a range of options and ask them to
         decide which option the program should pursue. Like with "lean on precedent," this allows
         managers to avoid direct responsibility for specific cuts to his or her staff and other resources.
         This strategy is prone to backfire when policymakers respond by saying, "It's not my job to
         pick. You know your program better than anyone. You pick."

      "Washington Monument." In 1994, the federal government shut down after President Clinton
         and House Speaker Gingrich could not agree on a continuing resolution. President Clinton
         responded by ordering the National Park Service to close all of the key historic sites in
         Washington, D.C. One of the first to close was the Washington Monument. As the shutdown
         dragged on, President Clinton was able to frame the closed Washington Monument as a
         symbol of Congressional intransigence. The essence of the Washington Monument strategy is
         to propose cuts to a small but highly visible program.

And finally, managers often deploy a different set of strategies when attempting to expand their
program's budget:

      "It pays for itself." Managers can sometimes argue that investing in a program will "pay for
         itself" through cost savings later. For instance, public health advocates have long argued that
         expanding childhood immunization programs pays for itself by reducing the incidence of
         communicable diseases like tuberculosis, measles, and rubella that place enormous strain and
         expense on public hospitals.

      "Spend to save." Investments in technology, equipment, and infrastructure can save staff time,
         reduce paperwork, collect revenues faster, etc. - or that's how managers sell those
         investments in the budget process.

234 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
 "Foot in the Door." Many large, long-standing, popular public sector programs began small. An
   effective way to expand a program is to run a small pilot program, study, or demonstration
   project. Legislators and board members are generally willing to appropriate small amounts of
   money to try "innovative" approaches. With time, many of those small experiments morph
   into large-scale programs.

 "It's just temporary." Like "small innovations," legislators and board members are much more
   willing to provide temporary funding for a program or project than they are to provide
   permanent funding or budget authority. Crafty managers are able to convert temporary
   funding into either "ongoing temporary funding" or even permanent authority.

 "Finish what we started." This approach is especially popular with respect to capital projects.
   Many capital projects begin with an appropriation to analyze, plan, and design a capital
   project. With that planning in place, managers can make a compelling argument that it's
   necessary to appropriate more money to "finish what we started," often without regard for
   whether the plans are complete or whether the analysis suggests the project is necessary.

 "Re-categorize." Sometimes shifting a program to a different part of the budget is a necessary
   step toward expansion. For example, public health advocates have successfully argued that
   many public health activities like smoking cessation or diabetes prevention are in fact
   education or outreach programs. Within the education budget, they have access to a much
   wider range of funding sources and constituent champions. We've seen a similar dynamic
   with homeland security. Many programs in areas like crime prevention and cybersecurity
   were once local public safety initiatives but have since migrated to far more lucrative state and
   federal homeland security budgets.

                                                                                                                        FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 235
236 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
GLOSSARY OF TERMS

Amortization: refers to the expensing of acquisition costs (minus residual value) or an intangible
asset. The term is also used to refer to the schedule of payments for a loan or mortgage. These are
frequently referred to as loan amortization schedules. The schedules detail outstanding loan balance,
payment per period, principal paid per period, and interest expense per period - through maturity or
end of the lending period. See also depreciation.

Accrual accounting: reports on a transaction when it has an economic impact, regardless of whether
it spends or receives cash. Said differently, under the accrual basis of accounting, revenues are
reported when earned and expenses are reported when incurred, regardless of when payment is
received or made. See also modified accrual basis.

Adverse opinion: is an opinion made by an auditor that states that the financial statements do not
fairly present the entity's financial position, results of operations, or cash flows in conformity with
generally accepted principles. Also see unqualified opinion, qualified opinion, and disclaimer of
opinion.

Allocation basis: is an observable metric we can use to measure the relationship between direct and
indirect costs within a cost center. For example, square footage is a metric that can be used to allocate
rent or depreciation costs.

Assets: a resource with economic value owned by an individual, company, or government with the
expectation it will provide future benefits. Assets are reported in the balance sheet in reducing order
of liquidity.

Bad debt expense: also known as allowance for doubtful accounts or allowance for uncollectable, is an
estimate of receivables management expects will not be paid. Bad debt expense reduces the number of
accounts receivable reported in the balance sheet and provides a more realistic picture of the amount
management should expect will turn to cash as payments come due.

Balance sheets: present a summary of an organization's assets, liabilities, and equity position at a
particular point in time (e.g., as of December 31, 20XX). Also known as Statement of Financial Position
or Statement of Net Position.

Bankruptcy: proceedings provide financially distressed municipalities with protection from
creditors by creating a plan between the municipality and its creditors to resolve the outstanding debt.

Board-designated endowment: also known as a quasi-endowment, is a fund that functions like an
endowment but without external restrictions. A non-profit's board may designate a portion of
the non-profit's investments to a fund with a specific objective in mind (e.g., capital campaign,
working-capital reserve). Board-designated funds will be reported under net assets "without donor
restrictions." See also net assets, true endowment, and term endowment.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 237
Book value: reports the historical cost of an asset, net of depreciation. Book value is always less than
historical cost. See also historical cost.

Budgetary solvency: refers to the government's ability to create a balanced budget that provides
enough revenues to pay for expenses that occur within the budget period. See also cash solvency.

Business-type activities: also known as proprietary activities, are supported by user charges and fees
for the goods and services it delivers.

Budget resolutions: establish overall revenue and spending totals, allocate spending among major
functions of government (e.g., national defense, transportation, health, and agriculture), set limits on
resources for discretionary spending programs, and establish target levels for mandatory spending.
Since the congressional budget resolution is an act of Congress, it does not require the President`s
signature. Since it does not go to the President, it also cannot enact spending or tax law. It,
therefore, serves as a blueprint for the actual appropriation process and sets targets for other
congressional committees that can propose legislation directly.

Budget stabilization funds (BSFs): also known as rainy-day funds (RDFs), allow state or local
governments to set aside surplus revenue for use during unexpected deficits.

Capital budget: is a state or local government's budget that accounts for the acquisition of property
and equipment and all costs related to infrastructure investments. See also operating budget.

Capital improvement plan (CIP): is a physical and fiscal planning document that coordinates the
timing and financing of capital improvements. CIPs identify long-term capital spending needs over
a three-year or five-year period based on a review of existing infrastructure's age, condition, degree
of use, and capacity with recommendations to either renew, replace, expand, or retire capital
improvements. See also operating budget and capital budget.

Capital Projects funds: are used to account for and report financial resources that are restricted,
committed, or assigned to the expenditure of capital outlays. Restricted or committed revenues may
be initially received in another fund (e.g., General Fund), but must be subsequently transferred to the
Capital Projects fund. See also, General Fund.

Cash equivalents: are investment securities that are meant for short-term investing. They are highly
liquid and of high credit quality. They include commercial paperandmarketable securities like money
market mutual fundsandovernight repurchase agreements (Repos).

Cash Flow Statement: presents a summary of how an organization receives and uses cash to fulfill its
mission for a financial period (e.g., for the year ending December 31, 20XX). Also known as Statement
of Cash Flows.

Cash solvency: is the government's ability to generate and maintain cash balances to pay all its
expenditures as they come due. See also budgetary solvency.

Commercial paper: an unsecured promissory note issued by large corporations, with excellent credit
ratings, with a fixed maturity rarely more than 270 days.

238 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Continuing resolution: a temporary measure that Congress uses to fund the federal government and
avoid a government shutdown.

Contingent liability: is a probable obligation that may or may not arise depending on how a future
event (e.g., a lawsuit) unfolds. A contingent liability should be recorded as an expense or loss on
the income statement and liability on the balance sheet, or otherwise disclosed in the notes to the
financial statements.

Cost accounting: also known as managerial accounting, is the process of creating information about
costs to inform management decisions. Managers need good information about costs to set prices,
determine how much of a good or service to deliver and manage costs in ways that make their
organization more likely to achieve its mission.

Cost driver: a factor that affects the cost of an activity.A good cost driver is a reliably observable
quantity that shares a consistent relationship with the indirect cost in question and the basis for
allocating indirect costs.

Credit rating: an independent assessment a rating agency assigns to an issuer (or related bond)
to indicate the likelihood the obligor will make payments on time and in full. Ratings range from
Aaa/AAA to D - the lowest rating, typically indicating the issuer or obligor is in default.

Current assets: are all the assets that are expected to be sold, used, or converted to cash within a
year. Current assets include cash, short-term investments, receivables, and inventory. See also non-
current assets.

Current liabilities: are all liabilities that need to be paid within a year. Current liabilities include
accounts payable, accrued salaries (or wages payable), and the current portion of long-term debt. See
also non-current liabilities.

Debt issuance costs: are costs paid by the issuer for services relating to the selling of municipal
securities - including general obligation bonds, revenue bonds, and notes payable to investors - and
managing elements of the transaction. Issuance costs include fees paid to a municipal advisor, credit
rating agency, bond insurance, underwriter or underwriting syndicate, and bond counsel, to name a
few.

Debt service: is the sum of principal and interest to be paid in the current period, given outstanding
long-term debt obligations. On the occasion that the government issues municipal securities, the cost
associated with debt issuance would be reported as debt service in the period incurred.

Debt Service funds: are used to account for and report financial resources that are restricted,
committed, or assigned to principal and interest expenditures. Restricted or committed revenues may
be initially received in another fund (e.g., General Fund), but must be subsequently transferred to the
Debt Service fund. See also, General Fund.

Deduction: is a dollar amount that reduces taxable income. Taxpayers have a choice of either taking
a standard deductionor itemizing their deductions.

Defaults: include technical default (failure to comply with bond contract provisions), pre-monetary

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 239
default (unscheduled draws on debt service reserves), and the most severe type of default, monetary
default (failure to pay interest or principal).

Deficit: or budget deficit, occurs when expenditures in the budget exceed revenues. A cyclical deficitis
the result of a decline in revenues as a result of fluctuations in the economic cycle (e.g., an economic
recession), and the expected increase in expenditures. A structural deficitis when a government`s
long-term spending exceeds its long-term revenues. It represents a mismatch between revenues
generated by a government's current tax laws to fund ongoing essential public services. A
fundamental change in taxing and spending policies is required to eliminate a structural deficit.

Deferrals: include deferred inflow of resources and deferred outflow of resources. A deferred inflow of
resources is the acquisition of net assets that apply to a future period, whereas a deferred outflow
of resources is the consumption of net assets that apply to a future period. Deferred inflows are
substantively different from unearned revenue.

Depreciation: is the loss in value of a fixed asset (including improvements on land - such as site
preparation, buildings, and infrastructure, office furniture, equipment, computers, and vehicles) with
time, due to wear and tear. There are a wide variety of ways of estimating depreciation expense,
including straight-linedepreciation, acceleratedmethod, declining balance, and sum-of-the-
yearsmethod - all of which would produce different estimates of depreciation expenses. Depreciable
assetsinclude improvements on land, equipment, leased assets, etc. Non-depreciable assetsinclude
construction-in-progress, art, and land (except land bought for mining or extraction).

Differential cost accounting: sometimes called marginal cost analysis, is the process of determining
how a good or service's full cost changes when we deliver more or less of it.

Disclaimer of opinion: states that the auditor does not express an opinion on the financial
statements. Also see unqualified opinion, qualified opinion, and adverse opinion.

Discretionary spending: is government spending controlled in annual appropriation acts approved
by Congress. See also mandatory spending.

Direct costs: also known as traceable costsor controllable costs, are directly attributable to a cost
center. They include salaries for staff who work entirely within acost center, facilities and supplies
used onlyby that cost center, training for cost center-specific staff, etc. Many public organizations
further stipulate that a cost is direct to a cost center only if it can becontrolled by that center's
management. See also indirect costs.

Dividends: represent payments made by a company to owners of the company's stock. They
represent the distribution of net income to investors and one of the ways investors earn a return from
investing in stock.

Effective tax rate: is the ratio of tax liability divided by taxable base (e.g., taxable income or market
value of a property).

Fiduciary Fund Statements: are prepared on a full accrual basis and include a Statement of Net
Position and Statement of Changes in Net Position.

240 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
Fiscal accountability: is the government's responsibility to justify that their actions in the current
period have complied with public decisions concerning the raising and spending of public money in
the short-term (usually one budgetary cycle or one year). See also operational accountability (from
GASB Statement No. 34).

Fund: a stand-alone, self-balancing set of accounts with a specific purpose. A fund is classified as a
major fundif government officials believe that fund is particularly important to financial statement
users (e.g., the General Fund) or whose revenues, expenditures/expenses, assets, or liabilities are at
least 10 percent of corresponding totals for governmental or enterprise funds. See also, General
Fund.

Filibuster: when an individual Senator kills a proposed bill by "talking it to death," taking advantage
of Senate rules allowing unlimited debate. Filibusters allow legislators to debate over a proposed piece
of legislation to delay or entirely prevent a decision from being made on the proposal.

Full cost accounting: is the process of identifyinga good or service's full cost. The full cost of any
service is the direct costs plus the indirect costs.

General Fund: is a major fund reported in the Governmental Fund Statements (GFS). The General
Fund is frequently the largest fund reported in the GFS. It is used to account for unrestricted
resources or resources that are not required to be accounted for in other funds. For a majority of
state and local governments, it is the fund that will account for a large proportion of expenditures
related to spending priority areas like education, public safety (police and fire), public health, and
transportation. These are services that are paid for using unrestricted property and sales taxes.

General obligation bonds: are borrowing by state or local government, backed by its full faith and
credit, which essentially means taxing powers. For local governments (and some state governments),
voter approval via referendum is required for that entity to issue general obligation bonds. See also
Revenue bonds.

Governmental activities: are supported by taxes and other non-exchange revenues.

Governmental Fund Statements (GFS): are prepared on a modified accrual basis and include a
Balance Sheet and Statement of Changes in Revenues, Expenditures, and Fund Balances. Activities reported
in the GFS are those that are generally financed with revenues from taxes, intergovernmental
transfers, and other non-exchange or non-market transaction-based revenue sources. The General
Fund is a major fund reported in the Governmental Fund Statements. See also Proprietary Fund
Statements and Fiduciary Fund Statements.

Gross Domestic Product (GDP): is a measure of the value of all the final goods and services produced
in a specific period.

Historical cost: costs incurred in the acquisition of non-financial assets.See also book value and
market value.

Indirect costs: apply to more than one cost center. Some managers call them service center

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 241
costs,internal servicecosts, or overhead costs becausethey are usually for support services provided within
an organization. See also direct costs.

In-kind contributions: are goods or services provided for free or at discounted rates. The market
value of the in-kind contribution is recognized as revenue and expense in the budget period.

Income Statements: present a summary of an organization's revenues, expenses, and profitability
(or change in net assets) for a financial period (e.g., for the year ending December 31, 20XX). Also
known as an Operating Statement, Profit and Loss Statement, Statement of Activities, Statement of Revenues,
Expenditures, and Changes in Fund Balances,or Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net
Position.

Individual/interpersonal racism: pre-judgment, bias, stereotypes, or generalizations about an
individual or group based on race. The impacts of racism on individuals include internalized privilege
and oppression. Individual racism can result in illegal discrimination (source: Race and Social Justice
Initiative, City of Seattle). See also institutional racism and structural racism.

Institutional racism: Policies, practices, and procedures that work to the benefit of white people and
the detriment of people of color, usually unintentionally or inadvertently (source: Race and Social
Justice Initiative, City of Seattle). See also structural racism and individual/interpersonal racism.

Intangible asset: an asset, other than a financial asset, that lacks physical form. Examples include
intellectual property, patents, copyrights, franchises, goodwill, trademarks, and software, to name a
few. See also tangible asset.

Inventory: goods an organization intends to use, sell, or give away as part of delivering its services.

Liability: sum of money an individual, company, or government owes to others. Liabilities are
incurred as a result of general operations (e.g., accounts payable or accrued salaries) or the result of an
investment in tangible assets (e.g., mortgages, loans, and bonds). Liabilities are reported in the balance
sheet in increasing order of maturity. Maturity refers to the moment in time when payment is due.

Line-item veto: Power possessed by an elected chief executive (e.g., governor) to reduce or reject
selected items in an appropriation bill before signing the bill into law.

Line of credit (LOC): sometimes referred to as a credit line or overdraft facility, is a preset amount of
money that a financial institution has agreed to lend either unsecured or secured (using fixed assets or
receivables as collateral). Users can draw on the LOC as needed, up to the maximum amount. Interest
expense is based on the amount borrowed and the period of use. To be liquid, organizations have to
zero out (clean-up or clean-down) for at least 30 consecutive days.

Liquidity: the ease with which an asset can be converted into cash with minimal loss in value.

Long-run solvency: refers to the government's ability to pay for its long-term liabilities given its
current taxing or revenue authority. See also budgetary solvency and service-level solvency.

Mandatory spending: is government spending that is governed by existing law; it is not set by annual

242 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
appropriation acts. That said, changes in the level of benefits have to be approved by Congress. See
also discretionary spending.

Matching principle: is an accounting principle associated with the accrual basis of accounting that
requires we recognize expenses in the income statement in the period in which the related revenues
were earned. Additionally, if those expenses created a liability, that liability should appear in the
balance sheet at the end of the accounting period.

Market value: estimated value of an asset that a willing buyer would pay, and a willing seller would
accept, in an open and competitive market. See also historical cost.

Modified accrual accounting: is a hybrid of cash basis and full accrual basis of accounting. Under
the modified accrual basis of accounting, revenues are recognized when they are both measurable(i.e.,
cash flow from the revenue can reasonably be estimated) and available(i.e., revenues are available to
finance current expenditures within 60 days). Expenditures are to be recognized in the accounting
period in which the fund liability is incurred, if measurable, except for interest on long-term liabilities,
which should be recognized when due. The governmental fund statements are prepared using the
modified accrual basis of accounting. See also accrual basis of accounting.

Money market mutual fund: a mutual fund that invests in fixed-income securities with short
maturities and minimal credit risk (i.e., high credit quality). Securities frequently include U.S.
Treasury bills and commercial paper. Returns from money market funds are minimal but retain value
with minimal volatility.

Mortgage: is a debt instrument, secured with collateral of specified real estate property.

Municipal bond: is a debt security issued by the government or a governmental agency to finance
capital improvements. Governments can issue two types of bonds:general obligation bonds which are
backed by the taxing authority of the issuer orrevenue bonds which are supported with a specific
revenue stream (e.g., utility revenues, tuition fees or dormitory rents, patient revenues, or tolls).
Non-profits can issue revenue bonds via a special agency or public authority, including healthcare
facility authorities, housing finance agencies, higher education facility authorities, and industrial
development finance authorities.

Mutual fund: investment instruments that pool money from multiple investors to invest in a
diversified portfolio of financial investments (stocks and bonds).

Net assets: represent the difference between assets and liabilities. Non-profits will report net assets
"without donor restrictions" and net assets "with donor restrictions." The latter represents net resources
the organization holds that are subject to a donor provision over time or use. These were previously
reported as either temporarily restricted(over time or use) net assets or permanently restricted (restricted
in perpetuity) net assets.

Net pension liability: represents the net obligation of retirement benefits a government owes its
current employees, retirees, and beneficiaries. It represents the difference between the present value
of projected retiree benefits and the assets, most investments, reported at fair value. If accumulated
assets exceed projected benefits, a net pension asset is reported instead.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 243
Net position: represents the differences between assets and liabilities. Governments will report net
position as net investment in capital assets, restricted net assets, and unrestricted net assets. Net
investment in capitalconsists of capital assets, net of accumulated depreciation, reduced by outstanding
balances of bonds, mortgages, notes, or other borrowings that are attributable to the acquisition,
construction, or improvement of those assets. Restricted net position consists of restricted assets
reduced by liabilities and deferred inflows of resources related to those assets. The balance is reported
under unrestricted net position, which represents the sum of net assets, deferred outflows, liabilities,
and deferred inflows that are not included in the determination of net investment in capital or
restricted component of net position (see GASB Statement 63).

Non-current assets: include assets that are not expected to be sold, used, or converted to cash
within a year. Non-current assets include long-term receivables, investments (including restricted
investments), and fixed assets. See also current assets.

Non-current liabilities: all liabilities that do not need to be paid within the current year. This will
include long-term debt payable (net of the current portion) and pension liabilities. See also current
liabilities.

Notes payable: unsecured short-term loans with maturities ranging from 18 months up to 60
months.

Notes to the Financial Statements: also known as footnotes to the financial statements, allow additional
information and clarification to items presented in the basic financial statements (balance sheet,
income state, and cash flow statement). It presents a summary of required disclosures, including
accounting assumptions and any modifications that are material and relevant to financial disclosures,
a discussion of financial policies, and a summary of upcoming transactions that may affect the
organization's long-term financial position.

Operational accountability: is the government's responsibility to report the extent to which it
has met its operating objectives efficiently and effectively, using all resources available for that
purpose, and whether it can continue to meet objectives for the foreseeable future. See also fiscal
accountability (from GASB Statement No. 34).

Operating budget: a state or local government's budget that accounts for recurring agency or
program expenditures. See also capital budget.

Other financing sources: reported in the governmental fund statements account for inflows and
outflows of resources that affect fund balance that are neither a revenue nor expenditure. Other
financing sources and uses include proceeds from the sale of assets, insurance recoveries, bond or loan
proceeds, and transfers in from or out to other funds.

Other Postemployment Benefits (OPEB): are benefits (other than pensions) that state and local
governments provide to retired employees. Benefits principally involve healthcare benefits (including
dental, vision, and hearing), but may also include death benefits, life insurance, disability, and long-
term care.

Program revenue: includes fees linked to programs for "exchange-like" transactions (e.g., fees the

244 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
government charges for the goods and services it delivers) and grants and contributions (i.e., revenues
from other governments). Grants are further broken out into operating grants and contributions and
capital grants and contributions, with the latter dedicated to capital improvements and investments
in infrastructure. See also general revenue.

Proprietary Fund Statements: are prepared on a full accrual basis and include a Statement of Net
Position and Statement of Revenues, Expenses, and Changes in Net Position.

Qualified opinion: is an opinion made by an auditor that states that, except for a few issues to
which the qualification applies, the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
entity's financial position, results of operations, and cash flows in conformity with generally accepted
accounting principles. Also see unqualified opinion, adverse opinion, and disclaimer of opinion.

Race equity: if race can no longer be used to predict life outcomes, and outcomes for all groups
improved (source: Race and Social Justice Initiative, City of Seattle). See also Racial inequity.

Racial inequity: race can be used to predict life outcomes, e.g., disproportionality in education (high
school graduation rates), jobs (unemployment rate), criminal justice (arrest and incarceration), etc.
(source: Race and Social Justice Initiative, City of Seattle). See also Racial equity.

Receivables: including accounts receivable, pledges receivable,and grants receivable, represent monies
owed to an organization as a result of a sale of goods or services (accounts receivable), promise to give
(pledges receivable), or grant award (grants receivable). Receivables will be reported under current
assets if payment is expected within the year; otherwise, they would be reported as non-current
assets.

Rescission: The cancellation of budget authority previously provided by Congress. The
Impoundment Control Act of 1974 specifies that the president may propose to Congress that funds
be rescinded. If both Houses have not approved a rescission proposal (by passing legislation) within
45 days of continuous session, any funds being withheld must be made available for obligation.

Realized gain (loss): results from the selling of a financial asset at a price higher (lower) than the
original purchase price or value of the financial asset at the start of the financial period.

Repurchase agreement (Repos): short-term borrowing, mainly in government securities.
Specifically, one part sells an asset (usually fixed-income government securities) to another at one
price and commits to buying them back, usually the following day, at a slightly higher price.

Revenue bonds: borrowing by state or local government, government enterprises (e.g., water and
sewer districts), and non-profits (e.g., hospitals, museums, and private universities) that is secured
with non-tax revenues of the issuer. Unlike general obligation bonds, revenue bonds do not require
voter approval and governments do not guarantee repayment of bonds with revenues other than
those included in the contract. See also general obligation bonds.

Sequestration: automatic spending cuts that occur through funding withdrawal for certain (but not
all) government programs.

Service-level solvency: a government's ability to pay for all the costs of providing services at the

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 245
level and quality that are required for the community's health, safety, and welfare. See also budgetary
solvency and long-run solvency.

Special Revenue funds: used to account for and report on activities related to the use of resources
that are restricted or committed for specified purposes other than debt service and capital projects.
Those restricted or committed revenues may be initially received in another fund (e.g., General Fund),
but must be subsequently transferred to a designated Special Revenue fund. Special Revenue funds
should not be used to account for resources held in trust for individuals, private organizations, or
other governments. These are reported under fiduciary funds. See also, General Fund.

Statement of Functional Expenses: an ancillary financial report used to show the relationship
between expenses by type (e.g., salaries, payroll taxes) and key functional areas (e.g., programs,
management and administration, and fundraising and development). Following the FASB issuance
of Accounting Standards Update (ASU) 2016-14, all non-profits are now required to present a
functional expense report.

Straight-line depreciation: estimated by dividing the difference between the asset's historical cost
and its expected salvage value (or value at write-off) by the number of years it is expected to be used.

Structural racism: The interplay of policies, practices, programs, and differing institutions leads to
adverse outcomes and conditions for communities of color compared to white communities. It occurs
within the context of racialized, historical, and cultural conditions (source: Race and Social Justice
Initiative, City of Seattle). See also institutional racism and individual/interpersonal racism.

Supplemental appropriations: Appropriations bill that adds to an existing appropriation and is
frequently adopted after the start of the budget year. Legislative bodies may find it necessary to
approve additional budget authority for unforeseen contingencies such as natural disasters.

Tangible asset: an asset that has a finite monetary value and usually a physical form (e.g., property
and equipment). See also intangible asset.

Tax preference: a provision in tax law that allows preferential treatment for certain taxpayers. They
include exclusions, exemptions, deductions, preferential tax rates, credits, and deferrals.

Unearned revenue: sometimes referred to as deferred revenue, represents revenue the organization
has received for services it has yet to provide or goods that have not yet been delivered. If for any
reason the organization is unable to deliver the goods or services, it will need to issue a refund to
its customers or clients. That is why we recognize that revenue as a liability - the organization owes
either goods/services or a refund.

Unrealized gain (loss): records the change in the value of the financial assets if the price is higher
(lower) than the original purchase price or value of that financial asset at the start of the financial
period. Unrealized gains or losses exist on paper, as the financial assets have not been sold.

Unqualifiedopinion: also known as a clean report, is an opinion made by an auditor that states
that the financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position, results of

246 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
operations, and cash flows of the entity in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles.
Also see qualified opinion, adverse opinion, and disclaimer of opinion.
Working capital: sometimes known as net working capital, is a measure of an organization's liquidity
position. It is the difference between current assets (such as cash, cash equivalents, investments, and
receivables) and current liabilities (such as accounts payable and wages payable). Every organization
needs working capital. It is the excess cash that allows the organization to pay its obligations as they
come due, invest in new opportunities as they become available, and have the necessary cushion when
payments by clients, donors, grantors, or taxpayers are not received on time or there is a decline in
operations.

                                                                                                                                FINANCIAL STRATEGY FOR PUBLIC MANAGERS 247
ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Sharon N. Kioko is an Associate Professor at the Daniel J. Evans School of Public Policy and
Governance at the University of Washington. Justin Marlowe is a Research Professor at the University
of Chicago Harris School of Public Policy.

248 SHARON KIOKO AND JUSTIN MARLOWE
