Principles of Strategic
      Management
       Accounting
PRINCIPLES OF
STRATEGIC
MANAGEMENT
ACCOUNTING

STIJN MASSCHELEIN

University of Western Australia
Principles of Strategic Management Accounting Copyright © 2024 by Stijn
Masschelein is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial 4.0 International License, except where otherwise
noted.

Principles of Strategic Management Accounting by Stijn Masschelein
is licenced under a CC BY-NC licence, excluding logos and branding.
https://oercollective.caul.edu.au/
principles-strategic-management-accounting
CONTENTS

Introduction                                 1

Accessibility Information                    3

Acknowledgement of Country                   vi

About the Author                             vii

Part I. The Principles

1. The Story of the Miners and the           11

Landowner

Stijn Masschelein

2. Transaction Cost Economics                19

Stijn Masschelein

3. The Role of Strategy in Transaction Cost  36

Economics

Stijn Masschelein

4. Specific Knowledge                        45

Stijn Masschelein
5. Human Capital                          56

Stijn Masschelein

6. Agency Theory                          65

Stijn Masschelein

7. Promotions and Subjective Performance  79

Evaluation

Stijn Masschelein

8. Power and Institutional Theory         95

Stijn Masschelein

9. Implementation and Change              102

Stijn Masschelein

Part II. Budgeting

10. What are budgets (good for)?          119

Stijn Masschelein

11. The Budgeting Process                 123

Stijn Masschelein

12. Variance Analysis                     131

Stijn Masschelein
Part III. Cost Accounting

13. The Value of Cost Information  147

Stijn Masschelein

14. Activity Based Costing         153

Stijn Masschelein

15. Cost Accounting and Production Capacity 165

Stijn Masschelein

Review statement                   173
              INTRODUCTION | 1

INTRODUCTION

This textbook is an alternative introduction to strategic
management accounting tools such as budgets, activity based
costing, balanced scorecards and the use of performance
measures to penalise and reward employees. The book is aimed
at students who have an introductory knowledge of these
management accounting tools but it does not require an in
depth knowledge of how they work. I use the chapters in this
book as the core material for two classes in management
accounting with students who have had a one semester
introduction to management accounting. In one class,
students apply the framework in this book to empirical
academic papers in management accounting and in the other
class, they apply the framework to business case studies.

   The two classes show the general intent of this textbook.
The goal is to present an analytic framework rooted in
academic research that can be used to understand and analyse
real businesses. In the first part of the book I build up a
coherent framework based on different theoretical perspectives
in the academic literature. The core principles of the theories
are explained through stripped-down stories of intentionally
unrealistic business transactions. This narrative approach is
a deliberate choice. I do not expect that the reader of this
book is familiar with the academic literature or its terminology.
The style of this book is closer to the more personal style of
online newsletters and blogs than traditional academic writing
or textbooks. At the same time, I want to do justice to the
variety of insights that have been generated in the academic
literature. The stories allow me to explain the core principle
  2 | INTRODUCTION

  of a theory in a short self-contained narrative that is easy to
  remember. This is why I also recommend the first part of this
  book to my doctoral students when they start out with their
  research project.

     The first part of the book builds up the framework and
  it is the major departing point from traditional management
  accounting textbooks. I first explain the difference how
  organisations can create a competitive advantage through a
  combination of difficult to imitate investments which defines
  the strategy of the organisation. The core idea of this textbook
  is that management accounting tools contribute to managing
  the core investments in the organisation and this is exactly
  what makes them strategic. That means that whether a certain
  management accounting tool is strategic depends on its
  function and not necessarily whether it is a new and
  revolutionary tool. In my book, the much maligned budget
  is the quintessential strategic management accounting tool
  because it is the main tool by which organisations decide where
  their priorities are. My approach emphasises the role 1 of
  management accounting tools in the organisation first and
  focuses on the details of how they work later.

     A second version of this book will contain a second part
  in which I will delve more deeply in budgets, activity based
  costing, and the balanced scorecard.

1. That role can be the explicitly intended by the people implementing the tool or the
  role can organically emerge over time. I do not take a position on whether all
  benefits and costs of the implementation are explicitly intended or not.
                                              ACCESSIBILITY INFORMATION | 3

ACCESSIBILITY
INFORMATION

We believe that education must be available to everyone which
means supporting the creation of free, open, and accessible
educational resources. We are actively committed to increasing
the accessibility and usability of the textbooks we produce.

Accessibility features of the
web version of this resource

The web version of this resource has been designed with
accessibility in mind by incorporating the following features:

  · It has been optimized for people who use screen-reader
      technology.
          all content can be navigated using a keyboard
          links, headings, and tables are formatted to work
            with screen readers
          images have alt tags

  · Information is not conveyed by colour alone.
4 | ACCESSIBILITY INFORMATION

Other file formats available

In addition to the web version, this book is available in a
number of file formats including PDF, EPUB (for eReaders),
and various editable files. Choose from the selection of
available file types from the `Download this book' drop-down
menu. This option appears below the book cover image on
the eBook's landing page.

Third-Party Content

In some cases, our open text includes third-party content. In
these cases, it is often not possible to ensure accessibility of this
content.

Accessibility Improvements

While we strive to ensure that this resource is as accessible and
usable as possible, we might not always get it right. We are
always looking for ways to make our resources more accessible.
If you have problems accessing this resource, please contact
UWA Library to let us know so we can fix the issue.

   Copyright Note: This accessibility disclaimer is adapted
from BCampus's Accessibility Toolkit, licensed under a
Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International license and
University of Southern Queensland's Enhancing Inclusion,
Diversity, Equity and Accessibility (IDEA) in Open
Educational Resources (OER) licensed under a Creative
                                              ACCESSIBILITY INFORMATION | 5

Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0
International License.
6 | ACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF COUNTRY

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
OF COUNTRY

The University of Western Australia acknowledges that its
campus is situated on Noongar land, and that Noongar people
remain the spiritual and cultural custodians of their land, and
continue to practise their values, languages, beliefs and
knowledge.
                                                           ABOUT THE AUTHOR | 7

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Dr Stijn Masschelein, Senior Lecturer at the UWA Business
School, has 12 years of experience teaching two advanced
management accounting units at the University of Western
Australia. He developed the curriculum for those units and
wrote his own lecture notes for those classes which are
available on his website or on the Social Science Research
Network. One of the lectures notes, for Strategic Management
Accounting, has been cited in two doctoral theses already and
the author has received encouraging emails from colleagues
from other institutions on how the notes helped them in their
teaching. These lecture notes were the starting point for the
textbook.

The author has developed a variety of online resources on
programming and statistical analysis for research students at
the UWA Accounting and Finance department. The lecture
notes and resources rely on the author's extensive knowledge
of the academic literature which has also resulted in multiple
publications, of which two are in the top journals in the field
of Accounting (Masschelein et al., 2012; Masschelein &
Moers, 2020). A full list of the author's publications can be
viewed on his UWA profile.

   Masschelein, S., Cardinaels, E., & Van den Abbeele, A.
(2012). ABC Information, Fairness Perceptions, and Interfirm
Negotiations. The Accounting Review, 87(3), 951-973.
https://doi.org/10.2308/accr-10214
8 | ABOUT THE AUTHOR

   Masschelein, S., & Moers, F. (2020). Testing for
complementarities between accounting practices. Accounting,
Organizations and Society, 86, 101127. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.aos.2020.101127
                                                                    THE PRINCIPLES | 9

 PART I

THE PRINCIPLES

  In the first section of the book I will introduce different
  perspectives from economic and sociological theories to
  understand why organisations measure the performance of
  their employees and departments. The economic theories are
  often based on sophisticated mathematical models which
  scares off undergraduate students and textbook writers alike.
  I believe that I can explain the essence of these theories with
  stories. I call them stories because just like the models from
  the academic literature they are not literal descriptions of how
  the real world works. Still, they do reveal underlying principles
  that help us understand the real world. None of these stories
  will tell the whole story 1. To present a fuller picture I need
  more than one principle and that is why the first story will
  introduce three economic theories at once. These three
  theories form the core around which the remainder of the
  book is structured.

     I will then build on these stories and show how they can
  be used to explain the role of management accounting tools
  to support, implement, and change an organisation's strategy.
  The other theories round out this core story and show how
  management accounting tools play a role in management
  activities that are hard to measure, and how organisations
  figure out what the appropriate management accounting tools
  are for their situation. The complete picture allows us to tackle

1. Pun very much intended
10 | THE PRINCIPLES

the different management accounting tools and their value to
support an organisation's strategy.
              THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER | 11

1.

THE STORY OF THE
MINERS AND THE
LANDOWNER

   Stijn Masschelein

Imagine a landowner with the property rights to do whatever
they want with their land. One day they discover that their
land might be rich in iron ore. They quickly realise that they
should mine their property for the precious metal. However,
they are not quite sure how to do this. Fortunately enough,
a number of experienced miners live in the same town as the
landowner. All the miners have a wealth of experience in
mining for different resources. They know the best techniques
for drilling into different surfaces, testing for the quality of the
ore, and the exploitation of different types of mines.

   The economic problem is that the people who know how
to run the mine do not own the land. In other words, in the
current situation without any economic transaction the land is
not used in the most optimal way. There are broadly speaking
two possible solutions to address this problem. First, one of the
miners can buy the land. Second, the landowner can buy or
hire the expertise of (one of) the miners.
12 | THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER

The two solutions

Let me start with making the first solution more concrete.
Imagine that the owner knows that if they run and exploit the
mine, they will earn a total profit of 120 gold coins until the
mine is exhausted. The most efficient miner on the other hand
could earn 200 gold coins, the second most efficient miner
would make 180 gold coins, and the least efficient miner could
generate 160 gold coins worth of iron ore. In the ideal scenario,
the owner can auction the mine to the three miners who each
can bid for the mine. Interestingly, none of the parties involved
needs to know the value that the others have attached to the
mine. As long as the bid price is below 160 gold coins, all
miners will be interested, however only two miners will be
willing to bid more than 160 gold coins for the mine.
Eventually, the most efficient miner will be the only one left,
they will bid 181 gold coins and the owners will accept the bid.
The owner makes 61 gold coins more than what they would
have made if they would have run the mine themselves. The
most efficient miner pays 181 gold coins to the landowner, but
they will earn a total of 200 gold coins from exploiting the iron
ore. We have arrived at the best possible situation for this four
person economy; the most efficient miner is running the mine
and creating the highest possible value.

   The limitations to this story are clear. For instance, in reality
the miners and the landowner will not exactly know how they
should value the mine. They might be uncertain about the
price of iron ore in the future, they might not know how
much iron ore can be mined from the land, or they might be
unsure how much work it is to run this specific mine. Another
problem is that the miners might not be able to pay the
                THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER | 13

  amount they want to bid. They might need financing 1. It is
  entirely possible that none of the miners are willing to bid
  more than the 120 gold coins. In that case, the landowner
  might decide that it is profitable for them to employ one of the
  miners to do the mining for them. Thus, the second solution
  to the economic problem is that the owner hires the most
  capable miner and the owner knows that the miners have more
  knowledge and experience.

 Contracting problems for the
 landowner

  Which one of the two solutions will play out depends on the
  costs of contracting for both solutions. The cost of buying
  land involves a number of costs for the buying miner. They
  will spend a long time and need special instruments to
  establish the value of the iron ore in the land. One cost for
  the landowner is that they do not know what the value is of
  the iron ore and so they might get a low price if the miners
  have conspired against them. However if the cost of buying
  and selling the land is not too high, the economic problem is
  solved. The miner has the land (ownership rights), the miner
  knows and can decide what to do with the land (decision
  rights) and the miner is motivated to exploit the mine as good

1. I have been asked to present what studying finance is to high school students
  multiple times. If I say so myself, this story has been a successful way to make
  students interested. I usually first play out the auction with groups of students in
  the role of miners and landowners. The ensuing discussion about what could go
  wrong in the real world provides an excellent opportunity to introduce the
  importance of valuation models, risk, currency fluctuations, and regulation.
14 | THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER

as possible because they can sell the iron ore and reap the profit
in gold coins.

   On the other hand if the landowner hires a miner for their
knowledge, there is still a problem. The landowner holds all
the rights to do what they want with the land (decision rights)
and they get all the profits of the mine exploitation (ownership
rights). However, the miner is more capable in mining and
has the right experience to actually do the work. This problem
can partly be solved by assigning some decision rights to the
miner. For instance, if the miner has sufficient knowledge on
mining, they need the decision authority to make the calls on
the investment in machines or which drilling techniques to
employ.

   Granting decision rights to the miner only partly addresses
the economic problem. Even though the miner can make the
right decisions, they are not necessarily motivated to do so. If
they take the right decisions, they will earn a fixed salary. If
they take the wrong decisions, they will also earn a fixed salary.
These wrong decision might be ones that make the miner's
life a little easier. For instance, the miner might choose to buy
expensive machines that do all the work.

   The landowner can address this issue by measuring the
performance of the miner and rewarding them for good
performance. One possible option is that the landowner gives
a percentage of the profits from the sales of the iron ore to the
miner. The miner is now motivated to increase their earnings
by taking the best decisions for the mining operation. We are
now again in the best possible outcome for the four person
economy. The miner with the best knowledge of how to mine
for the iron ore can make decisions on how to operate the mine
and they will be motivated to take the right decisions.
             THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER | 15

Theories and topics

In the story of the mine, the landowner needs to take three
crucial decisions.

 1. The landowner needs to decide whether they will sell the
      mine or keep it.

 2. If the landowner keeps the mine, they need to decide
      how much autonomy or decision rights to give to the
      miner they hire.

 3. If the landowner gives decision rights to the miner, they
      need to decide which performance measures and rewards
      they will use.

In this simple story, the value of measurement and evaluation,
the topic of this book, depends on how much authority the
landowner wants to give the miner when they hire a miner.
The value of good performance measures thus depends on
how easy it is to sell the mine and how much more experienced
and knowledgeable the miner is. The main difference between
the three different economic theories at the start of this book is
which decision they emphasise.

   Transaction cost economists argue that the most important
determinant of economic organisation is the cost of either
buying and selling the land versus the costs of hiring the miner
to work as an employee (Williamson, 1979, 1991, 2002). In the
next chapter, I will go into the details of where these costs are
coming from and how it relates to an organisation's decision to
keep control over their own production process or outsource
it to a supplier.

   Others argue that the people with the right knowledge
should get the decision rights. If the owners of the rights
cannot hire the knowledgeable people in the economy they
16 | THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER

might be better off selling their rights. Specifically, some
knowledge can be easily transferred but other types of
knowledge, specific knowledge, is specific to people with the
right experience or education. These theorists argue that the
distribution of specific knowledge ultimately determines how
economic transactions will be structured (Jensen & Meckling,
1995).

   Agency theorists have argued that what really determines
the organisation of firms and economic transactions is whether
there are good performance measures available. In one of the
following chapters, I will explain how economists define good
measures. The agency theoretical explanation argues that if
these measures can be used to write an enforceable contract,
landowners can reliably grant decision rights to their
knowledgeable miners and they do not need to sell their
ownership rights (Holmstrom & Milgrom, 1994).

   These three theories are not mutually exclusive. They do
focus on different decisions and emphasise different choices on
how firms should organise themselves. Together, the theories
give a good indication of the role of performance measurement
in the organisation of a firm. In this book, I take the view that
a good understanding of these three perspectives provides a
structure to understand how performance measurement and
rewards choices affect the organisation as a whole. Similarly,
the combination of these theories also helps to understand
how other organisational choices increase or decrease the
importance of performance measurement. The chapters
dealing with these theories and their applications form the core
of the book.

   Nevertheless, not all the aspects of the structure of
organisations has been covered. Other economists have
focused on internal labour markets to motivate and select
employees. The internal labour market is the result of
competition in the organisation for promotions. We will see
             THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER | 17

that promotion decision are not only based on objective but
also on subjective performance measures that cannot be used
in formal contracts but are still a valuable tool to evaluate and
motivate employees (Baker et al., 1994). This part of the book
can be fully understood from the perspective of the three core
theories but its application is so important for most employees
that it deserves its own section.

   Next, I branch out to another non-economic perspective.
Some researchers argue that not all organisations maximise
the economic value of the activities they are undertaking.
Specifically, when it is unclear what the best action is,
organisations rely on institutions to determine the course of
action (Dimaggio & Powell 1983). They might be influenced
by pressure of powerful groups, professional organisations, or
social customs and norms. Other organisations imitate the
decisions of more successful organisations even if that is not
necessarily optimal. These institutional influences are explored
and we will see how an understanding of institutional forces
and power helps us to better understand how organisations
make changes to their existing performance measurement
systems and how they implement new ones.

References

Baker, G., Gibbs, M., & Holmstrom, B. (1994). The internal
economics of the firm: Evidence from personnel Data. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 881-919.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2118351

   Dimaggio, P. J., & Powell, W. W. (1983). The iron cage
revisited institutional isomorphism and collective rationality
in organizational fields. Advances in Strategic Management,
48(2), 147-160. https://doi.org/10.2307/2095101

   Holmstrom, B., & Milgrom, P. (1994). The Firm as an
18 | THE STORY OF THE MINERS AND THE LANDOWNER

Incentive System. The American Economic Review, 84(4),
972-991.

   Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1995). Specific and
general knowledge and organizational structure. SSRN
Electronic Journal, 251-274.

   Williamson, O. E. (1979). Transaction-Cost Economics:
The Governance of Contractual Relations. The Journal of
Law and Economics, 22(2), 233. https://doi.org/10.1086/
466942

   Williamson, O. E. (1991). Comparative economic
organization: The analysis of discrete structural alternatives.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2), 269-296.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2393356

   Williamson, O. E. (2002). The Theory of the Firm as
Governance Structure: From Choice to Contract. Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 16(3), 171-195. https://doi.org/
10.1257/089533002760278776
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 19

2.

TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

   Stijn Masschelein

This chapter explains the Transaction Cost Theory developed
by Oliver Williamson (1979, 1991, 2002). This theory argues
that there are three important governance structures that are
the blueprints for how to organise business activities: (1)
Markets, (2) Long-term Contracts, and (3) Hierarchical
Organisations. I will deal with these three blueprints in turn
and explain the role of transaction costs in deciding which
blueprint is optimal for different circumstances. Similar to the
story of the mine, these three blueprints are a useful
simplification of real world phenomena and not all real world
examples will be easy to categorise. However, that does not
mean that transaction cost economics has no practical
applications because in the chapter I will use the theory to
explain the role of strategic management accounting.
  20 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

 Blueprints of Governance

  In this section, I explain the three blueprints 1 for governing
  economic transactions in the Transaction Cost Economics
  framework: Markets, Long-Term Contracts, and Hierarchical
  Organisations. We will see that these blueprints are idealised
  and simplified versions of real world phenomena. Just like the
  story in the first chapter, they help us to focus on what is
  important by simplifying reality.

 Markets

 The role of markets

  The market is a meeting place for buyers and suppliers where
  buyers exchange money for a product or service from the
  supplier. In this market, suppliers sell at a given unit price and
  the buyers pay this unit price. For each buyer, the identity of
  the supplier is not important. They are merely interested in
  the product and the price they have to pay. This is the ideal
  market from any introduction to economics course and it has
  a number of interesting characteristics.

     First, a market is adaptive to disturbances or changes in
  the economic environment. If the consumer demand for the
  goods of the buyers goes up and they need more materials from
  their suppliers, those materials becomes more valuable. Buyers
  will (have to) pay a higher unit price to their suppliers. Thus,

1. I use blueprint here in the sense of a design or plan for how a real organisation or a
  real market looks. A blueprint gives the general structure and the main features but
  it has to leave the details out.
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 21

the unit price that buyers pay and suppliers receive, responds
to changes in the consumers' preferences. In general, all
relevant information about the economic environment will be
captured in the price of the product. As a result an ideal market
can be seen as an information generating machine. The market
price gathers all the demand and supply related information.
That also means that buyers and suppliers do not need to
invest in information technology such as performance
measurement. They can just follow the price to know all the
relevant information that is in the market.

   Second, an ideal market also provides incentives to the buyer
and suppliers. The market is unforgiving in the sense that if a
supplier wants to ask a higher price no buyer will be willing to
pay that price. If buyers want to pay a lower price, no supplier
will be willing to sell. That means that both buyers and
suppliers have an incentive to be efficient. If they are
inefficient, they are not able to generate a profit at the market
price. Again, this means that the buyers do not have to worry
about monitoring the suppliers and there is no role for
performance measurement. Buyers will only buy a product or
service that they need and they only care about the price they
are paying.

Transaction Costs in Markets

We see in practice that firms use extensive contracts with their
suppliers and with their employees. They set standards, have
rule books, try to measure the quality of the work delivered,
and the efficiency of work practices. This is because real
markets are not perfect markets and these imperfections give
rise to transaction costs, which are the costs of ensuring that the
market functions.

   The story of the mine already reveals some transaction costs
in imperfect markets. Not every potential miner has the time
22 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

to investigate the new land. Some miners might not have the
necessary information to value the mine. The landowner
might not know how to reach all miners who are interested
in exploiting the mine. These types of information and search
costs are common transaction costs in markets and they give rise
to the need for formal contracts with clauses that reward good
performance and penalise delays and bad performance.

   Another potential problem in the story of the mine is that
the landowner and the miner might need to make initial
investments together before they can decide whether they
want to respectively buy or sell the mine. For instance, the
miner will want to independently investigate how valuable the
iron ore and they will hire geologists to assess the mine. The
landowner will have to invest in background checks on all
potential bidders to make sure that they can actually pay for
the mine. The problem is that both parties need to coordinate
on these initial investments. If the landowner does not do
background checks, the miners will not feel confident that the
landowner actually wants to sell the land and they do not want
to face the costs of hiring a geologist. If the miners do not
invest in a geologist, the landowner does not feel confident
that the miners actually want to buy the land and they do not
want to invest in background checks. The transaction costs
associated with solving these coordination problems are
unimaginatively called coordination costs.

   A typical solution in markets is that there is third party who
is trusted by both parties who will assure that both parties
are genuinely interested in the transaction: the buyers can be
trusted to pay and the sellers can be trusted to deliver the
goods. Exchanges and banks play this role in financial markets
and traders pay the exchange or the bank fees for their services.
These are transaction costs to solve the coordination problem.
In business-to-business markets, companies rely a lot on
reputation concerns. An organisation that wants to survive
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 23

long term cannot be known in the industry for not paying
their suppliers or for not delivering goods and services to their
customers. The transaction cost is that sometimes you will
not get paid as a supplier or you will not get your goods as a
customers because the counter party does not care about their
reputation because they plan on disappearing with all your
money to a subtropical island.

Long-Term Contracts

The Role of Long-Term Contracts

The second blueprint is a long-term contract where two or
more different economic parties decide to work together for an
extended period of time. In practice, these long-term contracts
can take the form of joint ventures, alliances, purchasing
agreements, strategic partnerships and many more. The crucial
part for our purpose is that both parties remain independent
organisations and they plan to interact with each other for an
extended period of time.

   The critical part of a contract is that it specifies rewards
for when the parties completely adhere to their responsibilities
and it contains penalties for when the parties do not fulfil their
duties. A supply contract typically contains penalties for late
delivery and the buyer will need to pay interest on any late
payments.

   The ability of contracts to specify the parties'
responsibilities creates the opportunity to solve the
coordination problems that emerge in markets. The contract
can specify which initial actions a buyer and supplier need
to take. For instance a supplier of industrial machines will
have to invest in a new production technology to produce
the customised machines that a new customer wants. Their
24 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

customer will need to share information about their
production process so that the supplier knows what the
customer needs. The advantage of the long-term contract is
that the buyer and supplier can rely on the contract to be
sure that the other party will fulfil their part of the deal. They
can write the contract in such a way that the supplier is
incentivised to invest in the new technology and the buyer
is incentivised to share the information. After signing the
contract, either party can be assured that the other will do their
part. Specifically, the supplier does not have to fear that they
will invest in a costly technology and that the customer will not
share the necessary information to do the job. Furthermore,
the long-term contract also covers multiple transactions for an
extended period of time. This also gives the suppliers more
assurance that the customer will reward them for the initial
investment in new production technology.

   Another type of clause in long-term contracts are
stipulations on how the parties will address conflicts when
they inevitably arrive. In a long-term contract the parties
interact with each other for an extended period and they
cannot predict all possible problems that will arise. If both
parties agree on how to deal with problems, there is no
problem. However, if both parties disagree, they need a
mechanism to resolve this conflict. The contract will specify
when they can resort to mediation by a third party,
renegotiation of the contract, or to the legal system. Conflict
resolution in a long-term contract makes sure that the buyer
and supplier can adapt the working relationship if the
environment or requirements of the task change.

Transaction Costs in Long-Term Contracts
and the Role of Performance Measures

The transaction costs of long-term contracts consists of two
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 25

categories. The first costs are the costs associated with the
contract itself and the second ones are the costs of a breakdown
in the relation. The first category are obvious contract costs
such as lawyers involved in negotiating the contract, the
opportunity cost of the time it takes to negotiate the contract,
and the information and measures that are needed to
determine whether the parties should be rewarded or
penalised.

   The last example is our first encounter with performance
measurement. In the transaction cost view, performance
measurement is important because it allows the parties to write
a contract that solves the coordination problem. In this view,
performance measurement is subject to a cost-benefit analysis.
The costs are the time, money, and effort involved in collecting
the measures. The benefits are that the measures allow the
parties to work together while being assured that the other
parties will make the necessary and agreed upon investments in
the joint project. This allows the parties to organise economic
transactions that would not be possible in the ideal market
because of coordination problems.

   The second category of transaction costs in the long-term
contract are the costs of conflict resolution. In the ideal market,
there are no costs of conflict because the only transaction that
happens in the ideal market is that the buyer and seller
exchange money for goods or services and this is where the
relation ends. In the long-term contract, the buyers and
supplier keep interacting with each other. They have been able
to overcome the coordination problem together and therefore
cannot just go to a different partner. They are to some extent
dependent on each other. This creates the risk that when the
economic environment, such as customer demands or the cost
of energy, changes the benefits of working together might
change. For instance, the supplier of industrial machines might
have to adapt the machine they delivered to new specification
26 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

by their customer, so that the customer can respond to
changing demands from their customers. In some cases, the
contract will specify which party is responsible for upgrading
the machines and at what cost to the supplier. It is also possible
that the changes in the environment were not predicted at
the time the contract was signed and the parties need to
renegotiate parts of the contract with all the costs that entails.
In the most extreme case, the parties will disagree who is
responsible for making adjustments or how to continue the
relation. They might end up in a legal battle with all the legal
costs involved.

   The role of performance measurement and collecting
information from the environment is to lower the possibility
that the changes in the environment are not foreseen in the
contract or at least that they do not come as a surprise to
the parties. So, another advantage of a good performance
measurement and information system is that they help the
parties in the long-term contract predict changes that can lead
to a conflict in the relation. It gives the parties time to adapt
to changes in the environment. Nevertheless, certain economic
activities are too unpredictable and require too much
coordination and cannot be dealt with efficiently in a long-
term contract. For these type of transactions, we need the third
blueprint, organisations.

Organisations

The Role of Hierarchical Organisations

Hierarchical organisations are formed to react quickly to
changes in the environment when mutual investments are
needed and need to be coordinated. In an organisation the
buyer and supplier are no longer two different entities. They
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 27

become one organisation which can take many legal forms
but most of the time we will think of them as for-profit
corporations. In fact, in an organisation there will often be
more than two parties, not just a buyer and a supplier. An
organisation has multiple divisions or departments who all
need to work together. If a manufacturing firm needs to
produce different products in response to changing customer
demands, the marketing division needs to collect information
on what customers want, the production division needs to
adjust the manufacturing process, the purchasing department
need to search for new suppliers, and the HR team needs to
hire new specialists. The advantage that organisations have is
that these actions are coordinated.

   The organisation will set-up formal responsibilities and
duties to make sure that all necessary actions are taken.
Typically, a small group of people, top management, is
responsible to ensure that everyone in the organisation fulfils
their responsibility. Top management can unilaterally decide
to assign duties to different employees, to invest in new
technology, or to focus on new customers. They do no need
to rewrite a long-term contract to change the course of the
organisation. This gives the organisation the flexibility to
quickly adapt to changes in the environment.

   Organisations have a second function to deal with changes
in the environment. Top management can easily resolve
conflicts at will in the organisation. If two divisions do not
agree on how the organisation should react to changes in the
environment, top management can simply tell them what to
do. There is no need for time wasting negotiations between the
divisions or expensive court cases.

   Unfortunately, this flexibility in organisations comes at a
cost. All divisions in the organisation know that they are stuck
with each other. Together they are creating value by being able
to act together in response to changes. That means that no
28 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

division can be easily replaced and as a result they need to be
forgiving of each other when one of them makes a mistake.
While markets are unforgiving because every supplier or buyer
can easily be replaced, organisations are forgiving. Thus,
incentives to perform well are lower in organisations because
a division is more likely to not be punished because the other
divisions of the organisation need it. To make sure that the
divisions work in the best interest of the firm, top management
will have to design incentive systems. In transaction cost
economics, the role of incentives in organisations is to take
over one of the role of prices in markets: motivating the parties
involved in the transaction.

Transaction Costs in Hierarchical
Organisations

The transaction costs in organisations are the most directly
observable costs that we have dealt with so far. The first
category of costs are the costs of setting up a bureaucratic
system of role descriptions, duties, and budget allocation.
These are the costs involved in making sure that top
management's decisions are carried out all throughout the
firm. In this category, we will also find a role for cost
accounting and measurement of key performance indicators
or balanced scorecards. All these tools provide information to
top management and allow them to make better decisions.
The specific costs can be the cost of collecting data, managing
databases, or the cost of the Human Resources department.

   The second category of costs are the costs involved in
designing rewards and penalty schemes to motivate the
divisions and not let them rely on being forgiven for mistakes.
The costs involved in these incentive schemes are the same
costs of information collection but also the cost that employees
will want to be compensated for the risk that their
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 29

compensation depends on factors beyond their control. I will
discuss these last costs further in the chapter on incentives.

   The fundamental insight of transaction cost economics is
that there is a cost-benefit trade-off for strategic management
accounting tools. There is a cost in setting up accounting
systems which needs to be weight against the benefits of
coordinating different divisions. If the costs are too high to
manage the different divisions, the different divisions in the
organisation might be better off splitting up and operating as
separate entities.

Overview and How To Apply
Transaction Cost Economics

The important insight of transaction cost theory is that
market, contracts and hierarchical bureaucracies are efficient
for different economic transactions. Hierarchical organisations
are better at coordinating activities and investments that
benefit the organisation as a whole and resolving conflicts
within the organisation. The disadvantage of organisations is
that they cannot rely solely on market prices to provide
information and incentives. Organisations need performance
measurement and accounting systems to replace the
information and incentives of prices. These systems have their
own costs which have to be weighted against the costs of better
coordination and better conflict resolution.

   As we will see going forward, the role of performance
measurement and evaluation systems is to provide information
on the environment, the performance of different divisions,
and provide incentives, just like ideal markets do. Firms will
often outsource some activities to suppliers because they
believe that the market is better at evaluating and incentivizing
the supplier or they believe it is better to outsource certain
  30 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

  activities with a long-term contract. Nevertheless, firms also
  keep a lot of activities within the firm and strategic
  management accounting plays an role in coordinating those
  activities and motivating the divisions.

     As we will see further on, transaction cost economics does
  not capture all important factors to understand the role of
  strategic management accounting tools. Just like the story of
  land owner and the mine, transaction cost economics provides
  a useful, simplified model to help us think about the role of
  management accounting tools in organisations. I deliberately
  used blueprints to refer to the different ways of managing
  economic transactions in transaction cost economics because
  they should be seen as incomplete representations of real world
  markets, contracts, and organisations. Real relations between
  businesses, between employees and employers, or between
  divisions within a firm might show some elements of each
  blueprint but often one blueprint will dominate. What will
  be important for us is that we should be able to realise the
  transaction costs of managing the relation and that we can
  compare the benefits of blueprints to their potential costs.

     In order to better understand those costs and benefits, in the
  next section, I turn my attention to two factors that drive the
  cost-benefit trade-off that favours one blueprint over an other.

 The Drivers of Costs and Benefits

 Asset Specificity

  As I explained above, both markets and organisations 2 can

2. Long-term contracts sit in the middle between markets and organisations. For
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 31

adapt quickly to changes in the environment. You might ask
yourself what the difference is between the blueprints if they
essentially do the same thing well. The difference between
markets and organisations is in how they need to respond to
changes.

   Organisations rely on asset-specific investments which are
investments that are only valuable for a specific transaction.
For instance a supplier can invest in a technology to improve
the quality of the products they produce. If all their current
and potential customers are willing to pay more for the
improved quality, the technology is general and not specific.
The market will reward suppliers who invest in this
technology. However, if the improved quality of the products
is only relevant for one or two customers, the investment is
specific to the relation that supplier has with those customers.
There are two reasons why the supplier might not be willing to
invest in the technology. The first one is that the supplier needs
to invest in the technology before they reap the benefits from
higher sales. If the higher sales do not materialise, they are just
left with additional costs. The second and related issue is that
the customers can not always assess the quality of the product
before they use it. If this is the case, they will not be prepared
to pay a higher price for the product and thus, the supplier will
not want to invest in the technology.

   I can make this more concrete with another simple story
which we will build on in the following chapters. Imagine
that one supplier can make shiny white computers and one
buyer can build shops that make shiny white computers look

simplicity, I will ignore them in this discussion. You can think of them as
somewhere between the two extremes of the ideal market and the strictly
hierarchical organisation
  32 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

  more attractive to consumers 3. If the suppliers sells their white
  computers to another buyer with another shop, their
  investment in the production technology for white computers
  is useless. If the buyer purchases regular grey computers, their
  investments in lighting for white computer are useless. Based
  on the price in the competitive market the supplier has no
  incentive to make the investment in the production
  technology for white computers. Therefore the buyer has no
  incentive to invest in lighting for white computer. As I have
  explained before, it will be beneficial for the supplier and the
  buyer to write a contract that makes sure that they both invest
  or they can form a single organisation where top management
  directs both parties to make the investment.

 Uncertainty

  The role of uncertainty and unpredictable changes in
  customer demands or technology has permeated the
  discussion of transaction cost economics in this chapter. At
  the end of the chapter, I will clarify some of the more subtle
  differences I have glossed over. The most obvious place where
  uncertainty has popped up is that I have defined the benefits
  of the blueprints in terms of how quickly they can respond to
  changes in the environment. If the environment never changes
  and is not expected to change, there is no uncertainty at all.

     Uncertainty also showed up as a measurement problem. Top
  management in an organisation is uncertain about its

3. It's not difficult to see that this is a simplified version of what Apple is doing.
  Apple requires shops like JB Hifi to present Apple products in a very specific way.
  As a customer, you can recognise the Apple style presentation tables wherever you
  go in the world. I will talk more about this application in the next chapter.
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 33

environment and needs to collect information to decide what
the best combination of actions and investments is for the
divisions of the firm. Buyers are uncertain about the quality
of products delivered and suppliers are uncertain whether a
buyer will pay a higher price. In a lot of these cases, we can
transform the problem to a risk-benefit trade-off. For instance,
the buyer might not be sure about the quality of the product
but they can decide that it might still be worth the risk to buy
a product. Top management might not be sure that customers
want a new product but they can decide it is worth the risk
to launch a new product because of the potential sales. One
important feature of this type of risk is that it can be minimised
by having better measurement systems. Thus, there is a role
for performance measurement and information systems to
minimise the risk.

   The last type of uncertainty is fundamental
unpredictability. Some events cannot be predicted and
therefor cannot be put as a condition in a long-term contract.
In an organisation, unpredictable events lead to conflicts and
mistakes. In a fundamentally unpredictable environment, the
value of conflict resolution and integration of different
perspectives in decision making will be crucial. On the other
hand, unpredictability can also break markets if buyers are
no longer be assured that suppliers will deliver the goods and
services and sellers are not longer sure that buyers will pay. All
blueprints can deal with a moderate level of unpredictability
but the common view is that organisations at least have the
processes in place to deal with completely unexpected events in
the form of a group of top managers that can take decisions in
the best interest of the firm as a whole.
34 | TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS

Summary of the Drivers

The drivers are the factors that determine which of the
blueprints is best at adapting to changing environments. Since
the focus on this book is on strategic management accounting
tools, we are primarily concerned with organisations. This
blueprint is best at coordinating a bundle of specific
investments that are only valuable within the organisation in
an unpredictable environment. In transaction economics,
organisations are somewhat of a paradox in that they on the
one hand are resilient to change because their value comes
from this bundle of investments where all investments are
necessary. On the other hand, when necessary they can change
quickly because only a handful of top managers need to agree
to make the change happen. From a transaction cost
economics point of view, the key role of strategic management
accounting is to coordinate the bundle of investments and to
provide top managers with information on how to adapt to a
changing environment.

References

Williamson, O. E. (1979). Transaction-Cost Economics: The
Governance of Contractual Relations. The Journal of Law
and Economics, 22(2), 233. https://doi.org/10.1086/466942

   Williamson, O. E. (1991). Comparative economic
organization: The analysis of discrete structural alternatives.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 36(2), 269-296.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2393356

   Williamson, O. E. (2002). The Theory of the Firm as
Governance Structure: From Choice to Contract. Journal of
                                       TRANSACTION COST ECONOMICS | 35

Economic Perspectives, 16(3), 171-195. https://doi.org/
10.1257/089533002760278776
36 | THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

3.

THE ROLE OF STRATEGY
IN TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

   Stijn Masschelein

At this point, it would be reasonable to ask the question why a
book on strategic management accounting should start with a
simple model of what the difference is between an organisation
and a market. The reason is that I will use the insights from
transaction costs to explain the benefits of a strategy for a
organisation and how management accounting plays a role in
reaping the benefits of a strategy. The fundamental insight of
transaction cost economics is that organisations exist because
they are more efficient at coordinating certain asset-specific
investments than independent organisations transacting in
markets. The argument in this chapter is that an organisation's
strategy can be defined by which investments they coordinate
and that different management accounting tools help to
coordinate these investments. To make that proposition more
concrete I will use the examples of the Apple and the Android
ecosystem in the smartphone industry.
                            THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
                                                                        ECONOMICS | 37

 Strategy and Transaction Costs

  The categorisation of organisation strategies is a source of a lot
  of debate. A company's strategy explicates how organisations
  exploit opportunities in the market place that lie within their
  capabilities (Horngren et al., 2012) or their strategies specify
  the direction a company tends to take over the long term to
  achieve its mission and meet its objectives. Most management
  accounting textbooks focus on the distinction between cost
  leaders and differentiators (p.5 in Horngren et al., 2012;
  p.14-15 in Langfield-Smith et al, 2008). Cost leaders provide
  products and services at prices that competitors cannot match.
  Examples of cost leaders are Amazon, JetStar, and Red
  Rooster. Typically, cost management will be an important tool
  for companies with a cost leadership strategy. Other
  organisations try to differentiate their products and services
  from competitors. Apple is a prime example of a company that
  has been able to differentiate its iPhones and MacBooks to
  the extent that some customers almost see them as a different
  product category, separate from other smartphones and
  laptops. A subtler example is Subway that has successfully
  built an image of being a healthy fast-food alternative.

     Although this distinction is useful and can be further
  refined 1, I look slightly differently at an organisation's strategy.
  The established view of strategy in management accounting
  textbooks assumes that the strategy is decided upon at the top
  of the company and top management tries to implement that
  strategy with the help of management accounting tools such as
  budgets, cost accounting systems, incentive systems, and other

1. Some people identify an intermediate, flexible strategy where organisations try to
  adapt quickly to customer demands by frequently updating their products.
38 | THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

performance measurement systems. While this assumption
might be realistic in organisations that are tightly controlled
by a powerful CEO such as Steve Jobs (Apple), Jeff Bezos
(Amazon, Blue Origin), or Elon Musk (Tesla, Solar City,
SpaceX), it does not have to be true.

   The approach in this textbook is different in that it does
not assume that the strategy of the organisation is a deliberate
choice of top management. For the purpose of this text, the
strategy of the organisation is determined by the investment
decisions that give the organisation a difficult to imitate
competitive advantage. The assumption is that organisations
that have no sustainable competitive advantage will be copied,
or taken over by competitors, and disappear from the market
place as they are being replaced by more efficient copy-cats.

   One way how organisations can create a difficult to imitate
competitive advantage is by coordinating a lot of asset-specific
investments. Remember that these are investments that are
only valuable within the organisation and if they are combined
with other asset-specific investments. One example is a
vertically integrated organisation like Apple. Apple tightly
controls the hardware design, the engineering of the computer
chip, the operating system, the marketing and the retail
experience for their iPhone smartphones.

Markets

In order for a organisation's strategy to provide a competitive
advantage, it is not enough that no other single organisation
can copy the strategy. The organisation also wants to avoid
that a collection of organisations together outperform the
organisation's strategy. This is especially important for
vertically integrated organisations like Apple. For the
production of the iPhone, Apple tightly controls the hardware
                            THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
                                                                        ECONOMICS | 39

  design, the engineering of the computer chip, the operating
  system, the marketing and the retail experience. For the typical
  Android smartphone many more companies are involved such
  as Google, Samsung, Telstra, JB Hifi and they all have direct
  control over some of these activities.

     The Android market approach has a number of attractive
  features. As each organisation is a for-profit entity, they all have
  a strong incentive to be efficient. An inefficient organisation
  will either be quickly put aside by their customers because
  their prices are too high or they will incur losses and run out
  of funding. The incentives in the market are in general much
  stronger than those for individual departments in an
  integrated organisation as we have seen in the previous chapter.

     The second feature of markets is that the price of the
  different products and services is a coordination mechanism
  between the individual companies. When customers are
  buying more Samsung phones, the retailers, such as JB Hifi,
  are willing to pay a higher price for Samsung phones and
  carriers, such as Telstra, are willing to subsidize the purchase
  of a Samsung phone with a phone plan. This is a signal to
  Samsung that their phones are popular and they should
  produce more of the phones that are in high demand.
  Although, Samsung is not in direct contact with the
  consumers, they still receive feedback on the popularity of
  their products 2. What holds for the final product, also goes
  for all the intermediate components that make up the phone.
  Every supplier in the whole production process will get price
  signals that determine whether they should make more or less

2. Yes, of course this example is simplified. In reality, Samsung will also directly
  interact with customers who buy their phones. As always, the simplified story is
  meant to help highlight the differences. This is not meant to be a full analysis of
  the smartphone market.
40 | THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

of a product or product category. This is the famous invisible
hand of Adam Smith at work.

Incentives and Information in
Organisations

Integrated organisations will need to replace the incentive and
price signal of markets internally. This is one of the major
functions of the strategic management accounting tools that
we are going to discuss in the second section of the book.
The goal of budgets, balanced scorecards, cost accounting, and
bonus systems is some combination of gathering information
from inside and outside the organisation, disseminating that
information through the organisation, and motivating the
different departments in the firm to work in the best interest of
the organisation.

   As an example, organisations can set up a transfer pricing
system which is the most direct reflection of a market
mechanism. A transfer price is a price paid by one department
of the company to another for a product or service. For
instance in a proto-typical manufacturing company, the
production department assembles the product and the sales
department sells to the final customer. The transfer price is
a revenue for the production department and a cost for the
sales department which allows the headquarters to assess each
department's contribution to the organisation's profit (See
further in this textbook for more on transfer pricing and
chapter 22 in Horngren et al. (2012) or chapter 12 in
Langfield-Smith et al. (2008)). Alternatively, organisations can
allocate a budget to each department and assess whether the
department used the budget efficiently. The allocation of
budgets can also be used as a way to coordinate both
                         THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
                                                                      ECONOMICS | 41

departments. If headquarters want to increase the number of
products manufactured, they can allocate a larger budget to
the production department (see further in this textbook for
more on budgets, or chapter 6 in Horngren et al. (2012) and
chapter 9 in Langfield-Smith et al. (2008)). As a last example,
organisations also collect non-financial measures to evaluate
and motivate employees instead of relying on market
incentives and financial measures only. Financial measures and
non-financial measures are used together in a balanced
scorecard and they help organisations to keep track of the
overall performance of the organisation and to coordinate the
different departments. The balanced scorecard allows the
organisation to break up the overall strategy into departmental
strategies that are measured in separate, departmental balanced
scorecards so that each department knows how they can
contribute to the overall goal of the organisation (see further
in this textbook for more on the balanced scorecard, or chapter
13 in Horngren et al. (2012), and chapter 14 in Langfield-
Smith et al. (2008)).

Integrated Organisations and
Transaction Costs

Because performance measures and evaluation systems are
rarely perfect, they often contain less information than the
price in a perfectly functioning market and the incentives in
organisations are often less strong than in a competitive
market. Organisations can not as easily fire employees as they
can change their suppliers. When markets seem to be better
at summarising information and providing incentives, the
question remains why vertically integrated organisations exist.
In other words, why has the market of software and hardware
  42 | THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
  ECONOMICS

  manufacturers not driven Apple out of the smartphone
  market?

     The advantage of an integrated organisation is that it can
  combine and coordinate all the functions at once and create
  synergies. Apple for instance has created its own system on a
  chip (SoC) which optimises energy use and performance for its
  software on its hardware. To get the best of this combination
  Apple needs to invest and coordinate the investments in the
  design of the chip, the software, and the hardware at the same
  time. The coordination of all these benefits is a delicate
  balancing act but if the benefits of this integration outweigh
  the costs of abandoning the market's price mechanism, an
  integrated organisation has a sustainable, difficult to copy
  strategy. For our purpose the key insight is that the success
  of the integration will depend crucially on using the right
  management accounting systems to assign the necessary
  budget to all projects, hold divisions accountable for their
  contribution to the overall strategy, and communicate the
  overarching strategy to the different divisions 3.

     In the smartphone industry, other players such as Google,
  Microsoft, and Samsung, have with varying success moved
  towards more vertical integration. In general, all organisations
  are combining and coordinating multiple investments. That is,
  all organisations are integrated to a certain extent. I have used
  the comparison between Apple and the Android ecosystem as
  another simplified story to illustrate the value of integrating

3. Apple is notoriously tight-lipped on how they manage the organisation and it is
  difficult to use Apple as a case study. Nevertheless, there are some educated guesses
  we can make. For instance, when Apple launched the first iPad tablet they
  deliberately compromised on features to keep the overall price for customers under
  499 USD for the base model while maintaining a healthy profit margin. This is
  consistent with a management accounting practice called target costing.
                            THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
                                                                        ECONOMICS | 43

  multiple functions and coordinating them well. The simplified
  story shows that while management accounting tools might
  not be as effective as the market price in an efficient market,
  this does not necessarily diminish the value of these tools if
  they allow firms to combine and coordinate multiple
  functions and create synergies. This cost-benefit analysis
  between the transaction costs of setting up management
  accounting tools and the benefits of synergies is how we should
  evaluate the value of strategic management accounting tools
  4. As a result, not all organisations are necessarily trying to
  get more vertically integrated. Some organisations choose a
  strategy that tries to remove transaction costs. The success of
  companies such as Uber and Amazon shows that some
  organisations do not shy away from creating markets, and
  using a pricing system as the core of their strategy. Uber, for
  instance, manages demand and supply for driving services
  through a dynamic pricing system.

     These transaction costs of management accounting tools
  can take numerous forms: from the cost of hiring consultants
  to help design the system, over the cost of IT systems to
  manage and collect the data, to the reaction of employees to
  being monitored or have their salary depend on imperfect
  measures. It is equally important to know what transaction
  costs are not. They are not the costs of goods, services, and
  human resources that are necessary for the production process
  of the organisation 5. I believe that one of the key differences of

4. Most management accounting textbooks touch upon integrated organisations
  when talking about the outsourcing and make-or-buy decisions (e.g. Chapter 11 in
  Horngren et al. (2012) or p860 in Langfield-Smith et al. (2008). However, I believe
  the focus in those chapters understates the importance of the integration and
  coordination in organisations.

5. That is, operational costs are not transaction costs.
44 | THE ROLE OF STRATEGY IN TRANSACTION COST
ECONOMICS

my approach to strategic management accounting compared
to traditional textbook approach is the focus on transaction
costs. I fundamentally start from the premise that all
management accounting tools have transaction costs
associated with them. Thus, they will only be useful to an
organisation if the benefit of having the management
accounting tool are larger than the transaction costs of
developing and implementing it.

References

Horngren, C. T., Datar, S. M., & Rajan, M. V. (2012). Cost
Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis (14th ed.). Pearson
Prentice Hall.

   Langfield-Smith, K., Thorne, H., and Hilton, R. W. (2008).
Management accounting: Information for creating and
managing value. McGraw-Hill Higher Education.
                                                      SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 45

4.

SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

   Stijn Masschelein

We started the discussion of economic theories with
transaction cost economics in the previous chapters. The
emphasis of transaction cost economics is on the value that
organizations create by coordinating different functions in
different departments. Transaction cost economics of
hierarchical organisations has a top down flavour that focuses
on the coordination role of top management. In this chapter, I
introduce the notion of specific knowledge because it will help
us think about when top management should not take the
decisions. That is, I will answer the question when decisions
should be decentralised to the departments in the organisation.
Decentralisation leads to new measurement and control
problems which can be solved or at least alleviated by strategic
management accounting tools. In one of the following
chapters, I will expand the notion of specific knowledge to
the broader category of human capital where investments in
human capital are an alternative mechanism for organisations
to create a difficult to imitate competitive advantage.

General and Specific Knowledge

This chapter focuses on the problem of assuring that the
person or department with appropriate knowledge decides
46 | SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

how to implement a strategy, which projects to fund, or how
to execute them. I make a distinction between two types of
knowledge: general knowledge and specific knowledge. The
distinguishing feature of specific knowledge is that it is difficult
to communicate (Jensen & Meckling 1995). If a person has
specific knowledge that means that they cannot just explain
their insight to other people. For instance, the design
sensibilities of Jonathan Ive or Steve Jobs at Apple and the
experience and negotiation skills of Warren Buffett are more
difficult to transfer to other employees. Production workers,
such as the manufacturing employees at Toyota, gain unique
insights in their job just by doing it. It is costly and often very
difficult to impart this knowledge to new employees. They will
only learn through their own experience.

   In contrast, the market price for a product or service is the
quintessential example of general knowledge. If sellers' cost of
production goes up, the market price will increase. If the final
customers value the buyers' products more, the intermediate
market price will increase. In a well functioning market, the
market price contains all the information that buyers and
sellers need about the product. If there is more demand for the
product (by the buyer), the price will go up. If there is more
supply of the product (by the sellers), the price will go down.
The market price is known to everyone in the market and
can be understood by everyone in the market and is therefore
general knowledge.

   There are multiple reasons why information is difficult to
communicate. I will focus on two. The first reason is that
we humans have cognitive limitations. We cannot digest and
remember an infinite amount of information. That means that
in all but the smallest organisations, it is unlikely that one
person will have all the knowledge necessary for the
organisation to be run perfectly. In addition, when we learn
new knowledge, it takes time. Just reading this textbook is
                                                         SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 47

  not enough for you to have the same knowledge that I have
  1. When we learn a new skill or new knowledge, we need to
  practice which takes time. That means that we are learning
  new knowledge that is difficult to communicate.

     The second reason why specific knowledge exists is that a lot
  of knowledge is specific to an environment and the people who
  work in that environment know best what is important. For
  instance, sales people interact a lot with the firm's customers
  and as a consequence they know a lot about the preferences
  of the customers. Similarly, the production team knows the
  production process the best. They will be able to identify
  possible improvements in the production process. If a
  department needs to transfer this information to the
  headquarters some of the knowledge will get lost in
  translation. Every report or presentation by the production
  managers will necessarily leave out some details which might
  be important for the decision about the production process.
  The fact that the production managers have to write a report
  or must have multiple long meetings with headquarters is also
  a sign that it is costly to transfer their knowledge.

 Markets and Specific Knowledge

  As we have seen before in the story of the mine, there are two
  possible solutions to assure that the people with knowledge
  take the decisions. The first solution works in the well
  functioning market. A market operates best when the rights to
  assets are in private ownership and these rights can be bought

1. Setting aside the obvious questions whether that would be something that you
  would want.
48 | SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

and sold. This means that the owners of the rights transfer the
rights to somebody else and the new owners reap the profits
of using the machine. If you have the ownership rights to a
machine, you can sell this machine and you get the sales price
when you sell. You can also use the machine to produce goods
and sell the products to consumers. In such a case, market
forces will assure that the owners of the rights will sell them
to the most knowledgeable people in the market. These people
know what to do best with the rights and can use the machine
most efficiently. The machine is more valuable for
knowledgeable people and they are willing to pay the highest
price for the rights to the machine. Because that price will
be higher than what the current owners can earn from the
machine, the owners will be happy to sell.

Organisations and Specific
Knowledge

The market solution does not work in organisations and it is
obvious why. The sales department can not sell the goods to
consumers and keep the money. The price that consumers pay
for the companies products belongs to the company. Similarly,
the production department can use the organisation's
machines but it is rare that they are allowed to sell the
machines. And even if they are allowed to sell the machine,
the proceeds from those sales do not belong to the production
department but to the organisation. In these examples, the
sales person and the production manager do not directly
benefit from the decisions that they take and this sets up a
potential conflict of interest.
                                                         SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 49

 Numerical Example of an Organisation

  We can use a simple numerical example to illustrate the
  problem. Let us assume that there is a manufacturer of
  computers with two departments: a production department
  and a sales department. The production department can invest
  in a technology to produce shiny white computers which can
  be sold at a higher price to consumers than regular grey
  computers. The production department is evaluated as a profit
  centre with a fixed transfer price for each computer that it
  manufactures and transfers to the sales department. As a result,
  the production department does not profit from an
  investment in the production technology for white computers.
  Whether they deliver a white computer or a grey computer
  does not matter for the transfer price in our example. The
  sales department can invest in more attractive lighting in the
  stores which will increase customer traffic and thus customer
  demand. The investment is so substantial that the sales
  department alone will not profit enough to invest 2.

     To make this example more tangible, I will put some
  numbers on these investments. We have four possible options:
  the production department can either invest or not in white
  computer technology and the sales department can either
  invest or not in better lighting in the stores. In Table 4.1, you
  can find the profit of the production department for each
  of the four options. The key insight is that the production

2. The similarity with an existing company is not entirely coincidental because it
  provides further continuity with some of the examples I used in the chapters on
  transaction costs. Nevertheless, the investment in this example are deliberately
  trivial to emphasize this is just a story to illustrate the problem with specific
  knowledge. This is not an actual case study of Apple computers.
50 | SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

department would rather not invest independent of what the
sales department does. If the sales department invests and the
production department does not invest, the production
department has a profit of 450 while investing gives a profit of
350. Similarly , when the sales department does not invest and
the production department does not invest, it has a profit of
300 while investing gives a profit of 200.

Table 4.1: Production Department Profit

                           Sales    Sales No
                       Investment  Investment

Production Investment  350          200

Production No          450          300
Investment

Table 4.2 shows the profit for the sales department with the
same four options. The sales department is in a very similar
situation. No matter whether the production department
invests or not, the sales department is better off not investing in
the lighting for the stores. The profit of not investing is always
higher than the profit of investing.

Table 4.2: Sales Department Profit

                           Sales    Sales No
                       Investment  Investment

Production Investment  380          420

Production No          200          300
Investment

In our simple story, we can just add up the profit of the
                                                       SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 51

production department and the sales department to get the
profit of the firm. Table 4.3 shows that the firm has the highest
profit when the production department and the sales
department both make the investment.

             Table 4.3: Firm Profit

Firm Profit                Sales      Sales No
                       Investment    Investment

Production Investment  730               620

Production No Investment 650             600

This situation is the problem of asset specific investments in
transaction cost economics. The sales and production
department are better off not to invest but the firm as whole
would benefit from the investments 3. This is a good place to
think about what the solution is to this problem. You can even
go back to the chapter on transaction cost economics because
coordinating asset specific investments is exactly the problem
that transaction cost economics identifies as the key problem
in economic governance.

   The solution is simple because the story is simple. The best
option for the firm is for top management to take the

3. Remark that in our example the firm benefits from the sales investment or the
  production investment independent of whether the other investment is
  undertaken. From the firm's point of view, both investments should obviously be
  undertaken. I deliberately choose the numbers in this example to illustrate that the
  problem is the different perspective between the departments and the firm as a
  whole. There is nothing inherently complicated to the decision process whether to
  invest or not.
52 | SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

investment decisions and let the departments execute the
strategy that is implied by these decisions. This is why
transaction cost economics explains the benefits of the
hierarchical organisation where top management coordinates
the investments.

Extension with Uncertainty and
Specific Knowledge

In the simple story above, I assumed that top management
exactly knows the benefits and costs of both investments. This
assumption is not always useful. It is not hard to imagine a
situation where the production department has specific
knowledge about the true cost of a new production
technology and the sales department has a better
understanding of customer demand and how customers will
react to changes to the stores. For simplicity, I will assume that
the true costs and benefits are given in Table 4.1, Table 4.2,
and Table 4.3. The specific knowledge of the production and
sales department means that they know respectively that Table
4.1 and Table 4.2 are true and therefore together they know
that Table 4.3 is true. However, because the tables are based
on specific knowledge they cannot be communicated to top
management.

   Let us further assume that because top management has
less understanding of the investment decision, they believe that
Table 4.3 is a possible outcome but they are not sure that they
can avoid the worst case scenario in Table 4.4 where the shiny
white computer production technology is more expensive
than expected and the demand is lower than expected with the
introduction of better lighting in the stores. Under the worst
case scenario, the firm would be better off not to invest in
either technology.
                            SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 53

Table 4.4: Firm Profit in the Worst Case Scenario

                           Sales    Sales No
                       Investment  Investment

Production Investment  390         520

Production No          550         600
Investment

This minor change to the original story complicates how the
firm should make investment decisions considerably. It is no
longer guaranteed that top management will take the decision
that benefits the firm as a whole because the necessary
knowledge to make the decision is in the departments. Again,
this is a good place to think about how top management can
solve this problem.

   There are two broad categories of solutions. The first one
is a top-down approach. Top management can try to make
the knowledge in the departments readily available to them by
requiring the departments to quantify their specific knowledge.
For instance, the production department can use a cost
accounting system to quantify the cost of producing the white
computers and the grey computers. Similarly, the sales
department can use a customer profitability analysis to
understand the willingness to pay for grey and white
computers in different customer segments. Quantifying
specific knowledge is one of the key contributions that
strategic management accounting has to better strategic
decision making.

   The second solution is a bottom-up approach. Top
management can decentralise the decision making process to the
departments which immediately introduces a new problem.
The departments will not take the best decision for the firm
as a whole, even in our most simple story, and thus, top
management will have to design incentives to make sure that
54 | SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE

departments make investments that are in the best interest of
the firm as a whole. Importantly, top management does not
know what the optimal decision is a priori. If they did, they
would just take the decision themselves and they would not
need to bother with decentralising decision making.

   In our story, a straight forward solution is to tie the
compensation of the departments to the firm's profit. There
are potential problems with this approach because factors
beyond the control of the departments could affect the profit.
For instance, the production department needs to trust that
the sales department will make the right investments and vice
versa. The production department also need to trust that
customer demand will not be affected by macro economic
factors or decisions by competitors.

   The problem of designing incentives that allow the firm to
decentralise the investment decision to the departments is the
subject of a future chapter on agency theory. In this chapter,
I will explain the properties of good performance measures
to motivate the departments to make decisions that increase
total firm profit. Here, I want to highlight that management
accounting tools play an important role in defining the scope
of decentralisation and the incentives for the departments. If
the department has a budget to invest in new technologies, the
firm has granted them some decision rights. If a department
is evaluated at the end of the year on how much money they
spend of the budget, they will be incentivised not to
overspend. Budgets are at the heart of many investment
decision rights in hierarchical organisations and therefore they
will be the first strategic management accounting tool I will
discuss in the second part of this textbook. However, the other
management accounting tools such as cost accounting and
balanced scorecards play an important role in measuring the
performance of departments and investments and thus, they
are also used to design better incentives for decentralisation.
         SPECIFIC KNOWLEDGE | 55

Summary

In this chapter, I introduced the notion of specific knowledge
as knowledge that a person or a group of people has and that
they cannot easily or quickly communicate to others. In
combination with transaction cost economics, it gives us a
powerful framework to understand hierarchical organisations
and the need for management accounting tools. The
transaction cost framework emphasises the role of top-down
process because of the role of top management to coordinate
the different investments in the organisation. Specific
knowledge emphasises the limitations to the top-down process
because top management will not have all the necessary specific
knowledge. As a result, top management needs to use
management accounting tools to translate, collect, and
communicate specific knowledge to top management or they
need to design a more bottom-up structure where decisions are
decentralised. The latter solution also requires management
accounting tools to measure and evaluate the performance of
the decision makers. All these management accounting tools
have transaction costs associated with them. The role of top
management is to find the balance between good decision
making and transaction costs.

References

Jensen, M. C., & Meckling, W. H. (1995). Specific and general
knowledge and organizational structure. SSRN Electronic
Journal, 251-274.
56 | HUMAN CAPITAL

5.

HUMAN CAPITAL

   Stijn Masschelein

In the previous chapter I introduced the notion of specific
knowledge and mainly focused on how it complicates the
transaction cost blueprint for the hierarchical notion. Because
top management needs to rely on specific knowledge in the
departments, they need to use management accounting tools
and incur additional transaction costs. That part of the story
focuses on the costs of specific knowledge. In contrast, this
chapter focuses on the benefits of specific knowledge. Because
specific knowledge is difficult to communicate, it is also
difficult to imitate and thus specific knowledge is a valuable
source of a difficult to imitate competitive advantage. In this
chapter, I will extend this argument to human capital such
as capabilities, specific knowledge, reputation and trust of
employees and suppliers.

Human Capital as a Source of
Competitive Advantage

An organisation's strategy in this textbook refers to the crucial
investments that give a company a difficult to imitate
competitive advantage. In this section, I discuss a minimum
requirement for a strategy to be difficult to imitate. A
                                                                  HUMAN CAPITAL | 57

  sustained competitive advantage requires that no other
  organisation can apply the same strategy and improve upon it.
  I argue that solely investing in technology or physical assets can
  always be imitated by other companies if these competitors can
  buy the same assets and technology. In contrast, human capital
  is more difficult to imitate because human capital takes time to
  develop and therefor can not be just bought. In other words,
  developing trust with employees or suppliers takes time. Over
  that time, the company has to maintain its impeccable
  reputation and not betray the trust. If the employees of the
  firm have specific knowledge, a competitor can pay the
  employees a higher compensation to lure them away, but it will
  take time for them to establish the same working relationship
  with these employees. In other words, it is the working
  relationship that gives a company competitive advantage.

     The distinction between physical capital and human capital
  is not always easy but for accountants a good rule of thumb
  is that physical capital is much more likely to be found on the
  balance sheet while that is not the case for human capital 1.
  Physical capital is assets such as stores, factories, and machines.
  In this category, I also include technology because most
  technological solutions need a physical representation. Human
  capital are assets tied to specific people such as capabilities,
  culture, reputation, specific knowledge, trust of employees and
  stakeholders.

     Although there are some obvious exceptions such as the

1. One of my many, equal part frustrations and enjoyments in life is to see the
  recurring cycle of financial accounting colleagues struggling with designing general
  accounting rules on how to value the type of human capital that is in fashion at the
  time. In the chapter on the balanced scorecard, I will explain why I think that is
  impossible and why that is not a problem. Firms have developed robust
  management accounting solutions to deal with this problem.
58 | HUMAN CAPITAL

adage "location, location, location" for the tourism industry,
there are striking examples of the importance of human capital
over physical capital. One particular example is the rise of
Japanese car manufacturers in the U.S. market. Recent studies
have investigated why for decades General Motors was not able
to copy the strategies of Toyota despite having closely worked
together in an alliance. Several researchers have highlighted
that General Motors made considerable investments in
automation during the time they learned the best practices
from Toyota but it still took them two decades to catch up.
One team of researchers concludes that the difficulty for
General Motors was to copy the relations that Toyota had
with its suppliers and employees which allowed Toyota to fully
exploit the improved technology (Helper & Henderson,
2014). For instance, Toyota involved suppliers in the design
process of new models and employees in continuous
improvement of the manufacturing process. General Motors
tried to create the same efficiency gains through heavy handed
monitoring and incentive contract. However, these formal
practices prevented the development of cooperative relations
between General Motors, its suppliers and its employees. As
it turns out, it was the willingness to cooperate and
communicate mistakes that made it possible for Toyota to
become more efficient.

   This example also has direct relevance for management
accounting practice. One of the accounting practices that got
popularised by Japanese manufacturers is Kaizen costing (see
p. 203 in Horngren et al. 2014). With Kaizen costing, the
budgeting process assumes that costs of production will
steadily decrease over time because of continuous small
improvements to the production process. In Toyota, the actual
decrease in costs is driven by incremental improvements in the
production process discovered by manufacturing employees.
Despite the lack of explicit incentives for the employees, they
                                                               HUMAN CAPITAL | 59

trusted that management would reward them for all
suggestions to the production process. In General Motors,
employees lacked the trust in management and incentive
systems were difficult to devise which inhibited the effective
introduction of Kaizen costing and continuous improvement
programs (Helper & Henderson, 2014). This example
highlights that the successful introduction of new
management accounting systems depends on other factors
such as the culture of the firm. The case of Toyota reflects
the importance of human capital in general. The next section
discusses why human capital is difficult to imitate.

Strategy as Human Capital

So far, when talking about the strategy of the organisation I
have implicitly assumed that top management knows and can
explain the strategy of the organisation at least when they are
able to collect all the necessary information to make strategic
decisions. However understanding of what makes an
organisation successful requires experience and deep
knowledge of the industry in which the organisation is
operating. It should not come as a surprise that we can think
of strategic insight as a form of specific knowledge or human
capital.

Strategy as Specific Knowledge

Top management often has difficulty to explain or quantify
their own strategy in for instance a balanced scorecard. It is
not that they do not know what they are doing. They have
difficulty to communicate it to other employees or to the
outside world. Management skills are difficult to transfer from
60 | HUMAN CAPITAL

one manager to another. Research has shown that one of the
best predictors of bad management is whether the firm is led
by a second generation owner-manager (Bloom et al., 2010).
In other words, while the founder of a company might be an
excellent manager, they will often not be able to pass that skill
on to their offspring.

   One role of management accounting is to transform this
informal and subjective knowledge into general knowledge
that can be communicated to everyone in the firm or be stored
over time. For instance, a founder's intuitive knowledge of
who should be doing which work can be replaced by a formal
hierarchy with clear job descriptions. The earlier mentioned
role of balanced scorecards in communicating the firm's
strategy is another example. Cost price calculations based on
value chain analysis can formalise implicit engineering
knowledge. The engineers might have an intuitive idea of
which products are difficult to produce and which ones are
not. However, other divisions might not be aware of these
insights or understand where that knowledge comes from. If
the production difficulties are captured in the cost of
producing a simple versus a complex product, the sales people
can use that information in setting the price and the finance
people can incorporate that information in decisions to scrap
product lines (Wouters & Wilderom, 2008; Wouters et al.
2009). In other words, the formalisation of intuitive,
subjective, specific knowledge in numbers can help to transfer
that information across the firm.

   Specific, subjective knowledge can yield a difficult to imitate
competitive advantage for a firm because other firms cannot
immediately build up the same knowledge. It is by definition
difficult for firms to store and communicate that information
throughout the whole firm. If specific knowledge is not
formalised, firms risk to loose the knowledge when the
employees leave the company. Management accounting
                                                               HUMAN CAPITAL | 61

systems such as performance measures are an attempt to make
the subjective information more objective and general. Formal
management accounting systems can serve as a memory for
deliberate, top-down strategies. For instance, balanced
scorecards are used to map a strategy and develop a system of
measures to track the success of a strategy. When the executives
who developed the strategy leave the company, the balanced
scorecard can help their successors to implement the same
strategy. In other words, formal system can help to
communicate the strategy not only across divisions but also
across time.

A Bottom-up Strategy

The introduction of specific knowledge and human capital
in our framework puts the emphasis on bottom-up decision
making. Departments and people in those departments have
skills, relations, capabilities, and knowledge that cannot be
replicated by top management. So far, I implicitly have
followed the transaction cost economics view where top
management decides the overall strategy of the organisation,
that is which combination of investments can give it a difficult
to imitate competitive advantage. I did acknowledge that
sometimes top management will have to rely on the
departments to make decisions on which investments are
beneficial but we can go one step further. The definition I
use for a strategy does not require it to be determined by top
management.

   It is possible that top management only has a vague idea
of which direction the company should take but top
management is excellent at nurturing and motivating people
  62 | HUMAN CAPITAL

  to come up with new ideas 2. In this case, the strategy is more
  bottom up than top down because the rank-and-file employees
  effectively set the direction of the firm. In addition, we will
  see that top management often has difficulties in clearly
  formulating what the firm's strategy actually is. The
  implementation of strategic management accounting tools are
  often hampered by that lack of knowledge but at the same time
  the process of implementing a management tool sometimes
  helps top management realise what their strengths and
  weakness are.

     This emerging bottom-up strategy also benefits from
  management accounting tools. If nobody in the firm has an
  obvious grasp of the strategy, you might ask how the strategy
  can be implemented. A firm can use management accounting
  tools such as incentive contracts and targets to align the
  interest of employees with the interest of shareholders, i.e.
  creating long-term value. The joint effort of employees are now
  responsible for the emerging strategy. Budgets help to
  coordinate the needs of different divisions and allocate the
  limited funds of the company even when the firm does not
  know exactly how to execute the strategy. In other words,
  companies benefit from strategic management accounting
  tools even in the absence of a clearly formulated strategy
  because management accounting tools focus the attention of
  the employees and coordinate their efforts.

2. I think Alphabet (formerly Google) is an example of this type of bottom-up
  strategy.
         HUMAN CAPITAL | 63

Summary

This chapter on human capital introduces another key
component in my view on strategic management accounting.
The human capital view emphasises the importance of the
people in the organisation and their skills, capabilities, and
knowledge. I have explained that these people can be a
fundamental part of making an organisation's strategy difficult
to imitate exactly because the human capital is difficult to
quantify. In contrast to what some might expect, this does
not imply that there is no role for management accounting.
Indeed, sometimes organisations will use strategic
management accounting tools to formalise and quantify some
of the unstructured knowledge of its people. Other
organisations will use management accounting tools to
coordinate and motivate the employees to work in the best
interest of the organisation. Which brings us to the next
chapter.

References

Bloom, N., & Van Reenen, J. (2010). Why do management
practices differ across firms and countries? The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 24(1), 203-224. https://doi.org/
10.1257/jep.24.1.203

   Helper, S., & Henderson, R. M. (2014). Management
Practices, Relational Contracts, and the Decline of General
Motors. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(1), 49-72.
https://doi.org/10.1257/jep.28.1.49

   Wouters, M., Anderson, J. C., Narus, J. a., & Wynstra, F.
(2009). Improving sourcing decisions in NPD projects:
Monetary quantification of points of difference. Journal of
64 | HUMAN CAPITAL

Operations Management, 27(1), 64-77. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jom.2008.07.001

   Wouters, M., & Wilderom, C. (2008). Developing
performance-measurement systems as enabling formalization:
A longitudinal field study of a logistics department.
Accounting, Organizations and Society, 33(4-5), 488-516.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2007.05.002
                                                              AGENCY THEORY | 65

6.

AGENCY THEORY

   Stijn Masschelein

The chapters on specific knowledge and human capital
showed that top management needs to decentralise decisions
to departments because the people in those departments have
skills, knowledge, and capabilities that top management does
not have. This creates a potential conflict of interest where the
departments can use those decisions rights to take decisions
that are in their best interest and no longer in the interest of
the firm. Because the departments know better which decision
is in the best interest of the firm, top management cannot
judge whether the departments have taken the right decision
directly. They have to rely on necessarily imperfect measures.
The central trade-off of decentralisation is between better
decision making by the departments and the contracting costs
as the result of imperfect performance measures (Prendergast,
2002).

   In contrast to market transactions, organisations do not
transfer the ownership rights to their employees; they only
grant them some decision rights. Sales staff in a car dealership
do not have the right to do what they want with the car. There
are a limited number of decisions they can take over what
will happen with that car. The decisions they can and cannot
take will be described in their (official) job description. Their
level of autonomy will depend on whether or not they have
to get permission from a supervisor to give price reductions,
66 | AGENCY THEORY

give away extras at reduced prices, or pay for the customer's
old car. To make sure that the sales people make decisions in
the interest of the dealership, they will be paid a commission
for each sale. The remainder of this chapter deals with the
problem of designing these incentives so that the balance
between decision making and contracting costs is right.

The Agency Theory of Incentive
Contracts

The elements of incentive contracts

One of the tools to align the interests of the employees with the
interests of the firm are incentive contracts. For our purpose
contracts are broadly defined; they can be both written and
implicit agreements. Incentives are similarly supposed to
capture a broad range of possible rewards for employees: from
monetary bonuses, to business trips and awards, or a
promotion. The other crucial element in an incentive contract
are the performance measures that determine whether the
employees get a reward or that determine the size of the
reward. The measure can be financial measures, non-financial
measures, or even the subjective judgment by a superior.

   In summary, the theory of incentive contracts can apply to
a broad range of settings. In the remainder of this chapter, the
focus will be on explicit bonuses for managers of a department
but keep in mind that the theory is broader than this example
                                                                 AGENCY THEORY | 67

  1. I start by making goal of incentive contracts explicit in more
  detail which will help us to understand better why firms are
  using incentive contracts over just monitoring their employees.
  In the sections that follow, I will explain the characteristics
  of good performance measures and how the combination of
  multiple performance measures can improve incentive
  contracts. Lastly, I look at the problems that arise when the
  performance measures motivate employees only on a subset of
  all the actions that are the best interest of the firm.

 The goal of incentive contracts

  The main goal of incentive contracts is to encourage and direct
  the effort and attention of employees. The first goal that
  springs to mind is that bonus contracts make employees work
  harder because they will be rewarded for their additional effort.
  This is not the only function of incentive contracts and is
  the least interesting one for our perspective because it does
  not focus on the problem that departments with specific
  knowledge make decentralised decisions. Incentive contracts
  also direct the effort and attention of employees to the right
  task. For instance, fashion designers might spend most of their
  time on innovative and artful designs while their employer
  might be more interested in more mainstream designs. To
  make sure that the designer spends enough time on
  mainstream designs, the organisation can reward the designer
  for mainstream designs but not for avant-garde designs. With
  or without the incentive contract the designer will work
  equally hard but with the incentive contract, their effort will be

1. For instance, the chapter on internal labour markets will explicitly explain how
  subjective, non-verifiable judgements and promotions work as incentive contracts.
68 | AGENCY THEORY

more in the commercial interest of the organisation. Thus, the
organisation can give the fashion designers the right to decide
on which tasks to focus if they can design an appropriate
incentive contract. Another related but slightly different role
for incentives is to make sure employees invest in projects that
are profitable for the firm and not in projects that only increase
the prestige and status of the employee. CEOs are often
accused of empire building which means that they are
investing in big and popular projects to raise their own status
but those projects are not necessarily in the best interest of
shareholders. One way to solve this problem is to reward CEOs
with stock rewards. Of course, coordinating the incentives of
the organisation is the key task of top management according
to transaction cost economics.

   These incentive contracts are studied in sophisticated
mathematical models in a field of study that is sometimes
called agency theory or principal-agent theory (Holmstrom &
Milgrom, 1994; Lambert 2001). To explain the main intuition,
I rely on a simple story of top management (the principal)
and one employee (the agent). The timeline of the labour
relationship under an incentive contract is as follows. First, the
principal and the agent agree on a basic salary and on a bonus
for the employee depending on the outcome of a performance
measure. Next, the employee works and takes decisions. The
assumption is that the agent will try to maximise their total
compensation taking into account the costs of maximising
total compensation. Examples of these costs are extra hours
of work, or doing tasks that do not help their future career,
status or prestige. Another important cost stems from the risk
that the measure might not capture the agent's performance
completely and that despite the agent's best effort they do
not get their reward. Finally, in the last step in an incentive
contract, the outcome for the performance measure is
established and the employee receives their salary and bonus.
                                                              AGENCY THEORY | 69

   Something that is often counterintuitive is that in this
baseline story, the behaviour of the agent does not change
based on whether they get the bonus. The behaviour of the
agent is already fixed at the time when the bonus is being paid.
Or in other words, the behaviour of the agent determines the
bonus and not other way around.

   To better understand the role of incentive contracts, we
can contrast incentive contracts with giving directions to
employees and correct them when they do not adhere to the
directions. One of the reasons why giving directions might not
work is that employees know better how to do their job than
top management. They have the experience of doing the job
day in day out or they have the specific education. In short,
employees have specific knowledge. In addition,
communicating top management's directions through the
different hierarchical levels is costly or takes a long time. Lastly,
the employer still needs a costly monitoring system to know
whether employees have adhered to the directions they were
given. The employer can not follow around all employees to
check whether they are following up on the employer's
directions or not. To avoid all these problems and transaction
costs, firms can rely on incentive contracts to align the interest
of the employees. The next section will deal with costs that
are associated with these incentive contracts in the simplified
story.

Risk, sensitivity, and precision

The benefit of incentive contracts for top management is that
contracts make employees spend their time at the right tasks
and spend more effort for the firm. The benefit for some
employees is that they enjoy the responsibility and decision
rights instead of following directions. However, because top
  70 | AGENCY THEORY

  management can only imperfectly measure and reward the
  employees, there is a risk that despite spending more effort on
  an unattractive task, employees do not receive a reward. If the
  performance measure is affected by other factors such as the
  economy, competitors, or other employees than the employee
  might not receive the expected bonus despite their best effort.
  Most people are risk averse and prefer to avoid such risks.
  Employees will only accept a risky incentive contract if they
  are compensated for this additional risk of incomplete
  measurement (Holmstrom, 1979). The additional
  compensation to make-up for the risk 2 is a transaction cost
  or a contracting cost for the employer. The organisation will
  have to weigh this extra cost against the benefit of aligning the
  employee's interest with those of the firm.

     A good measure from both the organisation's and the
  employee's point of view is a measure that picks up only what
  the employee has done and nothing else. Remember that the
  main goal of a performance measure in an incentive contract
  is to direct the decisions and effort of the agent. Such a precise
  measure limits the risk of employees not getting their reward
  while they deserve it. The advantage for the firm is that they
  do not have to pay a higher compensation for the additional
  risk. A good measure will also be sensitive to what the employee
  has done. This means that when employees change their
  behaviour, the performance measure will change as well. If
  a measure is sensitive to their behaviour, it is easier for the
  employee to move the measure in the right direction and gain
  a reward. Because it is easy for the employee to influence the
  measure, firms do not need to hand out large rewards to
  motivate the employee and they can set more demanding

2. You can think of it as a risk premium in financial transactions.
                                                               AGENCY THEORY | 71

targets without offering egregious large rewards (Banker &
Datar, 1989; Holmstrom, 1979).

   Precision and sensitivity of a measure are not the same
characteristic. Measures can be affected by little outside
influences and be precise but at the same time not respond to
the behaviour of the employee and be insensitive. Similarly, a
measure can be affected by the behaviour of the employee but
also affected by a number of other factors. For such measures,
the organisations need to trade-off whether the improvement
in precision is worth the decrease in sensitivity.

   In the simplest agency theory story, the risk premium is
the main transaction cost of a bad performance measure. If it
is difficult for the employee to improve on the performance
measure and the measure can be affected by a number of
outside factors, they will not want to work under an incentive
contract but prefer a fixed salary. To persuade risk averse
employees to sign an incentive contract with such a bad
measure, organisations will have to pay high salaries and
bonuses.

Multiple measures

One way to improve the incentive contract is to make the
reward dependent on more than one measure. The idea is that
at two measures that are very insensitive or very noisy can
together be informative about the behaviour of an employee.
A specific application of this idea is to include measures in a
contract that are uncontrollable by employees but decrease the
noise in the contract. For instance, organisations regularly use
benchmarks that make rewards dependent on the performance
of peers or competitors. If there is a lot of economic
uncertainty and the peers or competitors are also subject to
that uncertainty, including performance of peers as a
  72 | AGENCY THEORY

  benchmark in the contract makes the total compensation less
  risky.

     For instance, a car dealership might want to reward the sales
  staff based on their individual sales. However, car sales depend
  on the general economic sentiment which is out of control
  of the sales staff. Furthermore, it is hard to actually measure
  the effect of economic sentiment on car sales. The sales staff
  will want to avoid that their bonus depends on weak economic
  demand. One possibility for the car retailer is to compare the
  sales from each staff member to the average and give them
  a bonus if they are above average. Because all sales staff are
  affected by economic demand, the average of the peers' sales
  will capture the impact of changes in demand and make the
  bonus less noisy. Including an insensitive measure (i.e. average
  peer sales), increases the precision of the overall measurement
  (i.e employee sales minus average peer sales) because it filters
  out the common economic effects. This is the basic idea
  behind benchmarking explained within the agency theory
  framework 3

3. This is a good place to illustrate why I take the approach of building up the theory
  of why organisations need performance measures over different story. At this
  point, you can trace back when benchmarking will be useful. It helps when an
  organisation (1) decentralises decision making to knowledgeable employees, (2)
  needs to incentivise the decentralised decision makers, (3) those decision makers
  are risk averse, and (4) benchmark helps to remove unwanted noise from the
  decision makers performance measure. I find it useful to be able to identify those
  assumptions because it helps me to decide whether benchmarking should be a
  priority in improving an organisation's performance measurement system.
                                                               AGENCY THEORY | 73

Multiple actions and incongruence

So far we did not explicitly take into account that a measure
can be affected by two different actions from the employee.
Another way of looking at the issue is that managers and
employees take a lot of different independent decisions that
can all affect the performance measures. A lot of actual real-life
performance measures are compiled out of information and
reports gathered by the employees. This means that employees
can influence the measure without improving task
performance by changing the reports. In this example, the
employee can take two actions that will influence the
performance measure, i.e. they can manipulate the measure or
they can improve performance. If a measure is more sensitive
to measurement manipulation than to performance
improvement (i.e. it is easier to fudge the number undetected
than to actually do the work), incorporating the measure in
the contract will motivate the employees to manipulate the
measure (Holmstrom, 1979; Lambert, 2001). If employees can
influence a measure in two different ways and one of them is
not valuable for the firm, the measure is called incongruent
with the firm's interest.

   The opposite is also possible. Sometimes a performance
measure does not capture every aspect of the job. For instance,
a lot of the criticism of accounting based measures (e.g.
accounting profit) is that they only measure a decision's effect
on short-run profit of the firm but not necessarily the effect
on long-term firm value. The firm can complement the
accounting based measures with non-financial measures such
as customer satisfaction, product quality or leadership to
capture those long-term effects.

   These two examples show that the principal needs to
consider two aspects when thinking about the effect of the
actions on the performance measures. (1) Are there any actions
  74 | AGENCY THEORY

  that can improve a measure but are not in the best interest of
  the organisation? (2) Are there measures that do not capture
  the results of the agent's actions? A congruent measure is a
  measure that captures all the actions of an employee that are
  in the best interest of the firm and no other actions. Very
  few measures are at the same time precise, sensitive to desired
  actions and not sensitive to undesired actions. Thus,
  incongruent measures will have to be rectified by adding
  additional measures to the bonus contract (Holmstrom &
  Milgrom, 1991). This is the motivation behind the Balanced
  Scorecard which I will discuss in a future chapter.

     However sometimes, the organisation will have to trade-
  off the different characteristics of the measures. For instance,
  the profit of a department is arguably more sensitive to the
  decisions by the department's managers than firm profit.
  Departmental profit is also less noisy than firm profit. In
  contrast, firm profit is more congruent because it will capture
  the effect that the manager's decisions have on the other
  departments. In the chapter on Specific Knowledge, we
  worked through a story of a production department and a sales
  department of a computer firm where both department were
  strongly interdependent. The trade-off might be difficult 4. Let
  us assume that the head of the department can invest in two
  projects: both projects improve departmental profit but only
  one improves firm profit. One setting where that could occur
  is when the department receives the revenues of the project

4. The story that follows is not something I necessarily expect you to come up with
  on your own. However, it again illustrates that combining the different stories and
  mechanisms that I have presented so far can lead to advanced insights in real cases.
  The problem is that the actual outcomes will depend on the actual costs and
  benefits which will differ from case to case. It becomes impossible to give general
  explanations that will always be true.
                                                               AGENCY THEORY | 75

while another department bears the costs. This is a variation
on the story in the chapter on specific knowledge. Rewarding
the head of the department only based on departmental profit
will increase the effort in the project that is in the best interest
of the firm but also in the project that is not in the best interest
of the firm. Depending on the circumstances it can be best for
the firm to:

 1. use both firm and department profit to evaluate the
      department. In that case, the firm will combine the
      congruence of firm profit with the relatively stronger
      sensitivity and precision of the department profit.

 2. use only department profit. If the project that is in the
      best interest of the firm is also more profitable than the
      other one for the department, department profit is not
      too incongruent. It will still motivate the department to
      focus on the project that is in the best interest of the
      firm.

 3. use only firm profit. If firm profit is not too noisy, the
      cost of the risk premium will be smaller than the benefits
      of more congruence with the interest of the firm.

These issues are at the forefront in discussion on the
reorganisation(s) at Microsoft. Whereas until around 2010,
Microsoft had strong internal competition between divisions
(such as the hardware, the Office software, or the Windows
software division), they have reconsidered their structure.
Because of the strong focus on division profit, each division
refused to cooperate with other divisions and invested in
projects that caused headaches for other divisions.

   One of the main sources of competition between the
divisions is for the limited budget to develop new projects.
The divisions have to convince headquarters that they deserve
investments in their projects. However, that competition can
76 | AGENCY THEORY

turn ugly when different divisions do not want to
accommodate their projects to benefit others. For instance, the
Office division was for a long time not willing to adapt their
software for a touch and stylus interface.

Costs and Benefits of
Decentralisation

The strategy of the firm will have a big impact on how a firm
structures its different divisions. Some firms will split up the
firm according to geographical locations, others choose to have
divisions for different product lines, and others have different
divisions for different business functions such as sales,
production, and purchasing. Big international firms will often
have an organisational structure over multiple dimensions in a
so-called matrix structure. In this concluding section, I want to
emphasise again how the decentralisation decision fits into the
broader framework I have presented so far.

   There are multiple reasons why headquarters decide to
decentralise decisions to divisions. Geographically
decentralised divisions often have better specific knowledge
about the preferences of customers, the capabilities of
suppliers, and employees, or the local political environment.
As a result, a decentralised division will be more responsive
to its environment than headquarters. Because a decentralised
division does not have to wait for directions from headquarters
it will not only detect changes in the local environment
quicker but also react quicker to changes in customer
preferences or supplier capabilities.

   In addition to improving decision making, decentralisation
improves the motivation of managers in the division. Because
managers feel more empowered when they can make their
                                                              AGENCY THEORY | 77

decisions, managers with more responsibility are more likely to
take initiative and work harder in the interest of the firm. For
instance, lower level managers with more autonomy are more
likely to develop management skills than managers who can
take fewer decisions. This does not mean that the incentives we
talked about in the previous section do not matter. When the
managers can earn a bonus or a promotion, they will be more
likely to put those improved skills in action.

   In the section above I already highlighted one potential risk
of decentralisation. It can lead to competition between
departments and the organisation no longer has the benefit
that it can coordinate multiple investment decisions. Another
disadvantage of decentralisation is that some activities and
functions of the firm might be duplicated. That is why firms
often centralise some supporting functions such as HR
administration, accounting, or purchasing. Centralisation of
these functions is an example of how firms can economise on
the transaction costs of running a business.

   The main insight of agency theory for this textbook is that
decentralisation of decisions depends on how well the
organisation can measure the actions of the decentralised
employees. If the measures as a whole are sufficiently sensitive,
precise, and congruent, the organisation can design a
performance evaluation system that motivates the employees
to act in the interest of the organisation. In agency theory, the
only transaction cost of such a performance evaluation system
is the risk premium the organisation has to pay as the result of
insensitive and imprecise measures and the cost of misaligned
incentives when measures are incongruent. In practice,
another considerable transaction cost will be the cost of
collecting, refining, and storing the measures that the
organisation is using to evaluate the employees.
78 | AGENCY THEORY

References

Banker, R. D., & Datar, S. (1989). Sensitivity, Precision, and
Linear Aggregation of Signals for Performance Evaluation.
Journal of Accounting Research, 27(1), 21-39.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2491205

   Holmstrom, B. (1979). Moral Hazard and Observability.
The Bell Journal of Economics, 10(1), 74-91. https://doi.org/
10.2307/3003320

   Holmstrom, B., & Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask principal-
agent analyses: Incentive contracts, asset ownership, and job
design. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7,
24-52. https://doi.org/10.1093/jleo/7.special_issue.24

   Holmstrom, B., & Milgrom, P. (1994). The Firm as an
Incentive System. The American Economic Review, 84(4),
972-991. https://www.jstor.org/stable/2118041

   Lambert, R. A. (2001). Contracting theory and accounting.
Journal of Accounting and Economics, 32(January), 3-87.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0165-4101(01)00037-4

   Prendergast, C. (2002). The tenuous tradeoff between risk
and incentives. Journal of Political Economy, 110(5),
1071-1102. https://doi.org/10.1086/341874
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 79

7.

PROMOTIONS AND
SUBJECTIVE
PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION

   Stijn Masschelein

Besides direct incentives from a bonus contract, employees are
also motivated by the opportunity to get a promotion. The
role of promotions has not received the same level of attention
as incentive contracts but we can glean some general insights
within the framework that we have built up so far. This
chapter will have a different flavour compared to the previous
chapters. Initially, I will use the concepts from transaction cost
economics, specific knowledge, and properties of performance
measures to give insights in the function of promotion
incentives within organisations. The second half of the chapter
introduces a new story to help us understand the role of
subjectivity in performance measurement and incentives.
Promotion decisions are often partly based on the subjective
judgment of higher-level managers and I will use this story
to explain the fundamental problem with these type of
evaluations. This will give us a good jumping off point to
talk about subjectivity in performance evaluation in general.
For a lot of non-managerial incentives, the bonus is not fully
  80 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
  EVALUATION

  determined by objective performance which is assumed in the
  previous chapter but the bonus will depend on the subjective
  judgment of one or multiple superiors.

 The Role of Promotions

  In this section, we leave the territory of the simple stories from
  earlier chapters and we are applying the insights from those
  stories to look at the role of promotions in organisations. As
  we will see with a number of strategic management accounting
  tools in the second part of the book, real-life practices often
  have multiple functions. One role of promotions is that it is
  part of a career path for the employee within the organisation.
  Because employees who are promoted have been working in
  the organisation for a while, the organisation has more
  knowledge about their skills and abilities. Similarly, those
  employees will also have more knowledge about how the
  organisation works through experience compared to outsiders.
  This is straight forward application of transaction cost
  economics and specific knowledge. Because the employee and
  organisation work together for a period of time, they develop
  specific knowledge and become mutually dependent. The time
  invested together becomes an asset specific, irreversible
  investment 1. The second role of promotions is that they can
  be used as a reward for employees who perform well. A
  promotion is often desirable and employees will be motivated

1. This is the first time that we explicitly acknowledge that economic investments do
  not necessarily have to involve a monetary costs. This will remain true for the
  remainder of this textbook.
                            PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                        EVALUATION | 81

  to get the prize of a promotion, i.e. the promotion is the
  reward in an implicit incentive contract.

 Mutually Beneficial Learning

  One advantage of promotions is that it gives the organisation
  the chance to observe the employees and get experience in how
  they work. Internal promotions allow organisations to find
  out which employees have the ability and the skills to work
  at a higher level in the hierarchy. Upon hiring and despite the
  interview process, firms are still uncertain on the capabilities
  of their employees. While employees are working for the
  organisation, supervisors learn more about the employees in
  day-to-day interactions on the job. In other words, supervisors
  and co-workers gain specific knowledge about their
  subordinates and colleagues. They might have a better
  judgement about whether certain employees are able to work
  in a different function. The firm for which an employee is
  working obtains specific knowledge on their employees that
  is not available to other firms. Similarly, the employees learn
  through experience how the organisation's processes work,
  and what the firm culture is. They get to know customers
  and suppliers of the firm. That is, the employees gains specific
  knowledge that is valuable for the organisation 2.

     Baker et al. (1994) provide evidence for this idea by looking
  at the differences between internally promoted employees and
  external hires in one specific firm. They show that external
  hires have more experience and have a higher educational
  degree than promoted employees. Some of these externally
  hired employees rise faster in the company than the average

2. This is just reiterating the importance of specific knowledge and human capital.
82 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION

current employee but overall more of the external hires stay
at the same level or exit in the first years. These differences
indicate that the career path of external hires is more uncertain
than the career path of incumbents. Some of the newly hired
employees are superstars who rise quickly but the majority is
moving slower in the hierarchy than the incumbents. This is
likely because the firm understands the capabilities of current
employees better than the skill set of new hires.

   This shows that there is a mutual dependence between the
organisation and their employees. The organisation knows the
employee better than any other potential employer and the
employee has knowledge and capabilities that are specifically
valuable within the organisation. Thus the organisation will
be willing to pay a higher compensation to those employees or
will be more ready to promote them. Baker et al. (1994) argue
that in the firm they study, the internally promoted employees
make up for their lack of general industry experience and
education by firm specific experience.

   The mutually dependent relationship between firms and
employees is similar to the mutual dependence of a
manufacturer making white computers and the retailers with
the luxurious shops in the chapter on specific knowledge. The
employee has invested time and effort in learning about the
company and the company has invested time and effort in
learning about the employee. Some of these investments are
specific to the employee and the company, i.e. the company
and the employee cannot use the knowledge respectively to
another employee or in a another company.

Tournament Incentives

The second role of promotions is to provide incentives.
Employees are motived to perform better if they know that
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 83

their work will be rewarded with a promotion. One story to
understand these incentives is to compare promotions to a
tournament in sports where one competitor wins the highest
price. All the employees are ranked and only one gets the
promotion. The advantage of promotion based incentives is
that the ranking is not affected by noise that is affecting all
employees such as economic shocks or weather conditions.
This is similar to the use of benchmarks as we discussed in the
chapter on agency theory. Because promotions are based on
the relative performance of an employee, they implicitly use
peer performance as a performance measure. As a result, the
tournament creates an incentive system that is less noisy than a
pure bonus based incentive system.

   One of the predictions of tournament theory is that the
prize for winning the tournament should increase with more
competitors. With more employees competing for one
promotion, every employee has a lower chance that they will
get the promotion. Therefore, they will need to be
compensated with a higher reward for this uncertainty, i.e
there is a risk premium. This is the sensitivity effect of
tournament incentives. As a consequence, you would expect
a higher compensation for functions in a hierarchy that are
limited to a few people (e.g. the CEO) because a lot of
employees are competing for a limited number of positions.
Baker et al. (1994) show indeed that the compensation level
increases more for promotions higher in the hierarchy.

   The literature also reports a number of drawbacks from
tournaments. When employees feel they can not get the
promotion they will be demotivated and they will not be
motivated to work harder. In agency theory terminology, the
employees belief that their promotion chances are not sensitive
to their effort. Other employees might take risky decisions to
catch up with co-workers that are ahead of them in the
ranking. Tournaments do not provide reasons to cooperate
84 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION

with co-workers and it might even be beneficial for an
employee to sabotage co-workers if they are in a better position
for the promotion. In the last two examples, the rank is an
incongruent measure because it motivates the employees to
take actions that are not in the best interest of the organisation.
In the tournament story, promotions are an incentive contract
with a performance measure, the rank of the employee, that
has less noise than the employee's performance but is also
potentially less sensitive and less congruent. As we have seen
so many times before, in this story promotions require a cost-
benefit trade-off.

Promotions and the Hierarchical
Organisation

While some elements of promotions in the tournament story
are reminiscent of the blueprint of the perfect market as we
encountered in the chapter on transaction cost economics, it
is actually instructive to think about promotion incentives as
being part of a hierarchical organisation (Baker et al., 1994).
Promotions do instigate a market like competition between
employees but typically that competition is limited. For
instance, the organisation will limit who can apply for new
position and often exclude anyone who is not already in the
organisation. In the blueprint of an ideal market, there are
no restrictions on who can compete. Another restriction is
that the organisation typically has a stable hierarchy and the
promotions follow a well known procedure and timing.

   One of the reasons why promotions work in stable,
hierarchical organisations is the mutual dependence that I have
explained above. Organisations are the preferred blueprint
when the transaction requires mutual asset specific
investments. The stable structure also provides benefits from
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 85

a tournament theory point of view. Employees know which
opportunities are available to them further in their career and
they can see how other employees have climbed the ladder.
The stability makes it easier to understand what the reward
is and it decreases the risk that employees might not get a
reward despite working hard. Similarly, restrictions on who
can apply for a promotion increase the chances of a promotion
and increase the sensitivity of getting a promotion to the
employee's effort.

   Finally, most promotion decisions are at least partly based
on the subjective judgment of superiors. These judgments are
often more informative than current performance to decide
whether an employee will be successful in the higher position
because the new position will require different skills and
capabilities than in the employee's previous job. Nevertheless,
from the employee's point of view subjective judgments are
more noisy than an objective measure. Hierarchical
organisations use formal procedures where they specify the
criteria the superiors have to address so that the employee has
more certainty and bears less risk.

   There is a second problem with subjective performance
evaluation. The superior might have incentives to not be
honest in their evaluation of the employee. This is the problem
I will explain in the next section of this chapter.

Subjective Performance
Evaluation

Subjective evaluations by superiors are an important measure
in most bonus contracts, not only for promotions. If superiors
have experience in the department or the job they are
evaluating, they have developed specific knowledge to
  86 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
  EVALUATION

  determine what good performance means. Knowledgeable
  superiors can also take into account and adjust for unexpected
  events during the year. An extreme example is the impact of the
  pandemic in 2020 on almost every part of the economy which
  could not be predicted at the start of the year. Remember from
  the time line of the incentive contract, that these adjustments
  are not possible in the traditional incentive contract. The
  reward and the measure are set at the start of the period and are
  not changed 3. Another advantage of subjective evaluation is
  that the superior can take into account factors that are harder
  to quantify such as the employee's attitude or how well they
  collaborate with their colleagues. In other words, the benefits
  of subjective performance evaluation is that when it is done
  well the performance evaluation by an experienced superior is
  more congruent than any combination of objective measures
  such as profitability or customer satisfaction.

 The Incentive Problem of Subjective
 Performance Evaluation

  The incentive problem of subjective evaluations is that the
  supervisor can manipulate subjective measures of
  performance. If the supervisor is not willing to grant a bonus
  or promote the employee, they can always understate the
  performance of the employee. The supervisor might even have

3. If the measure or the reward can be changed during the period, we are in effect in a
  situation with subjective evaluation even if it is not called that way. We will see
  examples in this section that are typically not associated with subjective
  performance evaluation but they show strong similarities with the subjective
  evaluation story and suffer from similar issues.
                            PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                        EVALUATION | 87

  an incentive to understate the performance of the employee,
  if the bonus or the higher salary is paid from the supervisor's
  budget. Economists consider this the fundamental difference
  between objective and subjective performance measures.
  Objective measures are performance measures that are
  specified at the start of the working period and the principal
  and agent agree on what the value of the performance measure
  is at the end of the period. Subjective measures are performance
  measures that are under control of the principal. The most
  straightforward example is if the measure is the opinion of the
  principal.

     To see the problem of subjective measures imagine the
  following story between a principal and an agent. The
  principal delegates some job to the agent where the agent has
  to make a decision between 1 and 5. The higher the agent's
  choice, the higher the cost to the agent and the higher the
  profit to the principal. This part of the story introduces a
  conflict of interest between the principal and the agent. The
  principal wants a high choice and the agent prefers a low
  choice. After the agent has made their decision, the principal
  will judge the outcome of the decision and decide on the
  compensation for the agent. The key difference with the
  incentive contract story is that there is no contract that
  guarantees the agent a bonus for a certain outcome of the
  performance measure 4. Table 7.1 puts some numerical values
  on this story.

4. Obviously, this is an extreme story. It is interesting to us because it captures the
  main dynamic we are interested in. The principal can ultimately decide the agent's
  compensation because it depends on whether the principal is happy or not and
  there is no way for the agent to check whether the principal is really not happy
  with the outcome or just pretending.
88 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION

     Table 7.1: Subjective Performance
                    Evaluation

Agent Decision 1 2 3 4 5

Cost Agent  0.5 2 4.5 8 12.5

Profit Principal 10 20 30 40 50

You can imagine for instance that the agent chooses 4, and
the principal pays the agent 15 in compensation. In this case,
the agent earns 7 = 15 - 8 and the principal earns 25 = 40
- 15. However, nothing is stopping the principal to pay a
lower compensation. For instance, they could pay 8.5, which
leaves the agent with 0.5. The principal does not even have to
stop there. If the agent and the principal make this decision
only once, the principal is best off when they just do not pay
any compensation to the agent. If the agent realises that the
principal can do that, they will decide that the best they can do
is to choose 1 or just find a different job. The principal does
not want that because their profit will go down as well.

   In contrast, in the long run, when this story plays out
repeatedly, the principal is motivated to establish a reputation
for being a fair assessor and reward their agents with a high
enough compensation. If they establish such a reputation,
their employees are motivated to choose 4 or 5 because they
know if they perform well they will be rewarded. On the other
hand, if the principal does not have such a reputation,
employees have no incentive to work hard because their
performance will not affect the likelihood of earning a reward
(Prendergast, 1999).

   To overcome the incentive problem, the organisation needs
to establish a norm or a culture where it is credible and clear
that agents will do their job well and that they will be rewarded
for their effort (Gibbons & Henderson, 2012). Credibility
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 89

means that it is in the best interest of the agent and the
principal to not defect from the established norm. Clarity
means that the norm and thus the expectations of what it
means to perform well in a job. In Table 7.1, the agent's actions
and the principal's profit have numerical value and are thus
easy to communicate. However, remember that this story is
meant to illustrate the problem with subjective performance
evaluation where the superior makes a judgment about the
agent's performance and the superior uses specific knowledge
which is by definition difficult to communicate. As I will
explain in the next section, the role of management accounting
is to establish credibility and clarity of what the expectations
are.

The Role of Management Accounting

In the first section of the chapter, we saw that promotions
motivate the employees to develop specific knowledge for
working in the organisation. The stable structure of the typical
hierarchical organisation with a limited number of job types
helps clarify what the rewards are when you get promoted
and how you can get a promotion. The stable organisational
structure also provides credibility. If employees see that their
predecessors got fairly evaluated and received a promotion,
they are more likely be motivated and work hard to receive a
promotion. Especially larger organisations will have a policy
with formal rules on how promotion decisions should be
made. These formal rules will help supervisors to establish a
reputation.

   Management accounting plays an important role in setting
up these formal structures and rules that support promotions.
Especially budgets help define responsibilities of departments
and their managers. Management accounting tools are equally
  90 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
  EVALUATION

  an important part of subjective performance evaluation for
  promotions and rewards. So far, I have presented subjective
  performance evaluation as the extreme version where no
  objective measures are used by the superior. In reality,
  performance evaluation is a combination of objective measures
  such as profit, sales, customer satisfaction, and productivity
  measures and the subjective judgment of the superior. The
  superior can use their judgment to decide how important the
  different measures are or to exclude measures that were affected
  by unexpected events beyond the control of the employee. In
  the best case scenario, the superior can use the objective
  measures to set clear targets and create clarity about what their
  expectations are for good performance. At the same time, they
  can use their judgment to filter out noise from events that
  could not be foreseen at the start of the period 5. In addition,
  the use of objective performance measures makes it easier for
  the superior to defend their decisions to top management. Top
  management can hold the superiors responsible when they
  use their discretion unfairly. If employees know that their

5. I once again want to emphasise how the role of accounting can be important to the
  strategy of the firm as defined in this textbook. Remember that one way for
  organisations to create a difficult to imitate advantage is to develop the human
  capital of the firm. By offering employees a career path in the organisation, the
  employees are motivated to develop skills and knowledge that is especially relevant
  to working within the organisation. The career path critically depends on
  promotions within the organisation. One contribution of accounting measures is
  that they help clarify the expectations the organisation have while at the same time
  make it credible that good performance will lead to a promotion within the
  organisation while allowing superiors discretion in identifying talented employees.
  In short, the development of performance measures to evaluate employees for
  promotions helps the firm in its strategy to develop its human capital.
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 91

superiors are held accountable for their evaluations, the
superiors' subjective judgment is seen as more credible.

   In the chapter on specific knowledge, we saw that
accounting tools like cost accounting, budgets, and balanced
scorecards can help organisations to capture specific
knowledge and make it easier to communicate within the firm.
These same tools provide financial and non-financial
performance measures to similarly help the organisation to
communicate their expectations about what good
performance means. The similarity in both situations is the
role of accounting to quantify the specific knowledge and
experience so that it is easier to communicate.

Examples of Problems with Subjective
Performance Evaluation

This story of subjective measures is not only applicable to soft
measures, subjective judgments, or a subjective combination
of objective measures. It can also apply directly to measures
of profitability. This might be somewhat counterintuitive
because profit measures are often seen as the most objective
measure of performance. Remember that the defining feature
of the subjective performance evaluation is that the principal
can decide what the value of the measure is. If the principal can
change the profit measure and the agent cannot stop them, we
are in the story of subjective performance evaluation.

   Hollywood accounting is a an example where profit can be
seen as a subjective measure of performance. If the bonus of
a movie star would be dependent on the profitability of the
movie, the actor or actress has to trust the profit figures that
the accountants from the production company come up with.
The production company has an incentive to underestimate
the profitability of the movie so they can pay a lower bonus.
  92 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
  EVALUATION

  This might backfire in negotiation with other actors for new
  movies because they will not trust that they will get their
  bonus even if the movie is a success. For an example of some
  creative accounting in Hollywood: Even Harry Potter Movie
  Makes Loss

     As a result, big movie stars usually do not trust the studios'
  profit calculations and they will only except incentive
  contracts based on gross revenues. The revenues can be verified
  by comparing them to independent measures of box office
  sales. While profit is a more congruent measure from the
  studios' point of view, they cannot fully use it in contracts
  because actors fear that the studios will not calculate the profit
  fairly.

     Another potential problem with subjective measures is that
  the employees can influence the judgement of a supervisor
  without improving their performance. They might sabotage
  others or try to present their work more favourably without
  doing any productive work for the company. In other words
  sometimes there is an incentive for employees to spend less
  time being productive and more time trying to influence the
  evaluation by a supervisor. These latter activities are sometimes
  called rent seeking activities and it means that the performance
  measure is not congruent with the interests of the firm 6.
  Employees can influence their supervisor's judgement without
  actually improving their performance.

     Subjective measures are also influenced by psychological
  biases. Superiors sometimes put a higher weight on
  information that is externally generated, e.g. by customers,
  than internally generated information, e.g. by their own

6. This is exactly the problem of a measure that can be influence by two actions as
  discussed in the chapter on agency theory.
                         PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
                                                                     EVALUATION | 93

employees. Most superiors favour financial information over
non-financial information and objective, quantifiable
measures over subjective, qualitative judgements and they find
it easier to interpret performance when they can compare it to
a performance target or a benchmark.

   Ittner et al. (2003) investigate these biases based on the case
of a financial service provider with a balanced scorecard. The
scorecard has six dimensions. The headquarter of this firm has
to assess the performance of local bank managers on the six
dimensions. They also have to combine all the information
in the scorecard to judge the overall performance of the local
bank managers. Some of the dimensions are based on financial
information and others on non-financial. Some of the
dimensions are based on externally generated data but other
dimensions are based on internally generated data. Some
measures in the scorecard are quantifiable and other
information is qualitative. The researchers estimated how
much a change in each dimension influences the change in
the overall performance score for a local manager. Although
the findings are equivocal, the authors report that the
psychological biases explain a considerable amount of the
variation in the judgements of the supervisors.

Conclusion

This chapter serves as a capstone chapter to the previous
chapters in the sense that it brings together the different
strands we have touched upon so far. In this chapter, I argue
that one of the benefits of a hierarchical organisation is that
organisations can develop, identify, and retain human capital
through promotions and offering a career path within the
organisation for their employees. Because identifying
employees who would do better at higher levels in the
94 | PROMOTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE PERFORMANCE
EVALUATION

organisation requires specific knowledge, the decision on who
gets a promotion cannot be specified in a traditional agency
theory contract. Especially in larger organisation, promotions
are decided by a committee to include different points of view
(i.e. specific knowledge) and increase the credibility of
promotion decisions. These committees will partly rely on
objective performance measures when making these decisions
because objective measures also increase the credibility and
they clarify the expectations of good performance. The
bureaucracy around promotion decisions and collecting
performance measures are some of the more obvious
transaction costs involved in these promotion decisions. As
before, organisations have to decide to trade-off the
accumulation of human capital and better employees against
the transaction costs of the promotions.

References

Baker, G., Gibbs, M., & Holmstrom, B. (1994). The internal
economics of the firm: Evidence from personnel Data. The
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109(4), 881-919.
https://doi.org/10.2307/2118351

   Gibbons, R., & Henderson, R. M. (2012). Relational
Contracts and Organizational Capabilities. Organization
Science, 23(5), 1350-1364. https://doi.org/10.1287/
orsc.1050.0136

   Ittner, C. D., Larcker, D. F., & Meyer, M. W. (2003).
Subjectivity and the Weighting of Performance Measures:
Evidence from a Balanced Scorecard. The Accounting Review,
78(3), 725-758. https://doi.org/10.2308/accr.2003.78.3.725

   Prendergast, C. (1999). The provision of incentives in firms.
Journal of Economic Literature, 37(1), 7-63. https://doi.org/
10.1257/jel.37.1.7
                                 POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY | 95

8.

POWER AND
INSTITUTIONAL THEORY

   Stijn Masschelein

Economic theory and institutional
theory

Institutional theorists start from the observation that a lot of
organisations have a very similar hierarchical structure
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1983). There is one CEO on top,
supported by an executive team. There is division of labor in
different business unit based on products or geography. A lot
of these similarities are further formalised in bureaucratic
systems such as budgets, hiring, compensation and
promotion policies, company handbooks, or job guidelines.
The similarities are also expressed in norms and expectations
in different professional fields. For instance, traditional
professional business are more likely to expect their employees
and especially their executives to wear formal business attire
while business in the technology industry are more likely to
accept business casual attire. The argument from institutional
theory is that these practices, policies, and expectations are
not necessarily the result of organisations being forced to be
more efficient but the result of copying what other, similar
organisations are doing.
96 | POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY

In the previous chapters (transaction cost economics, specific
knowledge, agency theory, and promotions and subjective
performance evaluation), I have implicitly assumed that
organisations either deliberately choose formal systems and
develop norms that work best for their specific circumstances
or that they are forced to adopt those norms because they feel
pressure from capital markets. Banks, shareholders, venture
capitalists and other capital providers ask a price (interest,
dividend, buy-backs) for their investment. If the capital market
believes that the firm is not sufficiently adapted to its
competitive environment, they will ask a higher price for
investments to cover the risk that the firm decreases in value
or goes out of business. The capital market can even decide to
withdraw its investments from the firm. If a company does not
adapt to its competitive environment it will get a signal from
the capital market that something has to change. As a result,
firms in the same competitive environment will be similar to
each other.

   However, institutional theorists argue that this is not
enough to explain all the similarities between organisations
(DiMaggio and Powell, 1983). In times of uncertainty and
unpredictability, humans and organisations have a tendency to
look for stability and structure. Stability in this sense simply
means that the organisation survives in a similar form as it was
before. Thus, the need for stability leads to the introduction
of a formal hierarchy with levels of decision making and clear
role descriptions for every individual and business unit. This
formal hierarchy will only remain stable if making changes to
the hierarchy needs to be approved by the hierarchy through
bureaucratic rules that determine how the role descriptions
and levels of decision making can be changed. These
bureaucratic rules will also determine what the appropriate
lines of communications are in the organisation so that all
decisions receive the correct approval. In this view, accounting
                                    POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY | 97

  and control systems are the means by which organisations
  maintain stability and the survival of the organisation. 1

     As a result of this process permanent structures arise which
  can be organisations (for-profit and not for-profit, financial
  and product markets), communication channels (consultants
  and universities), and governance systems (government and
  private regulation). If these permanent structures become
  important and stable enough they are sometimes called
  institutions and as we will see in the next section, they can have
  the power to shape their environment and other organisations.

 Institutions shape the
 environment

  In the economic theories I have discussed before, organisations
  always respond to their environment. They will adapt to price
  changes in markets, changes in customer demand, or changes
  in technology. Institutional theory argues that some
  institutions do not have to respond to the environment by
  adaptation but that they can change the environment
  themselves. A specific example is that some firms do not have

1. The impersonal writing in this paragraph is not a coincidence. The institutional
  theory explanation is not that these outcomes are the result of deliberate decisions
  by managers in the organisation but that hierarchical organisations contain a drive
  to protect the organisation which creates these forces towards more
  bureaucratisation. It is a more fleshed out argument of the common utterance that
  large organisations and government organisations tend to resist change.
  98 | POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY

  to accept the market price, but can set the price for their own
  products 2.

     Institutions can become influential in three different ways.
  Some institutions take decisions that influence a large number
  of other organisations. If Google changes its search algorithm,
  this has an impact on all organisations and individuals who
  use their website to generate an income. If Microsoft Windows
  changes its operating system both hardware and software
  developers for Windows have to make changes to their
  product. Similarly, governmental decisions on environmental
  regulation have an impact on the whole economy of a country.
  This is not to say that it is either good or bad that one
  institution has such an influence but it is hardly disputable
  that in a lot of fields one institution can set the direction for
  the whole field. If this is the case, the dependent organisations
  have to conform to the powerful institution. Economic
  efficiency will only be a secondary consideration because
  survival primarily depends on the powerful institution.

     Another role of institutions is to set the example of what the
  best course of action is. For instance, the Balanced Scorecard is
  a performance management tool that combines financial and
  non-financial measures initiated by Harvard scholars (an
  institution). One factor in the popularity of the balanced
  scorecard compared to earlier and similar performance
  measurement tools such as the French Tableau de bord is
  Harvard's fame. Firms will be more willing to adopt a new
  strategic performance measurement system if it is backed by
  a well known institution. Similarly, over the last couple of
  decades, government agencies have started to see business

2. I will talk about this more when I discuss the role of cost accounting in price
  setting.
                                 POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY | 99

practices as examples on how to run government agencies.
This movement towards new public management has many
causes which I will not delve into here. What is important
for us is that government agencies have felt pressure to adopt
tools and organisational structures from for-profit companies.
Obviously, this will lead to a greater similarity in the how
government agencies and business units in the private sector
are managed. In general, by copying examples set by
prestigious or influential institutions, organisations will look
more similar to each other even without the pressure from the
capital market.
The last effect of institutions is that they set the norm and
expectations of a profession or a player in the field.
Professional organisations (e.g. CPA and CA) and
educational institutions (e.g. universities) determine who can
enter the labour market and who can not enter the market.
They determine what the necessary knowledge is for entering
the field but also set the expectations and ethical norms are. A
potential disadvantage of such a selection mechanism is the
influence of these institutions leads to limited diversity
between professionals in the field.

Criticism of the institutional view

The lessons from institutional theory is that powerful
organisations, groups, and individuals can have a huge impact
on their environment. The power of these institutions may or
may not stem from economic power but it can also come
from the role this institution plays in setting an example or
because the institution has a huge impact on the rules that
govern economic transactions. This view has come under
criticism for ignoring that organisations can make deliberate,
smart decisions that are in their best interest (Abernethy and
100 | POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY

Chua, 1996). To provide a more complete picture, there is
value in combining the economic insights from previous
chapters with the institutional view. In my view, institutional
theory is more informative when the organisation is going
through change or when the environment that the
organisation is operating in goes through rapid change. Under
those circumstances, all the bureaucratic and social forces that
resist change will be more important. The organisation will
have to be aware of these operational forces to successfully
adapt to the new environment. At the same time, in
tumultuous circumstances where the best solutions are not
clear, powerful institutions will provide examples on how to
deal with change and can provide best practices. Economic
theories are generally focused on what optimal management
control solutions are but provide little guidance on how to get
there. If we want to figure out how to implement or change
management accounting systems, the institutional view will
be more informative. In the next chapter, I will explain some
of the more common implementation problems and
solutions.

References

Abernethy, Margaret A, and Wai Fong Chua. 1996. "A Field
Study of Control System `Redesign': The Impact of
Institutional Processes on Strategic Choice." Contemporary
Accounting Research 13 (2): 569-606. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1911-3846.1996.tb00515.x.
DiMaggio, Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. 1983. "The Iron
Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective
Rationality in Organizational Fields." American Sociological
Review 48 (2): 147-60. https://doi.org/10.2307/2095101.
POWER AND INSTITUTIONAL THEORY | 101
102 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

9.

IMPLEMENTATION AND
CHANGE

   Stijn Masschelein

In previous chapters, I have talked about how management
accounting tools support organisations to create a competitive
advantage by coordinating the different functions within the
organisation, managing human capital and specific knowledge,
and aligning the interest of the employees and business units
with the organisation's goals and strategy. Unfortunately,
implementing or dramatically changing budget processes, cost
accounting systems, or performance measurement systems
takes time and effort and is prone to implementation costs
which are a specific example of transaction costs. You can find
a nice, practical overview of implementations problems by
Deloitte in Deloitte's perspectives series. In this chapter, I will
provide my own list of implementation problems and tie them
back to the different theoretical perspectives from the previous
chapters. Not only will it be useful to think of implementation
problems as transaction costs, we will again see that specific
knowledge is necessary to successfully implement new
accounting tools, that institutional forces can resist or hasten
change, and that organisation sometimes need bonuses to
convince employees to adopt the new system. The goal of this
chapter is not to provide a guide on change management but
to show how the core stories I have introduced can help to
                                       IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 103

diagnose the difficulties when overhauling a management
accounting system.

Change resistance

It is not unusual that changes to a company are met with
resistance or hesitations. One of the reasons is that people are
generally averse to uncertainty and risk. A feeling that is best
captured in the saying: "Never change a winning team". A
more developed argument is that institutional forces in
organisations are focused on the survival and stability of the
organisation and not necessarily on economic efficiency. These
institutional forces can take the abstract form of the
bureaucratic process in the organisation or they can be more
concrete like the power of the senior medical staff in a hospital
(Abernethy and Chua, 1996). Another related factor is that
changes in the organisation can create more risk for the
employees. The introduction of a new cost accounting system
changes how the profit and thus the performance of business
units is measured. In the chapter on agency theory, I explained
that employees generally demand a risk premium when they
have to bear more risk in their compensation. One way to
convince the employees to accept the risk in the new system
is to pay higher wages or bonuses which is one example of
a transaction cost for the organisation. If at all possible, the
organisation would prefer to not pay this cost.

   A different reason for employees to resist new management
accounting systems is that these systems often try to replace the
employees' subjective judgements with objective information.
As I explained before in Chapter 5, this can be the explicit
purpose of a management accounting tool for the
organisation. Often, the employees will argue that the
accounting system does not adequately capture all the nuances
  104 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

  or they might feel their influence diminished because their
  judgement is less important. The difficulty for management of
  the organisation is to distinguish between legitimate claims of
  flaws in the new system on the one hand and employees trying
  to protect their power over the decision or production process
  on the other hand. If employees have superior knowledge
  about what works and what does not work in their specific
  circumstances, they also know best whether a new
  management accounting system will work but they will not
  always be motivated to reveal that knowledge 1.

     The last reason for resistance is that management
  accounting systems can clash with established unspoken rules
  and norms in the organisation. Individual business units will
  often develop informal norms based on the day-to-day
  operations that top management is not aware of. New formal
  systems can disrupt and harm these norms. Sometimes that
  is the intention of the company because they want to change
  the culture of the business unit. However, in other situations,
  the implementation of a formal system can also disrupt an
  otherwise smooth running business unit because top
  management does not understand the culture of the business
  unit 2. It is often not easy for an organisation to decide whether

1. There is a very clear parallel with the reaction to large language or AI models such
  as ChatGPT and Bard. To understand the influence of AI on organisations, one
  useful lens is to think of these systems as formal management tools such as budgets
  and cost accounting system.

2. A well known example of this phenomenon is documented in a study on day-care
  centers. Surprisingly, the introduction of a penalty for late parents increased the
  number of late parents. Before the introduction of the penaly, the parents would
  feel shame because of a social norm against being late. With the penalty in place,
  they felt they could just pay for the convenience of showing up late (Gneezy and
  Rustichini, 2000)
                                          IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 105

  a business unit's resistance to a formal system is motivated by
  their own interests or by the legitimate fear that the new system
  will impair the functioning of the business unit.

 Fit with the environment

  In the previous section, I emphasised that the success of a new
  cost accounting or budgeting system depends on the existing
  firm culture and norms and this line of reasoning can be
  further extended. There exists a large body of academic studies
  that focus on how the benefits and costs of accounting systems
  depends on the environment in which the firm operates. In
  this section, I provide some examples of how the organisation's
  circumstances influence which accounting system is more
  appropriate. The message of this section is not that there are
  rules for which accounting system fits with which
  environment. The take-away message is that finding the right
  fit is complicated and can easily go wrong. The correct way to
  interpret the three subsections is to interpret them as micro
  case studies. An important consequence of the importance of
  context specificity is that a one-size-fits-all approach is rarely
  going to work 3. A cost accounting system that is successful
  in one firm is not necessarily the best approach for another
  firm. Similarly, if a firm's environment changes, the accounting
  system that was adequate in the old environment might no
  longer be optimal in the new environment.

     The goal of this section is to make you aware of the difficulty

3. Note that the search for best practices implicitly implies that there is a one size that
  fits a certain group of companies. In my personal opinion, the search for best
  practices is often misguided. Your mileage might vary.
106 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

to adapt the accounting system to the firm's environment. The
following examples illustrate that there are not even simple
one-to-one relations between the environment and the right
management accounting system. That makes it all the more
important to investigate the specific circumstances of an
organisation that help or hinder the implementation of a new
accounting system. Unfortunately, I cannot and will not give
you any easy answers in this textbook. The reality is too
complex for that. Once we accept this complexity and the
difficulty in finding the right system for each organisation,
we can focus on tactics to gather information that make it
more likely that we come up with a system that works good
enough for the organisation. Specifically, when we develop a
new accounting system, we will want to take into account the
knowledge in the organisation and we will want to learn about
what works and what does not work through direct experience
and experimentation.

Illustration 1: Competition and cost
accounting

One issue that we will revisit later on in more detail is when
a more complex cost accounting system is more useful. The
advantage of a more elaborate and detailed cost accounting
system is that the estimated cost prices for individual products
are more precise (Labro and Vanhoucke, 2007 ). Better cost
estimates allow organisations to set smarter prices. Some
textbooks have argued that in competitive markets, better cost
systems are more valuable because profit margins will be
smaller. On the other hand, in competitive markets,
organisations will not be able to charge more than the price
that competitors charge because customers can easily defect to
the cheapest producer. In other words, organisations do not
                                       IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 107

need an elaborate costing system to find out the right price
for their products. They only have to match the price that
competitors are setting.

Illustration 2: Uncertainty and budgets

Another controversial issue is whether budgets are more
valuable or less valuable when the firm operates in a more
uncertain environment (Hartmann, 2000). In an uncertain
environment where it is difficult to predict consumer demand,
the firm will have difficulty in setting up a realistic budget at
the start of the year. The uncertainty makes planning more
difficult because expected demand and expected purchasing
prices can change substantially. On the other hand, the budget
and actual deviation from the budget during the year might
provide information on these changes. If we plan to sell
100,000 units and half-way through the year we have sold only
40,000 units, we know that we should adjust our plans for the
year. Uncertainty clearly affects how firms can use budgets but
this does not necessarily mean that budgets are useless in high
uncertain environments.

Illustration 3: Strategy and cost
accounting

The strategy of a firm has also been highlighted as a factor that
might influence the use of an accounting system. For instance,
the argument has been made that cost control and
consequently cost accounting systems are more valuable to
firms who are following a cost leadership strategy. One
important technical issue in cost accounting systems is how
to assign costs from inventory and unused capacity. Most
  108 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

  accounting textbooks devote a whole chapter to this issue (see
  chapter 20 in Horngren et al., 2014). The following example
  will demonstrate that firms with a similar 4 cost leadership
  strategy can have totally different investments in inventory and
  capacity and hence in the need for an inventory costing system.
  The example shows why I define the strategy of the
  organisation based on its critical investments. Amazon is a
  very aggressive price cutter in almost every domain and they
  guarantee fast delivery by having a very extensive network of
  warehouses where inventories are constantly updated.
  OnePlus is a manufacturer of high end Android Smartphones
  at below market prices. Their strategy used to be to keep costs
  low by requiring potential customers of a phone to sign up
  during a limited subscription period. On regular intervals, they
  produce just enough of the phones to satisfy the demand of
  the customers who have signed up 5. OnePlus is fully aware
  that they might miss out on some potential sales but they
  prefer to have no unsold inventory. From a cost accounting
  perspective, Amazon has to have a good grip on the cost of
  its inventories and warehouse capacity to keep its margins
  sustainable while OnePlus does not even have to consider the
  issue. While both companies try to be a cost leader they have
  a totally different cost accounting system with respect to
  inventory management.

4. At least similar at the surface
5. The subscription model has changed but the phones are still not easy to buy and

  fairly rare. OnePlus has abandoned its tactic of using subscription but it still has a
  strategy where it aims to match production as close as possible to actual demand
  for the phones.
                                       IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 109

Specific knowledge and
employee involvement

In the absence of clear one-to-one rules of which accounting
tools work best in given environment, the organisation will
have to rely on the specific knowledge and experience of its
employees. Often the introduction of a new system will
require specific knowledge about the new system and that
knowledge will be difficult to communicate. This knowledge
can take two different forms. First, for instance changes in the
budgeting process will require the technical knowledge of how
budgets work. This is also the knowledge that this textbook
is trying to teach you. When firms do not have the required
experience in the form of a finance department or a dedicated
management accountant, they can turn to professional or
academic consultants. The role of these specialists is to
understand the goal of the new system and translate it into
a functional accounting system. The cost of hiring these
professionals is an example of a transaction cost of
implementing a new budgeting system.

   This is not the only form of specific knowledge that is
needed for the introduction of a new accounting system.
Because the success of a new system is context specific, the
implementation requires intimate knowledge of the specific
environment in which the accounting system will operate, i.e.
operational knowledge. For instance, the measures in a new
performance evaluation system need to be relevant and
understandable for the decision makers who will use the
system. The design of the system has to take into account what
the needs are of the users of the system. Often the employees
that will be using the new system may have already developed
their own unofficial accounting or budgeting system in
spreadsheets. One danger of a top down implementation of
110 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

a new system is that it ignores the experience and unofficial
systems of these users. One risk is that the new system will
ignore valuable information that might inform the design of
a better system. The local, ad-hoc data or metrics that have
already been collected could help to develop a prototype of the
new system because these are actual measurements from the
actual operations. Another disadvantage of ignoring existing
unofficial systems is that the local users are more familiar with
their own accounting system and are not always willing to
switch over to the new system (Wouters and Wilderom 2008,
Wouters et al. 2009). Implementations that take into account
the operational knowledge of current users will encounter less
resistance to change of these users.

   In short, to ensure that users of the new system are using
it, the implementation of the new system will require their
involvement in the design of the system. This means that the
more knowledge employees have, the more they will interact
with the new system, or the more they are accountable for the
measures in the system, the more their input will be important
for a successful implementation. This consultation process is
time consuming and will constitute an important transaction
cost of the implementation process. A successful
implementation also requires to get the communication right
between the employees with operational knowledge and
management accountants and consultants with technical
skills. These two groups often have different expectations and
backgrounds which makes this a non-trivial problem to solve.
Lastly, the use of a more complicated accounting system might
require additional training for the users. All these changes and
implementation steps are of course another source of
transaction costs of a new accounting system.

Learning by doing through
                                        IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 111

trial-and-error

So far, we have seen that developing an accounting system that
is appropriate for the organisation's environment is far from
straightforward. The organisation will also have to consult
with different people and integrate their specific knowledge.
As a result, it is unlikely that at any point in time one person
will know exactly what the best system will look like. All these
considerations highlight how difficult it is to account for all
possible obstacles in the design and successful application of
a new management accounting system. Taking into account
all these factors makes the development of a new accounting
system highly complicated. If an organisation relies on specific
knowledge from the rank-and-file, has an integrated strategy,
and operates in a complex environment, implementing a new
accounting system is equivalent to an optimising problem with
a lot of moving parts that are best understood by different
people.

   It is unlikely that an organisation will design such an
optimal system in one try. Organisations usually implement
accounting systems through a process of trial-and-error. For
instance, organisations will design a prototype for a cost
accounting system and trial it in some of their divisions or for
some of their products. Often the prototype is being used in
concert with the existing system to compare and contrast the
differences. If the differences make sense and can be explained,
the new system is probably an improvement. For instance if a
labor intensive product is allocated more costs in a new costing
system, the organisation will feel more confident. However,
if the differences between the old and the new cost prices are
difficult to explain, the organisation will want to investigate
the hidden assumptions behind the new costing system
(Wouters and Wilderom 2008).
112 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

   The use of prototypes and a gradual rollout will be
especially useful if many different rank-and-file employees have
to be involved in the system's development. In the gradual
approach, the organisation can include the specific knowledge
of the employees when it is most needed. For instance, while
the overall strategy and design of the balanced scorecard is
mostly driven by top management, lower level employees
might have better knowledge of how to design specific
performance measures in their area of expertise. As an example,
the sales people might have a better idea how to measure
repeated sales as an indicator of customer loyalty. That is, do
we need to count the number of customers that buy from our
company every week, every month or every year?

   Because it is almost impossible to decide whether a new
accounting system is perfect, the organisation needs to
regularly evaluate and refine the system. Changes in the
environment or in the strategy might require the development
of new measures or render some measures obsolete. A cost
accounting system can turn out to be too complex and evolved
to use and it needs to be simplified. Incentive contracts or
budget procedures might have unintended consequences
where employees can game the policies for their own best
interest without contributing to the organisations' goals. For
any sufficiently complex accounting system, it will be difficult
to predict the behaviour of all employees that interact with
the system. As a result, the firm will need to monitor any
unexpected reactions and gradually improve upon the existing
accounting system.

Looking back and forward

In earlier chapters, I explained how organisations replace
market mechanisms such as price signals and incentives at a
                                        IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 113

cost, i.e. transaction costs. The above discussion on the
difficulties of implementing management accounting system
revealed some examples of transaction costs of running a firm.
In this specific case, they all refer to explicit and implicit
implementation costs such as paying higher wages, the
opportunity costs of trial-and-error, the time lost through
involvement of rank-and-file employees or the fee to be paid to
external consultants.

   One obvious but often ignored cost of the implementation
of new systems is that employees might need convincing to
accept the new system. One way to overcome initial reluctance
to a change is to increase the wage of the employees. Especially
changes to the compensation structure go hand in hand with
increases of the labour cost. Another related cost is the time
of retraining and communicating the changes to employees.
These activities often negatively effect short-term productivity
of the employees because they can no longer pay full attention
to their main tasks.

   The current chapter also shows why management
accounting systems are not always able to fully replace market
mechanisms. It can take a lot of incremental improvement
before a management accounting system is sufficiently fine
tuned. Both an imperfect fit with the environment and
frictions with the existing company culture can lead to more
disagreement and less cooperation and communication. These
transactions costs are the result of the less than optimal design
of the system.

   In addition, the size and complexity of some systems will
make the use of the system more costly. Budgets, even when
they work well, are often criticised for being (too) time
consuming. The time to ask every division at all levels of the
organisation for their budget needs and to reconcile these
needs with each other and the overall business strategy is a
daunting task.
114 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE

   The current chapter gives a range of costs that organisations
have when they replace market mechanisms with accounting
systems. If organisations can keep these transaction costs
under control they will be able to reap the benefits of
integrating different investments. In the following sections, I
will discuss three accounting systems. In each chapter, I will
focus on how accounting can help with replacing market
incentives and price signals by coordinating different divisions
and investments outside of the market, translate subjective
knowledge into objective information for better decision
making, align the incentives of the employees with the strategy
of the organisation, or communicate with powerful
institutions.

References

Abernethy, Margaret A, and Wai Fong Chua. 1996. "A Field
Study of Control System `Redesign': The Impact of
Institutional Processes on Strategic Choice." Contemporary
Accounting Research 13 (2): 569-606. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1911-3846.1996.tb00515.x.
Gneezy, Uri, and Aldo Rustichini. 2000. "A Fine Is a Price."
The Journal of Legal Studies 29: 1. https://doi.org/10.1086/
468061.
Hartmann, Frank G.H. 2000. "The Appropriateness of
RAPM: Toward the Further Development of Theory."
Accounting, Organizations and Society 25 (4-5): 451-82.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0361-3682(98)00036-1.
Labro, Eva, and Mario Vanhoucke. 2007. "A Simulation
Analysis of Interactions among Errors in Costing Systems."
Accounting Review 82: 939-62. https://doi.org/10.2308/
accr.2007.82.4.939.
Wouters, Marc, James C. Anderson, James A. Narus, and
                                        IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE | 115

Finn Wynstra. 2009. "Improving Sourcing Decisions in NPD
Projects: Monetary Quantification of Points of Difference."
Journal of Operations Management 27 (1): 64-77.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jom.2008.07.001.
Wouters, Marc, and Celeste Wilderom. 2008. "Developing
Performance-Measurement Systems as Enabling
Formalization: A Longitudinal Field Study of a Logistics
Department." Accounting, Organizations and Society 33
(4-5): 488-516. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aos.2007.05.002.
116 | IMPLEMENTATION AND CHANGE
           BUDGETING | 117

PART II

BUDGETING
118 | BUDGETING
     WHAT ARE BUDGETS (GOOD FOR)? | 119

10.

WHAT ARE BUDGETS
(GOOD FOR)?

   Stijn Masschelein

Budgets are a quantitative expression of a business plan for a
specific period of time (p.184 in Horngren 2012). In my view,
they are the quintessential accounting tool and they should
be the first one that every textbook discusses. Although not
necessarily all firms use budgets (Hope and Fraser 2003), the
majority of firms still use them (Libby and Lindsay 2010);
both large multinationals and start-up firms, both firms with
high profit margins and razor thin margins have budgets. The
ubiquity of budgets is an indication that budgets can serve
different functions in different environments. Just from the
definition above, you can already guess that budgets will help
with the integration of different parts of the organisations.
Having an overall plan for the organisation in the form of a
budget is one step in making sure that the divisions in the
organisation are coordinated by headquarters. Budgets are also
explicitly a quantitative version of the overall plan. When
organisations budget for the next year, they are not just
estimating whether their products will sell more but they
estimate how much more, at which price, and what the cost is
of producing the products. This means that the organisation is
translating some of the specific knowledge of its sales people,
production planners, and engineers into financial terms which
120 | WHAT ARE BUDGETS (GOOD FOR)?

makes it easier to integrate all that information in one plan.
Finally during the year, the organisation can use the budgeted
sales and costs as a target for its managers and reward them for
reaching those targets.

   Traditionally, these same functions of the budget are
described as planning and communicating investments,
implementing strategies, gathering feedback on the success of
investments, and motivating and evaluating employees
(Hansen and Van der Stede 2014). The ubiquity of budgets
can easily be explained when you see strategies as a
combination of investments that give the organisation a
competitive advantage. When long-term budgets are informed
by the strategy, they are quantified versions of more
ambiguous strategic plans. The yearly operational budget
translates the plan for the year in concrete targets and budget
allocations which are easier to communicate through a large
organisation compared to fuzzy qualitative plans.

   In my view, an often underappreciated feature of budgets
is that they force an organisation to make choices between
different investments. While an university might have the
aspiration to offer the best education, perform world class
research, work with industry, and influence the public
discourse, budget constraints, both in time and money, will
make it very hard to accomplish all these objectives. The
university's budgeting process will inform the strategy, i.e.
which combination of investments in teaching, applied, and
basic research are feasible. Once these decisions are taken, the
agreed upon budget allocation to different projects makes it
clear for the whole university which projects have priority for
top management.

   The budget targets also serve as a way to evaluate the
performance of employees and divisions. The explicit and
implicit incentives based on the budget allow the firm to align
the interest of the organisation with the interest of the
                                        WHAT ARE BUDGETS (GOOD FOR)? | 121

  employees. When divisions exceed their assigned budget, the
  performance of their manager will be negatively evaluated
  which affects their bonuses and promotion changes.
  Alternatively, budgets can set the boundaries within which
  employees have to do their job. This approach to budgeting
  is appropriate when employees have more autonomy because
  of their specific skills such as in the fashion industry (Davila
  2013) or at Google1. When the employees are expected to be
  creative in their task, the firm wants to set boundaries to the
  creativity to ensure that the employees work together, or
  perform the more routine tasks as well. For instance, I am, as
  a lecturer, happy to look through the latest news for examples
  I can use in my lectures. However, I need some external
  motivation to finish marking on time because that is a more
  dreary task. That is why the university has a budget on how
  much time I can spent on marking and why they are giving me
  a deadline.

     The problems that are associated with budgets often stem
  from the difficulty to combine the different and sometimes
  conflicting functions. A lot of these problems are related to the
  problem that middle managers and rank-and-file employees
  have specific knowledge which top management wants to
  incorporate in the financial plan. However, the employees also
  know that the budget will be used to evaluate their subsequent
  performance and that the information they give top
  management will determine the budget they get allocated. As
  a result, employees have an incentive to game the budgeting
  process. When asked for their input, they try to steer the

1. For Google, I am referring to the famous rule where some of the computer
  engineers have to spent 80% of their working time on assigned projects while they
  can spend 20% of their time on their own chosen projects. The budget allocation
  in this case is time not monetary resources.
122 | WHAT ARE BUDGETS (GOOD FOR)?

budget in a way to get more budget allocated to their own
projects. The next section will describe how this problem
affects the process of setting a budget and how organisations
solve that problem.

References

Hansen, SC, and WA Van der Stede. 2004. "Multiple Facets
of Budgeting: An Exploratory Analysis." Management
Accounting Research 15: 415-39.
Hope, Jeremy, and Robin Fraser. 2003. "Beyond Budgeting."
Harvard Business School Press, Boston.
Horngren, Charles T., Srikant M. Datar, and Madhav V.
Rajan. 2012. Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis. 14th
ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Libby, Theresa, and R. Murray Lindsay. 2010. "Beyond
Budgeting or Budgeting Reconsidered? A Survey of North-
American Budgeting Practice." Management Accounting
Research 21 (1): 56-75. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.mar.2009.10.003.
                                                THE BUDGETING PROCESS | 123

11.

THE BUDGETING
PROCESS

   Stijn Masschelein

Budgets have multiple distinct roles in managing an
organisation which means that organisations will have
multiple budgets for different purposes (e.g. the operational
budget or the capital budget) or for different divisions within
the organisation. The goal of this part on budgets is not to
provide a comprehensive overview of all possible ways a budget
can work in an organisation. A budget can be a plan for the
entire organisation, for some division of the organisation, or
for a one-off project. It can be for the long term or the short
term. It can be an operational budget or a capital budget.

   In this chapter, I will focus on two archetypes (or stories)
of implementing a budget because they explain how
organisations can deal with the fundamental tension at the
heart of a budget: (1) the organisation wants to use as much
information as possible when setting the budget and (2) also
use that information to set targets for employees.
Unfortunately, that gives the employees an incentive to not
reveal their specific knowledge because they want to avoid that
the information is used to set more challenging targets. This
chapter describes the budgeting process as it is often presented
in textbooks as one approach to manage that tension and a
practitioner's example of a start-up implements budgets.
124 | THE BUDGETING PROCESS

There are significant differences between these two approaches
that be explained by the tension between collecting
information and managing incentives of the employees that
provide the information. Both these approaches are viable
ways to organise a budgeting process and in the final section of
this chapter I will reconcile their differences.

The textbook approach

The textbook approach is the typical decision making
approach: First gather all the relevant information, based on
the information make a plan, execute the plan. Typically, the
budgeting process will require the following steps.

       1. Identify the main organisational problem and

            uncertainty

       2. Obtain information

       3. Make predictions about the future

       4. Make decisions by choosing among alternatives

       5. Implement the decisions, evaluate performance, and

            learn

Based on Horngren (2012)
   In the case of an annual operational budget, in the first

stage, the organisation has to decide what the overall profit
target is for the year and what the important competitive
factors will be. Is the organisation able to increase sales and
maintain a targeted profit margin or will competitors enter
the market? The organisation will also investigate potential
                                                THE BUDGETING PROCESS | 125

increases in its costs such of labour and raw material or
services. In the second stage, the organisation collects
information about customer demand, its suppliers, and
competitors to reduce the uncertainty in its estimates. The
organisation will use publicly available information, historical
internal data, general knowledge from consultants, and
specific knowledge from employees to estimate customer
demand, production volumes, costs, and customer price
sensitivity. Consultants, for instance, can share benchmarking
data from comparable organisations. An example of internal
knowledge is the market insights of sales staff who have a better
understanding of customer preferences and customer demand
than top management.

   In the third and fourth stage, top management will use this
information to make predictions about future costs and
revenues. These predictions will also guide which investments,
projects, and new products are worth pursuing, and which
products or services might have to be cancelled. Finally, the
decisions will be made explicit in the form of budget
allocations and budget targets for different departments,
geographical areas, product lines, or employees. In the fifth
stage, these decisions that are implicitly embedded in the
budget are implemented by all employees. The organisation
will communicate the budget and should explain how the
targets and allocations are determined. During the course of
the year, the organisation will compare the actual performance
to the predicted performance in the budget. The organisation
will learn which projects are performing as planned and which
ones will need additional attention. How exactly organisations
can learn from comparing the actual results to the budget is
something I will explain in the chapter on variance analysis.

   This idealised textbook process emphasises the importance
of using all available information to intelligently coordinate
the different functions in the organisation. In this approach,
126 | THE BUDGETING PROCESS

the budget adds most value through better coordination of the
organisation where the cost of gathering the information and
managing the incentives to truthfully reveal specific knowledge
is a necessary transaction cost. This process also acknowledges
that not all information is available at the start of the
budgeting cycle and based on new information during the
cycle, the budget might need to be adjusted. This is
reminiscent of the trial-and-error process I discussed in the
chapter on chapter on implementation issues.

A practitioner's perspective

I derive the practitioner's approach from an essay by Ben
Horowitz on budgeting in a start-up firm. He is a partner of
the venture capital firm Andreessen Horowtiz and co-founder
of three start-ups in Silicon Valley. In the essay, Horowitz
discusses how the textbook approach can lead to a bloated
budget in a start-up firm because it gives the engineers the
opportunity to ask for more budget then they need. He
proposes the following, more top-down budgeting process.

 1. Determine the goal of the organisation and the resulting
      resource constraints and reduce the available budget by
      10%-25%

          Based on increase in sales compared to last year
          Based on aspired profit or acceptable loss
          Based on engineering growth rate

 2. Communicate the budget to the team
 3. Encourage the managers to do the best they can with the

      allocated budget.
                                                THE BUDGETING PROCESS | 127

 4. If one group can perform more with more money,
      allocate more from the 10%-25%.

Based on Horowitz (2015).
   The budgeting process should start from certain constraints

on the new budget. The constraints are necessary to limit the
growth rate of the firm's operations and thus its costs. The
growth rate can be in terms of the actual budget numbers or
the employee count of the previous year. In this budgeting
process, the primary concern is to avoid using the potentially
unreliable specific knowledge of the employees with the cost
that the organisation is not using all relevant information.

   The next step is to communicate the budget to the
employees in the company and motivate the employees to
perform as good as possible within the budget constrains.
Importantly, the rank-and-file employees are far less involved in
setting the budget compared to the textbook approach. Only
a limited amount of the total budget is allocated based on the
input from the employees and this allocation is treated as an
exception in step 4.

Reconciling the differences

The differences between the two approaches reveal some
important features of budgets. First of all, there is not
necessarily one budgeting approach that works for every firm
and every approach has its own set of advantages and
disadvantages. The textbook approach is likely to be more
appropriate in larger established firms while the Horowitz
approach is more apt for start-up firms. Here, I will go into
more detail why this is the case.

   The textbook approach is more vulnerable to budgetary
slack creation and budget gaming because employees can
128 | THE BUDGETING PROCESS

distort their true knowledge to get easier targets or more
budget. The distortions make it more difficult to assess
different investments and plan for the next year. To limit
budget gaming, organisations sometimes opt to not evaluate
the employees based on budget targets which takes away the
incentives for employees to create budgetary slack. Planning
and coordinating the budget of different divisions is often
more important in larger firms with multiple business than in
a start-up. The former have more activities and investments
that need to be coordinated. Similarly, the more diverse the
organisation, the more difficult it is for top management to
be involved in every aspect of the business. As a result, the
local, specific knowledge will be more valuable for planning
the following year's operations and it is more more important
to gather that information in the budget.

   In contrast, in a start-up firm, the future of the company is
even more unpredictable than in an established firm. Planning
one-year ahead might be a difficult task because the product,
the market, and the organisation are still rapidly changing. For
such an organisation, guiding the behaviour of the employees
is more important than planning for the next year. Start-ups
are often more cash constrained and any serious budget
overrun can have disastrous consequences for the survival of
the firm. Oversimplified, the start-up only has two goals: not
run out of cash and bring a product to the market. The most
important part is that the employees work towards those two
goals.

   Established firms have also more tools they can use to avoid
budget gaming. For one, they can create a culture where
employees are committed to the budget process. In Johnson
& Johnson, employees are often promoted internally which
means that managers have worked with the employees they
are supervising and they have experience with and trust in
the budget process. In other words, managers have sufficient
                                                THE BUDGETING PROCESS | 129

knowledge of the day-to-day process to understand when
budget demands by subordinates are not realistic. They have
experienced and absorbed the norms that make the budgeting
process work (see p. 202 in Horngren (2012)). We have seen
before that promotions are used by organisations to find
employees that have a good understanding of the internal
processes and that are a good match with the organisation. The
fit between the budgeting process and the internal promotions
at Johnson & Johnson is a concrete example of this argument.
Other organisations solve the incentive problem directly. They
provide incentives to managers and employees for accuracy in
their budget proposals. They pay a bonus for budget estimates
that are difficult and accurate (see p. 202 in Horngren et al.
(2012)). These bonuses are a direct application of the principle
that incentives should be congruent with the goal of the
organisation. If it is important for the organisation to
incorporate all information in the budget, they should reward
employees for accurate budget estimates.

   Start-up firms will have difficulty to develop such tools
because they will often not have the opportunity to only
promote current employees when they have to hire new people
to expand their operations. In the short lifetime of a start-up, it
is not always possible to develop and maintain the norms that
are necessary for a positive budgeting culture as in Johnson
& Johnson. Furthermore even for established firms, there are
transaction costs involved in establishing a culture or using
incentive contracts to secure honest budget proposals.
Johnson & Johnson has to exclude a lot of potential employees
because they prefer to recruit managers from inside the firm.
The transaction cost of an incentive contract for honest
budget proposals is that firms have to pay a bonus for when
employees submit honest budget proposals.

   In this chapter, I explained how budgets can be used to
coordinate the strategic investments but that this coordination
130 | THE BUDGETING PROCESS

comes at a transaction cost to manage the incentives of
employees to ensure that they do not misrepresent their local
knowledge. Some organisations forego these benefits of
budgets because the transaction costs are not worth it. Instead,
they use the budget to set boundaries and guide the behaviour
of employees. Nevertheless, no matter the specific goal of the
budget, an organisation wants to track during the budgeting
period whether the organisation and its employees are
completing the plan or stick to the boundaries set in the
budget. The organisation can check for deviations from the
budget to adjust the plan and to reward employees who stick
to the plan or punish the ones that break the boundaries. In
the next chapter, I explain how organisations can use variance
analysis to analyse the deviations.

References

Horngren, Charles T., Srikant M. Datar, and Madhav V.
Rajan. 2012. Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis. 14th
ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.
     VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 131

12.

VARIANCE ANALYSIS

   Stijn Masschelein

While the previous chapter focused on how the budget is set,
in this chapter I will show how an organisation can use the
budget at the start of the year and compare it to the actual
results. The purpose of this comparison, or variance analysis,
is to provide feedback on the progress of the strategic plan
during the budgeting period, assess the success of the strategic
plan at the end of the period, and evaluate the performance of
employees. The main advantage of the variance analysis is that
the organisation can use the objective financial information to
quantitatively estimate deviations from the plan and break the
overall deviations down in smaller parts. It does not have to
solely rely on subjective knowledge to evaluate the plan and the
employees. Still, as we will see, subjective knowledge is going
to be important in how the organisation should interpret the
calculations.

Easy Business Company Limited

The rest of this section builds on a case study that I have used
when teaching this material: Easy Business Company Limited.
The case describes how Sindy Sin starts a new recruiting
agency in China in 1998. After economic reforms, China was
in an economic boom until a relatively short-lived
132 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

international financial crisis hits the economy. Sindy starts her
business at the time where firms are still keeping close tabs on
their cost structure but they are starting to hire again. Sindy's
business is one of many established and new recruiting
agencies that provides services to match firms and job seekers.

   The following presents a simplified and slightly altered cost
structure of the new business. Sindy's revenues are driven by
the number of vacant positions she can fill. She expect to earn
2000RMB for each of the 250 positions she will fill over the
course of a year. For a recruiting agency, most of the costs are
fixed costs. I assume there are two important variable costs,
a bonus for the sales people per position filled and the cost
of advertisement in the local paper. Following the case study,
I assume that the bonus is set at 300RMB for each year.
Normally, advertisements are not variable costs, i.e. Sindy
would have to pay for the advertisements whether the position
is filled or not. I assume here that Sindy was able to negotiate
a deal with the paper where she only had to pay for the
advertisement once the position is filled. The following table
presents an overview of the variable costs and revenues for Easy
Business. In addition to the variable costs, Sindy expects to
have 300,000RMB in fixed costs.

Table 12.1: Planned Variable Costs and Revenues Easy
                            Business

         Category  Revenue and Cost per Position

Revenue            2,000

Sales Bonus        300

Advertisement      100
                                                         VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 133

Level 1: Static Budget Variances

From the information above, we can calculate the planned
budget and we are going to compare it to the actual costs and
revenues that are given in the next table. The planned budget
calculations are the planned positions filled times the variable
revenues and costs or:

  ·
  ·
  ·

The difference between the budget and the actual results is
calculated in the level 1 variance analysis and the differences
are called static budget variances. The variances are denoted by
(F) for favourable variances and (U) for unfavourable variance.
Variances are favourable when actual revenues exceed the
budget and when actual costs are lower than in the budget.
Unfavourable variances happen when sales are lower and costs
are higher than budgeted.
134 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

Table 12.2: Static Budget Variances Easy Business

                  Actual       Static Budget    Planned
                                 Variance       Budget

                  (1)          (2) = (3) - (1)  (3)

Positions Filled          225  25 (U)                250

Revenues          405,000 95,000 (U)            500,000

Bonus             63,000 12,000 (F)             75,000

Advertisements    27,000       2,000 (U)        25,000

Total Variable    90,000 10,000 (F)             100,000
Costs

Contribution      315,000 85,000 (U)            400,000
Margin

Fixed Costs       275,000 25,000 (U)            300,000

Operating         40,000 60,000 (U)             100,000
Income

The actual operating income of 40,000 RMB is 60,000 RMB
lower than in the planned budget. The level 1 analysis splits the
differences up over the different revenue and cost components
which helps Sindy to figure out why operating income is lower
than expected. It is easy to see that part of the explanation
is that Sindy could only fill 225 positions compared to the
250 positions she expected to fill. The total variable and fixed
costs are lower than expected which dampens the effect of the
decreased sales.The lower variable costs should not come as a
surprise because she filled less positions the variable costs are
expected to go down. In order to improve the profitability of
Easy Business, Sindy will want to know whether the lower sales
are the main reason for the drop in profits or whether there are
                                                         VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 135

also other explanations. The level 2 analysis in the next section
will try to disentangle the sales drop from other factors.

Level 2: Flexible budget
variances.

The flexible budget calculates budgeted costs and revenues
with the actual output for the year instead of the budgeted
output. In other words, the flexible budget adjusts the original
budget after the fact for the actual number of positions filled
instead of the budgeted number of positions filled. This allows
us to calculate at the end of the budgeting period what the
budget would have been if we correctly predicted the actual
output for the year. If we then find any deviations between
the flexible budget and the planned budget, we know that
these come from the sales volume. If we find any deviations
between the flexible budget and the actual results, we know
they cannot be because of the sales volume. This is exactly
what Sindy wants to figure out after the static budget analysis
in the previous section.

   The flexible budget for the variable costs is calculated as
225 times the unit variable costs in Table 12.1. The fixed costs
are by definition not expected to change when the output
changes. As a result, the flexible budget fixed cost is the same
as the budgeted fixed cost. The variable components of the
variable budget can then be calculated as follows:

  ·
  ·
  ·
136 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

The resulting flexible budget is shown in column (3) of the
next table.

       Table 12.3: Flexible Budget Variances Easy Business

                  Actual   Flexible  Flexible  Sales Volume Planned
                           Budget    Budget    Variance Budget
                           Variance

                  (1) (2) = (3) - (1) (3) (4) = (5) - (3) (5)

Positions Filled  225      -         225 25 (U)             250

Revenues          405,000 45,000 (U) 450,000 50,000 (U) 500,000

Bonus             63,000 4,500 (F) 67,500 7,500 (F) 75,000

Advertisements 27,000 4,500 (U) 22,500 2,500 (F) 25,000

Contribution      315,000  45,000 (U) 360,000  40,000 (U) 400,000
Margin

Fixed Costs       275,000 25,000 (F) 300,000   - 300,000

Operating         40,000   20,000    60,000    40,000 (U) 100,000
Income                        (U)

The difference between the planned budget and the flexible
budget in column (4) is called the sales volume variance and it
is a measure of how much of the variance between the actual
operating income and the budgeted operating income can be
explained by the difference in positions filled. The total effect
of the drop in positions filled is a decrease in the contribution
margin by 40,000 RMB which is two third of the total decrease
in operating income. I want to highlight that it makes most
                                                           VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 137

  sense to look at the total contribution margin and not at
  variable revenues and costs separately for the sales volume
  variance because the only change is the sales volume and all
  variable components are changing proportionally to the sales
  volume by definition.

     The difference between the actual results and the flexible
  budget is called the flexible budget variance and is calculated
  in column (2) of Table 12.3. The flexible budget variance for
  the revenues indicates that even accounting for the lower than
  expected positions filled, Easy Business lost 45,000 RMB in
  sales compared to the the planned budget. This difference
  must be the result of a lower sales price per position filled. The
  actual price per position filled of 1,800 RMB 1 is indeed lower
  than the planned price of 2,000 RMB in Table 12.1. Similarly,
  we can see that the flexible-budget variance is favourable for
  the bonus which means that the average bonus per position is
  lower than planned. In contrast, the advertisement variance is
  unfavourable which means that the average advertisement cost
  is higher than the planned advertisement costs. These findings
  are also supported by the actual unit costs in Table 12.4.
  Finally, the variance for the fixed costs shows that Easy Business
  had 25,000 RMB lower fixed costs than expected. All in all, the
  results show that the remaining third of the variance between
  expected and actual income is driven by a lower than expected
  price per position filled which are partly offset by significant
  cost savings in fixed costs.

1. We can calculate the unit sales price as
138 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

                                                                    Table

               Category

Revenue
Sales Bonus
Advertisement

There are a number of possible explanations for the lower
sales and the consequent sales volume variance. Maybe the
competition of other recruiting agencies has been harsher than
expected or the labour market was less hot than expected and
firms did not have that many positions to be filled. Or the sales
people were not willing to work hard enough to fill positions
because they did not receive a high enough bonus (RMB 1,800
instead of RMB 2,000). While Sindy cannot directly control
the competition and demand, she can control the bonus she
pays. The variance analysis gives her a tool to evaluate whether
it is worthwhile to increase the bonus for sales staff if it leads
to more positions filled. Because the variance analysis is
quantitative, she can directly compare the cost of increasing
the bonus to the benefits of more sales. This is one of the key
advantages of the variance analysis. It is easy to quantitatively
compare costs and benefits.

   Finally, the flexible-budget variance for the advertisement
cost gives an indication of how well Sindy was able to control
the advertisement cost given the actual positions filled. The
advertisement costs are 20 RMB higher than expected per
advertisement. There are two main explanations for the higher
than expected advertisement costs if I tell you that the
advertisement costs are calculated per word in the
advertisement. Easy Business either had more words per
advertisement than expected and/or the price per word was
higher than expected. With some additional information, a
                                                        VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 139

level 3 budget analysis can separate the contribution of those
explanations to the flexible cost variances.

Level 3: Price variances and
efficiency variances.

The level 3 analysis separates the flexible cost variance in a
price variance and an efficiency variance. The price variance of
a variable cost is the additional costs of an increase in the cost
price per input. The efficiency variance quantifies the cost of
consuming more of the underlying input per unit of output.
In the case of Easy Business, the input is the number of words,
the cost price per unit of input is the price per 10 words, and
the unit of output is the number of positions filled. In other
words, the price variance reflects the effect of an increase in the
cost per word in the advertisement (not the additional cost of
the advertisement itself!). The efficiency variance reflects the
cost of using more or less words per advertisement. We use the
information in Table 12.5 to calculate the price and efficiency
variance.
    140 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

    Table 12.5: Actual and Budgeted Advertisement for Easy
                                  Business

    Budgeted words per advertisement 50

    Actual words per advertisement 80

    Budgeted price per 10 words RMB 20

    Actual price per 10 words  RMB 15

    Budgeted cost per          RMB 100
    advertisement

    Actual cost per advertisement RMB 120

    The price variances in Table 12.5 are calculated as follows.
    First, we need to calculate the total number of inputs
    necessary, i.e. the total number of words in the advertisements.
    For the flexible budget, the actual numbers filled (=225) times
    the budgeted number of words per advertisement (=50) gives
    the total number of words. That is, under the assumptions of
    the flexible budget, Sindy expected to need 11,250 words for
    advertisements. The actual number of words used is calculated
    as 225 times 80 which equals 18,000. The efficiency variance
    is the difference between these two numbers, RMB 13,500,
    and it quantifies the total cost of using more words per
    advertisement, keeping the cost price per word the same. The
    price variance is the difference between the total actual cost and
    the actual number of units used, times the budgeted price per
    10 words, RMB 9,000 2. It quantifies the decrease in the cost

2.
                                                         VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 141

of advertisement because of the lower cost price per word. The
variances split up the effect of using more words (efficiency
variance) than expected at a lower cost per 10 words (price
variance).

Table 12.6: Price and Efficiency Variances for Easy Business

Actual Price Actual Efficiency Flexible
Results Variances Inputs Variances Budget

(1) (2) = (3) - (1)

Positions Filled 225 225 225

Total Words 18,000  - 18,000 6,750 (U) 11,250

Price Per 10 Words (RMB) 15 20 20

Advertisement (RMB) 27,000 9,000 (F) 36,000 13,500 (U) 22,500

There is more than one potential explanation for the efficiency
variance. The positions may have been more complicated and
needed more words to advertise. Or alternatively, Sindy was
not careful in crafting the advertisements and used too many
words. The price per words might have been lower because
Sindy found a cheaper outlet to put the advertisements in and
the change of outlet could also be the reason for the lower
number of positions filled. A variance analysis cannot attribute
the variance to one of these causes but what it can do is
quantifying whether a change in the original plan was good
or not. In this case, whether the favourable price variance in
the advertisement was worth the unfavourable sales-volume
variance. The latter is RMB 40,000 (U) versus a RMB 9,000
142 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS

(F) price variance. If Sindy moved to a cheaper outlet than her
savings are definitely not worth the loss of 25 customers.

   As outsiders it will always be difficult for us to understand,
what the deep underlying reasons are for the budget variances.
These questions can be better answered by managers and
employees with specific operational knowledge. For instance,
Sindy might have heard from applicants that they learn about
the position through other means than the outlet and they
normally only check the traditional newspapers. A common
refrain of this book is that formal systems, like budget variance
analysis, always need to be complemented with specific
knowledge from employees. The question is not whether
objective or subjective knowledge is superior. Most
meaningful decisions will involve both types of knowledge.

Budgets, Variance Analysis, and
on-Financial Measures.

I want to add one little addendum to this chapter. Traditional
management accounting tools such as budgets have often been
criticized for being too focused on financial measures such as
profits and cost prices. The variance analysis in the previous
section shows that judicious use of budget variances is not
just about profits and variances. It can also help to link cost
overruns to operational measures and help identify the causes
of bad performance. This book will further discuss the
Balanced Scorecard as a tool to
explicitly include non-financial measures and causal links in
management accounting systems. The existence of more
modern tools like the Balanced Scorecard should not
overshadow that budgets can already incorporate productivity
measures like the number of words per advertisement. The
                                                         VARIANCE ANALYSIS | 143

strength of variance analyses is that it allows to compare the
size of different variances to make explicit trade-offs.
144 | VARIANCE ANALYSIS
                                                         COST ACCOUNTING | 145

PART III

COST
ACCOUNTING
146 | COST ACCOUNTING
     THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION | 147

13.

THE VALUE OF COST
INFORMATION

   Stijn Masschelein

  In this part, I will discuss the role of cost accounting
  information. In the typical textbook, cost accounting will be
  the first topic in the textbook. I introduced budgets first
  because they are the quintessential strategic management
  accounting tool in my book 1. Nevertheless, we already talked
  about the difference between variable and fixed costs, a
  distinction that is important for flexible budgets. In the simple
  examples we have seen so far, the company only had one
  service, filling a job position, and we could allocate all the costs
  to the one service. In a simple business, the budgets can fulfill
  its strategic role but advanced cost accounting is not really
  necessary. Advanced cost accounting will be more relevant
  when the organisation has a lot of products, services, and
  processes because we will need to allocate many more costs to
  the different products, services, and processes. Nevertheless, an
  important distinction will remain

     The purpose of this chapter is to emphasise and explain
  that better cost information 2 is not always necessary. I find

1. Sorry!
2. whatever that means
148 | THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION

that this sometimes surprises students but it should not if you
have absorbed the lessons from transaction cost economics:
all management accounting tools have costs and benefits and
we should weigh the costs and benefits to decide whether a
management accounting tool is useful. In this chapter, I will
mainly focus on the benefits of better information.

   The main question to determine the value of (cost)
information is whether the organisation would take a different
decision when they have access to better information. I will
make a distinction between three different decisions that
organisations take based on cost information: (1) Set the price
of a product or service, (2) Determine whether to offer a
product or service, (3) Engineer a product or service to lower
its cost.

Pricing Decisions

Let us start with the pricing decision because we have
implicitly already talked about pricing decisions in a
competitive market. In that chapter on transaction cost
economics, I emphasised two features of market prices in a
competitive market: prices incorporate all relevant
information and they provide incentives for sellers to keep
costs low. The last part is key for the decision on pricing. If
an organisation sells a product at a price that is higher than
the market price, no buyer will be willing to buy it. Thus, the
only information relevant for the correct price is whatever the
price is that competitors are charging. If organisations would
only use cost information for setting the price of goods and
services in a competitive market, they have no incentive to
                                     THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION | 149

  invest in advanced or detailed costing systems 3. Another way
  of thinking about pricing in a competitive market is that the
  market price is general knowledge available to organisations
  which means they do not have to develop costly cost
  accounting systems to make pricing decisions.

     Obviously, organisations do develop advanced costing
  systems and they spend time and money on data collection,
  data validation, and IT systems to process and disseminate the
  cost data because organisations either operate in a market that
  is not fully competitive or they are using the cost information
  for a different purpose than setting the price of goods and
  services.

 Monopoly Pricing

  Let us tackle the issue of not perfectly competitive markets
  first. Not all organisations operate in a competitive market
  all the time. For instance, if an organisation launches a new
  product that is not directly competing with an existing
  product, they have some leeway in how to set the price of the
  product. You can think of the launch of the Apple iPhone as
  an example. In such a case, there are no competitors yet and

3. The Lehigh Steel Harvard Business Case, which I sometime use in my courses,
  shows that activity based costing can reveal a lot of information about the
  profitability of different products. One proposed solution for unprofitable
  products is to increase the price of the products. The Lehigh Steel case provides
  some arguments why this might not be possible. Most firms in the steel industry
  are price-takers and they cannot change the price of their products without being
  hit by a large decrease in demand. In other words, market forces put a limit on how
  much a firm can change its price.
150 | THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION

there is no market price that Apple needs to follow. The Apple
example also highlights a second way how organisations can
create leeway in how they set prices. Through a combination
of marketing, product design, and technological lock-in,
Apple has been able to create a customer perception that their
computers and phones are a different product category than
respectively Android phones or Windows PCs. If, in the
customers' perception, the product has no competitors, Apple
can set a different price than Samsung, Huawei, or Lenovo.

   When an organisation produces multiple products and
services, they can also create a unique customer experience by
explicitly or implicitly bundling these products and services.
One simplified example is Microsoft that has two important
software products; the Windows operating system and the
Office application. Office works best when it is integrated in
the Windows operating system and Microsoft knows it will sell
more Office subscriptions when more people have a Windows
operating system. This means that Microsoft has an incentive
to ask a lower price than the market price for the operating
system because they know that more people will buy it and
more people will buy the Office subscription. Interestingly for
Microsoft, they will also be able to set a higher price than the
market price for the Office subscription. The higher price and/
or higher sales for the Office subscription subsidize the lower
price for the operating system.

   This loss leader strategy does require a sophisticated costing
system because the organisation sets a lower price than
competitors and sometimes even lower than the cost of
producing the goods for the loss leader product (the Windows
operating system) and makes up for it by setting a higher than
competitive price or more sales of another product (the Office
subscription). A further complication for Microsoft Office is
that the subscription gives customers access to different
software products (Words, Excel, Outlook), online and offline
                                   THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION | 151

versions of the products, and different levels of support.
Different customers will use the different Office products and
services differently and Microsoft wants to charge heavy users,
such as business, more than light users, such as university
students. In the next chapter, I will introduce Activity Based
Costing which is a natural cost accounting approach to deal
with these complications.

Product Design Decisions.

The ability to set a better price will not always be the main
reason to adopt or improve a cost accounting system. Another
important advantage of better cost information is the ability
to find potential cost savings when designing a product or
producing a product. One obvious extension to the previous
discussion is that an organisation that is a price taker and
cannot raise prices. This organisation might find out that at
the end of the year, they are not profitable or they did not
reach the goals in their planned budget. Because this
organisation cannot increase profitability by increasing its
prices, it has to investigate its cost structure. A lack of
profitability is typically the trigger for organisations to invest in
better cost accounting systems as you will see when you study
specific cases.

   Detailed cost information will help organisations figure out
which parts of the production process are too costly and need
to be redesigned to use less resources. If that is not possible, the
organisation might decide to no longer produce the product
because they cannot produce it in a way where production
costs are lower than the selling price. Not unlike with variance
analysis, the numbers alone will only be a guide and the
employees with the best knowledge of the production process
will have to be involved in how to interpret the cost
152 | THE VALUE OF COST INFORMATION

information and how to improve the cost structure of loss-
making products. It will not surprise you that I believe it is
important to combine objective and subjective knowledge
when making product design decisions.

   Some organisations go one step further and meticulously
investigate the expected costs of the different steps and parts
when they design a new product in an approach that is called
target costing. With target costing, an organisation will use
objective information such as the price of similar products
and subjective knowledge from its marketing and sales team to
decide on a feasible price first. They then decide the product
so that it can be produced at a product cost that gives them
a sufficiently high profit margin. There is little known about
the Apple decision making process but from the outside, their
high profit margins, relatively limited product variety, and
strong emphasis on product design suggests that Apple follows
the principles of target costing when launching new products.

Summary

In this chapter, I structured the discussion of when better
information is valuable around whether it leads to better
decision making or not. Just having better information is not
enough, if we cannot change the price or cost of a product.
That also means that, in my view, it is never sufficient to advise
an organisation that they need a better cost accounting system
if you cannot explain which decisions will improve.
     ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 153

14.

ACTIVITY BASED
COSTING

   Stijn Masschelein

In this chapter, I introduce the cost accounting approach that
is often seen as the first modern cost accounting approach,
Activity Based Costing. I will introduce activity based costing
and show how and when more detailed cost accounting
systems provide useful insights for better decision making. The
next chapter focuses on a specific cost, the cost of unused
capacity, and its treatment in activity based costing systems.
Strategic investments such as machines or highly skilled
employees are often not used at full capacity and activity based
costing is well equipped to quantify the cost of unused
capacity.

Cost Object

The goal of every cost accounting system is to allocate costs
to different cost objects, which can be everything that an
organisation wants to know the cost of. For instance, car
manufacturers are interested in the unit cost of producing one
  154 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

  car 1 but they will also be interested in all the costs that are
  assigned to one specific car brand 2. If an organisation has both
  businesses and individuals as customers, it will be interested
  whether one class of customers causes higher costs than the
  other. Or the organisation may be interested in the costs
  absorbed by a department or the costs caused by one of its
  suppliers. For different decisions, different cost objects will be
  relevant. To set the price of a car, we need to know the cost
  of producing one car but to decide whether to discontinue
  producing a certain car brand, we need to treat the brand itself
  as the cost object.

 Direct and Indirect Costs

  All cost accounting systems distinguish between direct and
  indirect costs where a direct cost is a cost that can be
  immediately assigned to a cost object. For instance, the cost of
  a tutor can be immediately assigned to a unit. On the other
  hand, I am paid a salary to teach and do research. My salary
  can not immediately be assigned to this unit because my salary
  pays for more than one unit and for the non-teaching part of
  my job as well. We will have to find a way to quantify how
  much of my salary should be assigned to the unit. For instance,
  I could make a guess of how much of my time is spent on the
  unit 3. As a result, whether a cost is direct or indirect depends
  on the cost object that we are interested in. For instance, if we
  want to determine the cost per student, the cost of the tutor

1. as in, the car I have, which happens to be a Hyundai Getz
2. as in, all Hyundai Getz produced
3. For instance, how much of time is dedicated to writing this book
                                                   ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 155

  will be an indirect cost because a tutor will typically deal with
  multiple students at the same time. It is theoretically possible,
  to track exactly every second that a tutor spends on a specific
  student, maybe with some eye tracking technology. However,
  the cost of tracking the time of the tutor to the second would
  be uneconomical. Whether a cost should be considered direct
  or indirect is thus also a practical decision that depends on the
  transaction cost of tracking the cost usage. Sometimes, it is just
  not worth the effort to trace a cost directly to the cost object
  that we are interested in.

     If we cannot directly trace a cost directly to a cost object,
  that means that we need to estimate the indirect cost per
  object. In my previous example, to estimate the cost of a tutor
  per student, we can divide the cost of the tutor by the number
  of students. This is the typical, traditional volume based cost
  allocation because we use the volume (number of students)
  to allocate the indirect cost. This approach gives the average
  cost per student which is appropriate if either that is what
  we are interested in or if all students need approximately the
  same level of attention. However, if the university is interested
  in knowing the cost of different types of students and those
  students need different levels of attention by the tutors this
  average, volume based approach is no longer appropriate 4.
  This is where Activity Based Costing comes in.

4. One way to think about this that an average cost per student can be informative
  about the actual cost of any given student when the students are fairly similar but
  not when the students are heterogeneous.
156 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

Activity Based Costing

Activity Based Costing aims to make the allocation of indirect
costs more methodological by focusing on what the firm is
actually doing. The first step of an activity based costing
analysis should be to perform an activity analysis. A firm can
interview employees, observe them, and analyse internal data
to find out the main activities in the organisation. A
prototypical example for a manufacturing firm is given in
Figure 14.1 below which makes a distinction between five
primary activities that are supported by four other activities.

Figure 14.1: Michael Porter's Value Chain, 1985 by Dinesh
Pratap Singh

From Resources to Activities

For a lecturer, the important teaching activities are unit
preparation, lecturing, exam design, exam marking,
                                                 ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 157

assignment marking, and general administration. With
Activity Based Costing, a cost accountant wants to allocate the
salary of the lecturer to these activities according to a resource
driver. The most straightforward way is to use (or estimate)
the hours the lecturer spends on these different activities and
calculate the percentage of time that a lecturer spent on these
six different activities. I made some guesses for how much time
I spend on preparing and teaching my units 5 as a lecturer and
I show them in Table 14.1.

Table 14.1: Indirect and Direct Labour Costs for Higher
                       Education Teaching

Activities        Lecturer (Indirect) Tutors (Direct)

Unit Preparation  15 %                            22 hours

Lecturing         6 %                             44 hours

Exam Design       1 %

Exam Marking      2 % 15 minutes / student

Assignment Marking 3 %

Administration    3 %

I contrast the indirect lecturer costs with the direct tutor costs
for my undergraduate unit which has two weekly 2-hour
workshops for eleven weeks. The university allocates one hour
of preparation for every two hours of actual teaching. The cost
of marking by tutors can be immediately allocated to a student

5. which is only one part of my job description.
  158 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

  because the university policy is that marking should take no
  more than 15 minutes per exam paper. From this description,
  you can see that it is easy to allocate the cost of the tutors
  directly to the unit. We just need to multiply the cost per tutor
  hour 6 by the total hours the tutors dedicate to the unit. So, the
  intermediate step of allocating the cost of the resource (tutors)
  to the activities is not necessary for a direct cost.

 From Activities to Cost Objects

  I am coordinating and teaching two units per year, an
  undergraduate unit and an honours unit 7. Table 14.2 has
  more information on the two units which we use to allocate
  the cost of the lecturer activities to the two cost objects, i.e. the
  undergraduate unit and the honours unit.

6. e.g. AUD 30 per hour.
7. An honours year in Australia is a fourth undergraduate year in which students

  write a research thesis.
                        ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 159

Table 14.2: Activity Driver for Lecturer's Activities

Activity Driver         Undergraduate    Honours

Number of Students 100 15

Teaching hours per week 7 3

Preparation Load        40%              60%

Final Exam              Yes              No

Written                 24 per semester  7 per student
Assignments

In the honours unit, I am required to present the latest
research in accounting and finance and thus the unit needs
regular updating. I estimate that I spend about 60% of my
preparation time on the honours unit and 40% on the
undergraduate unit (see Table 14.2). As a result, 9% 8 of the
lecturer cost should be allocated to the honours unit and 6% 9
to the undergraduate unit. In the undergraduate unit, I lecture
one hour per week and run three two-hour workshops per
week for seven weeks in total. In the honours unit, I teach a
three-hour research seminar. This amounts to spending 4.2% 10
of my total time teaching in the undergraduate unit and 1.8%
11 in the honours unit.

   The exam design and exam marking activities are easier to

 8.
 9.
10. 7 / 10 \times 6 \%
11. 3 / 10 \times 6 \%
     160 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

     allocate because only the undergraduate unit has a final exam.
     The written assignments in the undergraduate unit are written
     reports written by groups of 4 or 5 students. Over the course
     of the semester, there are 24 group assignments that need
     marking. In the absence of a final exam, the honours students
     have continuous individual evaluation in the form of seven
     individual assignments. Over the course of the semester, there
     are 105 12 assignments that need marking. Thus, assignment
     marking for the undergraduate unit takes up 0.56% 13 of my
     time and marking for the honours unit takes up 2.44% 14 of
     my time. Notice that this calculation assumes that every
     assignment takes about the same amount of time to mark 15.
     Finally, I allocate the administration cost by the number of
     students 16.

12. 7 \times 15

13. 24 / (105 + 24) \times 3\%

14. 105 / (105 + 24) \times 3\%

15. This assumption is wrong.

16.              for the undergraduate students and

     for the honours students
                  ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 161

Table 14.3: Indirect and Direct Labour Costs for Each Unit as
                     Percentage of Lecturer Cost

Activities        Undergraduate  Honours

Unit Preparation  6 %            9 %

Lecturing         4.2 %          1.8 %

Exam Design       1 %            -

Exam Marking      2 %            -

Assignment        0.56 %         2.44 %
Marking

Administration    2.61 %         0.39 %

Total             16.37 %        13.63 %

Initial Conclusions

While the calculations are instructive, there are broader lessons
to be drawn from this exercise. First of all, the calculations
show why activity based costing can be valuable. If I would
have used the number of students (i.e. volume based cost
accounting) to allocate costs, the undergraduate unit would
have received more of the costs and the honours a lot less. The
costs for each of the activities in Table 14.3 differ considerably
from the 15-100 split in students.

   Nevertheless, if the university would have decided that each
unit takes about the same amount of time from the lecturer
with a small adjustment for units with larger students, they
would end up roughly in the same place as the totals of 16%
and 14%. After doing an exercise like this the university's cost
accountant might reasonably decide that they would not
repeat this exercise for each lecturer but it would be too time
162 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

consuming. Notice that I could provide such a detailed
breakdown because the estimates are based on my actual work
and thus my specific knowledge.

Extensions

The advantage of the activity based cost approach is that we
can be more discerning in which costs are treated as if they
are varying. Not necessarily varying based on the volume of
production but varying based on the activities that the
organisation undertakes. In the example above, some costs vary
based on the number of students, some based on the type
of unit, or some depend on the number of assignments. We
have seen in the chapter on variance analysis and the flexibility
budget that we can use the distinction between variable and
fixed costs to answer certain what-if questions. The flexible
budget is the answer to the question "What if we had made the
planned budget for exactly the volume that we actually observe
at the end of the period?" By treating more costs as potentially
varying in activity based costing, we can answer a broader set of
questions. For instance, what are the cost savings of decreasing
the number of assignments? In other words, activity based
costing allows the decision makers in the organisation to
quantify the impact of a broader set of decisions.

   More generally, in activity based costing, we allow for costs
to vary at different levels. For instance, the number of students
is the traditional, volume level in the cost hierarchy. In a
manufacturing firm, the number of units produced is at that
same level but some costs vary at a different level. For instance
batch level costs are not associated with a unit of production
but with a production run or an order. Machine set-up costs
between production runs and administration and handling
costs of customer orders are examples of batch level costs.
                                                     ACTIVITY BASED COSTING | 163

   R&D costs and marketing costs are examples of product level
   costs and are associated with a specific product line. Other
   costs can vary by the supplier, or by customer, or by the plant
   facility.

  Value of Activity Based Costing.

   As always, the value of activity based costing for a specific form
   will be a trade-off between the benefits and the costs. If the
   firm has highly effective technology to track all costs 17, it is
   able to directly assign costs to cost objects and it does not need
   activity based costing. In other words, only if the indirect costs
   are sufficiently large will activity based costing be advantageous
   to the firm. Even with a lot of indirect costs, when there are
   only a few resources, a few activities, or a few cost objects,
   activity base costing may be of limited value. Activity based
   costing will be of most value when a firm offers a large diversity
   in products or services, when these services consume different
   activities at a different rate, and the activities draw differently
   from the resources. In the example, above if a unit has no
   exam, there will be no costs allocated from the activity exam
   marking. However, if all units have an exam, we could as well
   split the costs of exam marking based on the volume, i.e. the
   number of students. If there is not much difference in the use
   of activities and resources, it will not make a large difference
   in cost calculations when we make a distinction between
   activities. In other words, when the cost objects are
   homogeneous, the distinctions that activity based costing makes
   are of little value. In the example above, if a lecturer puts the

17. e.g. scanning technology to track different parts, electronic tracking of employees.
    164 | ACTIVITY BASED COSTING

   same amount of preparation work in a postgraduate unit as in
   an undergraduate unit, we do not need to take that distinction
   into account.

      The transaction costs of activity based costing are relatively
   straightforward. Setting up an activity based costing system is
   much more time consuming because the organisations needs
   to perform an activity analysis which requires deep specific
   knowledge about the production process. I could only do the
   current exercise because it is about my job. Also, the IT
   requirements for a realistic system with over a hundred
   activities and thousands of cost objects are much larger than
   for a traditional and more simple system 18. Lastly, updating
   a complex activity based costing system is much harder. The
   organisation has to incorporate new activities and new
   products or customers over time, which is much harder than
   for a more simple cost accounting system. With a complex
   activity based costing system, the addition of a new type of
   customer could mean that all cost allocations of all activities
   need to be adapted to accommodate every new customer. As
   a result, if progress in information technological helps firms to
   manage the complexity and the updates of an activity based
   costing system, than technology can lead to more firms
   adopting ABC.

18. Just think about the number of footnotes I would need when my example would
    include every unit at the University of Western Australia
     COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY | 165

15.

COST ACCOUNTING
AND PRODUCTION
CAPACITY

   Stijn Masschelein

  In the previous chapter, I explained that one advantage of
  activity based costing is that we can treat more variables as
  varying based on the activities of the organisation. In a
  working example, I allocated the cost of my salary as a lecturer
  to different units 1 and argued that we can use the cost
  allocation to decide whether it would be cost effective to have
  fewer assignments. Still, if the university policy is to reduce the
  number of assignments, that does not mean that the university
  will immediately save money. My salary is still being paid. The
  university will only save costs if they also assign me different
  activities that allow the university to grow without increasing
  staff numbers 2. This reasoning implies that at any point in
  time I might have some free capacity to take on new activities
  or do more of my existing activities. In this chapter, I show
  how activity based costing systems deal with this unused
  production capacity.

1. i.e. courses
2. or they can get rid of me.
166 | COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY

   In the cost calculations so far, the capacity of the activity has
been given. In the example in the previous chapter, I assumed
that I could spend 100% of my time productively. This is not
a realistic assumption. The useful productive capacity is
typically lower than 100%. The typical choices are the capacity
in normal circumstances, the maximum possible production
in normal circumstances, or the theoretical possible
production capacity. These different possibilities are
respectively called the normal capacity, practical capacity, and
theoretical capacity. In most cases, the practical capacity should
be used for cost accounting calculations because we want to
allocate costs to the unused capacity, i.e. machine time that
was available but not used for production. The cost of unused
capacity should give us an idea whether it is worthwhile to
either scale down the production capacity or whether we
should keep the current capacity. If we use the normal capacity
in our calculations, under normal circumstances there will be
no cost of unused capacity. In other words, normal capacity
assumes that the firm in normal circumstances is working in
full capacity. Theoretical capacity on the other hand
overestimates how much the organisation realistically can
produce.

Lehigh Steel Example

The example in this chapter is based on the Harvard Business
Case on Lehigh Steel, an American steel manufacturer. In the
case study, the costs for five sample products is calculated
where a large part of the costs come from five activities in
the production process. Each activity has its own associated
costs because of the cost of the machines that are necessary
in the production step, the maintenance of the machines, and
the cost of power for the machines. One of the production
                 COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY | 167

  activities, steel rolling, is run at its maximum capacity but the
  other four activities all have spare capacity. Lehigh Steel's
  machines are capable of doing more of the four other activities
  but there is no point in running these machines for longer
  because there is one step in the production process that is
  constrained by its current capacity. An important strategic
  question for Lehigh Steel is how to adjust their investment in
  machines and whether they provide a competitive advantage.
  Cost calculations of spare capacity can clarify the cost-benefit
  trade-off of investing or divesting these large investments. In
  the calculations, I will use the case of the finishing machine
  for which the costs of the machines is $1.28 million, the cost
  of maintenance is $0.78 million, and the power cost is $0.87
  million.

     The case study 3 gives the key numbers for the calculations
  and I will reproduce them here. The finishing machine is used
  for 4.06 million minutes which is also the value for the normal
  capacity. I assume that the used capacity for the critically
  important rolling machine, 8.26 million minutes, is the
  theoretical capacity for all the machines. In reality, the
  organisation would have to use its understanding of the
  production process to calculate the the theoretical capacity.
  With this assumption, the maximum capacity of the finishing
  machine is 8.26 million minutes. Lehigh Steel is probably
  using additional resources to make sure that the rolling
  machine's operations are never interrupted because the rolling
  activity is critical to its operations. The finishing machine
  however may have some interruptions or may need to wait for
  the intermediate products coming from the rolling machine.
  One typical estimate for the practical capacity in a normal year

3. specifically Exhibit 6
168 | COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY

is 85% of the theoretical capacity (= 7.02 million minutes)
4. The practical capacity represents the maximum number of
machine minutes accounting for a reasonable expected
maintenance time.

   Table 15.1 shows the calculation of the activity driver rates
with normal capacity and practical capacity. The normal
capacity activity driver is the one that is used in the case study.
In most realistic scenarios, the practical capacity is often a
better indicator of capacity in activity based costing
calculations because it allows to calculate the cost of unused
capacity. Normal capacity assumes that the firm is using all
machines and employees at full capacity in the current
circumstances, and that the machine could not be used more.

Table 15.1: Capacity of Finishing Machine at Lehigh Steel

Capacity            Activity Driver Rate
                    ($/minute)

Normal Capacity

Practical Capacity

Table 15.2 shows the cost per minute of finishing for the
sample products (condition round, roller wire, chipper knife,
round bar, and machine coil) under the two different capacity
regimes. For instance, to make one condition round it takes
0.06 minutes on the finishing machines which amounts to a

4. More intimate knowledge of the production process can help in refining the
  estimate
              COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY | 169

cost of 4.32 cent under the normal capacity assumption and
2.52 cent under the practical capacity constraint. One key
advantage of the practical capacity is that the costs of one
product are not affected by production changes for the other
products. If Lehigh Steel decides to change its product mix so
that it needs less actual finishing minutes, the finishing driver
rate and the cost of finishing for the existing products will
increase under normal capacity. This is a strange conclusion
because the production process of the existing process has not
changed at all.

Table 15.2: Cost of Finishing for Five Sample Products

          Condition Roller Chipper Round Machine

          Round Wire Knife Bar  Coil

Finishing          0.02 0.07 0.08 0.05
Machine Time 0.06
(minutes)

Normal    4.32     1.44 5.04 5.76 3.60
($ cent)

Practical ($ cent) 2.52 0.84 2.94 3.36 2.10

The other advantage of the practical capacity approach is that
it is possible to calculate the cost of the unused capacity. In
the example of the finishing machine there are

                           million minutes of unused finishing
capacity. The excess capacity costs Lehigh Steel

                           million dollar.
170 | COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY

Unused Capacity and Strategy

We can interpret this cost in different ways depending on the
strategy of the firm. The unused capacity might be superfluous
and represent an avoidable cost. In that case, the organisation
will want to reduce the capacity and its associated costs.
Machines can be sold, or, less drastically, not replaced when
they are no longer functioning. Employees can be fired or
reassigned to activities that are value-adding. However, not all
excess capacity is an indication of inefficiency. Firms might
have good reasons to have more capacity than they are
currently using. Overcapacity may give a firm more flexibility
in ramping up production when demand increases or in
changing its product mix when customer preferences change.
Excess capacity in seasonal downturns also helps a firm to cope
with periods of high seasonal demand. Another reason to
build up excess capacity is to threaten potential entrants to
markets where the organisation has a high profit margin.
Manufacturing firms can build overcapacity so that they can
increase production quickly when competitors would enter
the market. The excess capacity credibly signals to potential
competitors that the incumbent organisation is capable of
unleashing a price war. Possible entrants will think twice about
competing with this organisation. They know that the firm
can easily flood the market and drive the price down. The
overcapacity helps firms to set a price higher than the
competitive price.

   The advantage of the practical capacity approach to costing
is that it allows the accountant to quantify the cost of not
using the capacity. This cost can be compared to the benefit of
meeting demand and preventing customers from entering the
market which allows the firm to make a cost-benefit analysis of
the excess capacity. In contrast, an important consideration for
               COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY | 171

a small business is to limit fixed costs (=capacity). If customer
demand is disappointing, the firm will still have to pay the
fixed costs. Recent research shows the opposite is true in more
mature firms (Banker et al. 2014). For those firms the bigger
risk is not to have capacity that needs to be paid for but to
disappoint customers when demand is surging. Mature firms
can find credit to bridge periods of disappointing demand but
they cannot recover sales once they had to turn away
customers.

References

Banker, Rajiv D., Dmitri Byzalov, and Jose M. Plehn-
Dujowich. 2014. "Demand Uncertainty and Cost Behavior."
The Accounting Review 89 (3): 839-65. https://doi.org/
10.2308/accr-50661.
172 | COST ACCOUNTING AND PRODUCTION CAPACITY
                                                        REVIEW STATEMENT | 173

REVIEW STATEMENT

The author and UWA Librarians involved in this project
would like to thank the reviewers for their time and generosity
providing feedback on this book. Their feedback and input
have helped ensure reliability, accuracy and consistency
throughout.

Peer Reviewers:

Thanesvary Subraamanniam, University of Western Australia
David Brown, University of Technology Sydney
Phil Hancock, University of Western Australia (Chapters 1-7)
Vincent Chong, University of Western Australia (Chapters
1-7)
